Online Distributed Proofreading Team (http://www.pgdp.net)


MOOR FIRES

by

E. H. YOUNG

Author of "WILLIAM" and "THE MALLETTS"


New York
Harcourt, Brace and Company

Printed in the U. S. A.


CHAPTER I


In the dusk of a spring evening, Helen Caniper walked on the long road
from the town. Making nothing of the laden basket she carried, she went
quickly until she drew level with the high fir-wood which stood like a
barrier against any encroachment on the moor, then she looked back and
saw lights darting out to mark the streets she had left behind, as
though a fairy hand illuminated a giant Christmas-tree.

Among the other trees, black and mysterious on the hill, a cold wind was
moaning. "It's the night wind," Helen murmured. The moor was inhabited
by many winds, and she knew them all, and it was only the night wind
that cried among the trees, for, fearless though it seemed, it had a
dread of the hours that made it. The fir-trees, their bare trunks like a
palisade, swayed gently, and Helen's skirts flapped about her ankles.
More lights glimmered in the town, and she turned towards home.

The moor stretched now on either hand until it touched a sky from which
all the colour had not departed, and the road shone whitely, pale but
courageous as it kept its lonely path. Helen's feet tapped clearly as
she hurried on, and when she approached the road to Halkett's Farm, the
sound of her going was mingled with that of hoofs, and an old horse,
drawing a dog-cart, laboured round the corner. It was the horse Dr.
Mackenzie had always driven up the long road; it was now driven by his
son, and when he saw that some one motioned him to stop, the young
doctor drew up. He bent forward to see her.

"It's Helen," he said. "Oh, Helen, how are you?"

She stood by the step and looked up at him. "I'm very well. I'm glad you
knew me. It's three years."

"And your hair is up."

"Miriam and I are twenty," she said gravely, and he laughed.

The horse shook himself and set the dog-cart swaying; the jingle of his
bit went adventurously across the moor; heather-stalks scratched each
other in the wind.

"You haven't lighted your lamps," Helen said. "Somebody might run into
you."

"They might." He jumped down and fumbled for his matches. "The comfort
is that we're not likely to do it to any one, at our pace. When I've
made my fortune I shall buy a horse from George Halkett, one that will
go fast and far."

"But I like this one," said Helen. "We used to watch for him when we had
measles. He's mixed up with everything. Don't have another one."

"The fortune's still to make," he said. He had lighted the nearer lamp
and Helen's slim figure had become a thing of shadows. He took the
basket from her and put it under the seat. She was staring over the
horse's back.

"There was a thing we used to do. We had bets about Dr. Mackenzie's
ties, what colour they were; but we never won or lost, because we never
saw them. His beard was so big. And once Miriam pretended there was a
huge spider on the ceiling, but he wouldn't look up, though she
screamed. He told her not to be a silly little girl. So we never saw
them."

"I'm not surprised," the young doctor said. "He didn't wear them. What
was the use? He was a practical man."

"Oh," Helen cried, "isn't that just like life! You bother and bother
about something that doesn't exist and make yourself miserable for
nothing. No, I won't do it."

"Do you?"

"It's a great fault of mine," she said.

He went round the back of the cart and lighted the other lamp. "Now I'm
going to drive you home. That basket's heavy."

"I have been shopping," she explained. "Tomorrow a visitor is coming."

"Your father?" he asked quickly.

"No; he hasn't been again. He's ill, Notya says, and it's too cold for
him here. Dr. Zebedee, aren't you glad to be back on the moor?"

"Well, I don't see much of it, you know. My work is chiefly in the
streets--but, yes, I think I'm glad."

"We've been watching for you, Miriam and I. She'll be angry that I've
seen you first. No; she's thinking too much about tomorrow. It's an
uncle who's coming, a kind of uncle--Notya's brother. We haven't seen
him before and Miriam's excited."

"And you're not."

"I don't like new things. They feel dangerous. You don't know what
they'll bring."

"I thought you weren't going to make yourself miserable," he said. "Jump
up, and we'll take home the fatted calf."

She hesitated. "I'm not going straight home."

"Let me deliver the calf, then."

"No, please; it isn't heavy." She went to the horse's head and stroked
his nose. "I've never known his name. What is it?"

"Upon my word, I don't believe he has one. He's just the horse. That's
what we always called him."

"'The horse'! How dreary! It makes him not a person."

"But the one and only horse!"

"I don't suppose he minds very much," she murmured. "Good-night, horse.
Good-night, Zebedee. My basket, please. I'm very late."

"I wish you'd let me take you home. You oughtn't to go wandering over
the moor by night."

She laughed. "I've done it all my life. Do you remember," she went on
slowly, "what I once told you about the fires? Oh, years ago, when I
first saw you."

"The fires?" he said.

"Never mind if you've forgotten."

"I don't forget things," he said; "I'm remembering." His mind was urged
by his sense of her disappointment and by the sight of her face, which
the shadows saddened. The basket hung on her arm and her hands were
clasped together: she looked like a child and he could not believe in
her twenty years.

"It doesn't matter," she said softly.

"But I do remember. It's the spring fires."

"The Easter fires."

"Of course, of course, you told me--"

"I think they must be burning now. That's where I'm going--to look for
them."

"I wish I could come too."

"Do you? Do you? Oh!" She made a step towards him. "The others never
come. They laugh but I still go on. It's safer, isn't it? It can't do
any harm to pray. And now that Uncle Alfred's coming--"

"Is he a desperate character?"

She made a gesture with her clasped hands. "It's like opening a door."

"You mustn't be afraid of open doors," he said--"you, who live on the
moor." He grasped her shoulder in a friendly fashion. "You mustn't be
afraid of anything. Go and find your fires, and don't forget to pray for
me."

"Of course not. Good-night. Will you be coming again soon?"

"Old Halkett's pretty ill," was his reply and, climbing to his seat, he
waved his hat and bade the old horse move on.

The moor lay dark as a lake at Helen's feet and the rustling of the
heather might have been the sound of water fretted by the wind--deep,
black water whose depths no wind could stir. At Helen's right hand a
different darkness was made by the larch-trees clothing Halkett's
hollow, and on her left a yellow gleam, like the light at the masthead
of a ship at sea, betrayed her home. Behind her, and on the other side
of the road, the Brent Farm dogs began to bark, and in the next instant
they were answered from many points of the moor, so that houses and
farmsteads became materialized in the night which had hidden them and
Helen stood in a circle of echoing sound. Often, as a child, she had
waked at such a clamour, and pictured homeless people walking on the
road, and now, though she heard no footsteps, she seemed to feel the
approach of noiseless feet, bringing the unknown. For her, youth's
delights of strength and fleetness were paid for by the thought of the
many years in which her happiness could be assailed. Age might be
feeble, but it had, she considered, the consolation of knowing something
of the limitations of its pain. She wished she could put an unscalable
wall about the moor, so that the soundless feet should stay outside, for
she did not know that already she had heard the footsteps of those whose
actions were weaving her destiny. Helen Caniper might safely throw open
all her doors.

The barking of the dogs lessened and then ceased; once more only the
whistling of the wind broke the silence, until Helen's skirts rubbed the
heather as she ran and something jingled in her basket. She went fast
to find her fires and, while her mind was fixed on them, she was still
aware of the vast moor she loved, its darkness, its silence, the smells
it gave out, the promise of warmth and fertility in its bosom. She could
not clearly see the ground, but her feet knew it: heather, grass,
stones, and young bracken were to be overcome; here and there a rock or
thorn-bush loomed out blacker than the rest in warning; sometimes a dip
in the earth must be avoided; once or twice dim grey objects rose up and
became sheep that bleated out of her way, and always, as she ran, she
mounted. For a time she was level with the walled garden of her home,
but, passing its limit, she topped a sudden steepness, descended it with
a rush, and lost all glimmerings from road or dwelling-place.

A greenish sky, threatening to turn black, delicately roofed the world;
no stars had yet come through, and, far away, as though in search of
them, the moor rose to a line of hills. Their rounded tops had no
defiance, their curve was that of a wave without the desire to break,
held in its perfect contour by its own content. The moor itself had the
patience of the wisdom which is faith, and Helen might have heard it
laughing tenderly if she had been less concerned with the discovery of
her fires. She stood still, and her eyes found only the moor, the rocks
and hills.

"I must go on," she said in a whisper. And now, for pleasure in her
strength, she went in running bounds over a stretch of close-cropped
turf, and space became so changed for her that she hardly knew whether
she leapt a league or foot; and it was all one, for she had a feeling of
great power and happiness in a world which was empty without loneliness.
And then a creeping line of fire arrested her. Not far off, it went
snake-like over the ground, disappeared, and again burned out more
brightly: it edged the pale smoke like embroidery on a veil, and behind
that veil there lived and moved the smoke-god she had created for
herself when she was ten years old. She could not hear the crackling of
the twigs nor smell their burning, and she had no wish to draw nearer.
She stretched out her arms and dropped to her knees and prayed.

"Oh, Thou, behind the smoke," she said aloud, "guard the moor and us. We
will not harm your moor. Amen."

This was the eleventh time she had prayed to the God behind the smoke,
and he had guarded both the Canipers and the moor, but now she felt the
need to add more words to the childish ones she had never changed.

"And let me be afraid of nothing," she said firmly, and hesitated for a
second. "For beauty's sake. Amen."


CHAPTER II


After her return over the moor, through the silent garden and the dim
house, Helen was dazzled by the schoolroom lights and she stood blinking
in the doorway.

"We're all here and all hungry," Rupert said. "You're late."

"I know." She shut the door and took off her hat. "Miriam, I met
Zebedee."

"Oh," Miriam said on a disapproving note. She lay on the sofa as though
a wind had flung her there, and her eyes were closed. In her composure
she looked tired, older than Helen and more experienced, but her next
words came youthfully enough. "Just like you. You get everything."

"I couldn't help it," Helen said mildly. "He came round the corner from
Halkett's Farm. Ought I to have run away?"

Miriam sat up and laughed, showing dark eyes and shining little teeth
which transformed her face into a childish one.

"Is he different?"

"I couldn't see very well."

"He is different," Rupert said; and John, on the window-seat, put down
his book to listen.

"Tell us," Miriam said.

"Nothing much, but he is older."

"So are we."

"Not in his way."

"We haven't had the chance," Miriam complained. "I suppose you mean he
has been doing things he ought not to do in London."

"Not necessarily," Rupert answered lightly and John picked up his book
again. He generally found that his excursions into the affairs of men
and women were dull and fruitless, while his book, on the subject of
manures, satisfied his intellect and was useful in its results.

There was a silence in which both girls, though differently, were
conscious of a dislike for Zebedee's unknown adventures.

Miriam laid her head on the red cushion. "I wish tomorrow would come."

"I bought turbot," Helen said. "I should think he's the kind of man who
likes it."

"I suggest delicate sauces," Rupert said.

"You needn't be at all anxious about his food," Miriam assured them.
"I'm going to be the attraction of this visit."

"How d'you know?"

Her teeth caught her under-lip. "Because I mean to be."

"Well, don't make a fool of yourself, my dear."

"She will," John growled.

Helen spoke quickly. "Oh, Miriam, I told Zebedee about Dr. Mackenzie's
ties, and, do you know, he never wore any at all!"

"Old pig! He wouldn't. Mean. Scotch. We might have thought of that. If
Daniel had a beard he would be just the same."

"It may surprise you to learn," Rupert remarked, "that Daniel takes a
great interest in his appearance lately."

"That's me again," Miriam said complacently.

"Ugly people are rather like that," Helen said. "But he wears terrible
boots."

"He's still at the collar-and-tie stage," Rupert said. "We'll get to
boots later. He needs encouragement--and control. A great deal of
control. He had a bright blue tie on yesterday."

"Ha!" Miriam shouted in a strangled laugh, and thrust her face into the
cushion. "That's me, too!" she cried. "I told him blue would suit him."

Rupert wagged his head. "I can't see the fun in that kind of thing,
making a fool of the poor beggar."

"Well," she flashed, "he shouldn't ask me to marry him!"

"You'd complain if he didn't."

"Of course I should--of course! I'm so dull that I'm really grateful to
him, but I'm so dull that I have to tease him, too. It's only clutching
at straws, and Daniel likes it."

"He's wasted half a crown on his tie, though. I'm going to tell him that
you're not to be trusted."

"Then I shall devote myself to Zebedee."

"You won't influence Zebedee's ties," Helen said, "or his collars--the
shiniest ones I have ever seen."

"She won't influence him at all, my good Helen. What's she got to do it
with?"

"This!" Miriam said, rising superbly and displaying herself.

"Shut her up, somebody!" John begged. "This is beastly. Has she nothing
better to do with herself than attracting men? If you met a woman who
made that her profession instead of her play, you'd pass by on the other
side."

Miriam flushed, frowned, and recovered herself. "I might. I don't think
so. I can't see any harm in pleasing people. If I were clever and
frightened them, or witty and made them laugh, it would be just the
same. I happen to be beautiful." She spread her hands and waved them.
"Tell birds not to fly, tell lambs not to skip, tell me to sit and darn
the socks!" She stood on the fender and looked at herself in the glass.
"Besides," she said, "I don't care. I'm not responsible. If Notya hadn't
buried us all here, I might have been living a useful life!" She cast a
sly glance at John. "I might be making butter like Lily Brent."

"Not half so good!"

She ignored that, and went on with her thoughts. "I shall ask Uncle
Alfred what made Notya bring us here."

She turned and stood, very slim in her dark dress, her eyelids lowered,
her lips parted, expectant of reproof and ready with defiance, but no
one spoke. She constantly forgot that her family knew her, but,
remembering that fact, her tilted eyebrows twitched a little. Her face
broke into mischievous curves and dimples.

"What d'you bet?"

"No," Helen said, thinking of her stepmother. "Notya wouldn't like it."

"Bah! Pish! Faugh! Pshaw--and ugh! What do I care? I shall!"

"Oh, a rotten thing to do," said John.

"And, anyhow, it doesn't matter," Helen said. "We're here."

"Rupert?" Miriam begged.

"Better not," he answered kindly. "Not worth while." He lay back in a
big chair and watched the world through his tobacco smoke. He had all
Miriam's darkness and much of her beauty, but he had already acquired a
tolerant view of things which made him the best of companions, the least
ambitious of young men. "Live and let live, my dear."

"I shan't promise. I suppose I'm not up to your standards of honour, but
if a person makes a mystery, why shouldn't the others try to find it
out? That's what it's for! And there's nothing else to do."

"You're inventing the mystery," Rupert said. "If Notya and our absent
parent didn't get on together--and who could get on with a man who's
always ill?--they were wise in parting, weren't they?"

"But why the moor?"

"Ah, I think that was a sudden impulse, and she has always been too
proud to own that it was a mistake."

"That's the first sensible thing any one has said yet," John remarked.
"I quite agree with you. It's my own idea."

"I'm a young man of penetration, as I've told you all before."

"And shoved into a bank!" John grumbled.

"I like the bank. It's a cheerful place. There's lots of gold about, and
people come and talk to me through the bars."

"But," Helen began, on the deep notes of her voice, "what should we have
done if she had repented and taken us away? What should we have done?"

"We might have been happy," Miriam said.

"John, what would you have done?" Helen persisted.

"Said nothing, grown up as fast as I could, and come back."

"So should I."

Rupert chuckled. "You wouldn't, Helen. You'd have stayed with Notya and
Miriam and me and looked after us all, and longed for this place and
denied yourself."

"And made us all uncomfortable." Miriam pointed at Helen's grey dress.
"What have you been doing?"

Helen looked down at the dark marks where her knees had pressed the
ground.

"It will dry," she said, and went nearer the fire. "Zebedee says old
Halkett's ill."

"Drink and the devil," Rupert hummed. "He'll die soon."

"Hope so," John said fervently. "I don't like to think of the bloated
old beast alive."

"He'll be horrider dead, I think," said Helen. "Dead things should be
beautiful."

"Well, he won't be. Moreover, nothing is, for long. You've seen sheep's
carcasses after the snows. Don't be romantic."

"I said they should be."

"It's a good thing they're not. They wouldn't fertilize the ground.
Can't we have supper?"

"Here's Notya!" Miriam uttered the warning, and began to poke the fire.

The room was entered by a small lady who carried her head well. She had
fair, curling hair, serious blue eyes and a mouth which had been
puckered into a kind of sternness.

"So you have come back, Helen," she said. "You should have told me. I
have been to the road to look for you. You are very late."

"Yes. I'm sorry. I met Dr. Mackenzie."

"He ought to have brought you home."

"He wanted to. I got turbot for Uncle Alfred. It's on the kitchen
table."

"Then I expect the cat has eaten it," said Mrs. Caniper with
resignation, but her mouth widened delightfully into what might have
been its natural shape. "Miriam, go and put it in the larder."

Surreptitiously and in farewell, Miriam dropped the poker on Helen's
toes. "Why can't she send you?" she muttered. "It's your turbot."

"But it's your cat."

Wearing what the Canipers called her deaf expression, their stepmother
looked at the closing door. "I did not hear what Miriam said," she
remarked blandly.

"She was talking to me."

"Oh!" Mrs. Caniper flushed slowly. "It is discourteous to have private
conversations in public, Helen. I have tried to impress that on
you--unsuccessfully, it seems; but remember that I have tried."

"Yes, thank you," Helen said, with serious politeness. She made a
movement unnatural to her in its violence, because she was forcing
herself to speak. "But you don't mind if the boys do things like that."
She hesitated and plunged again. "It's Miriam. You're not fair to her.
You never have been."

Over Mrs. Caniper's small face there swept changes of expression which
Helen was not to forget. Anger and surprise contended together, widening
her eyes and lips, and these were both overcome, after a struggle, by a
revelation of self-pity not less amazing to the woman than to the girl.

"Has she ever been fair to me?" Mildred Caniper asked stumblingly,
before she went in haste, and Helen knew well why she fumbled for the
door-handle.

The acute silence of the unhappy filled the room: John rose, collided
clumsily with the table and approached the hearth.

"Now, what did you do that for?" he said. "I can't stomach these family
affairs."

Helen smoothed her forehead and subdued the tragedy in her eyes. "I had
to do it," she breathed. "It was true, wasn't it?" She looked at Rupert,
but he was looking at the fire.

"True, yes," said John, "but it does Miriam no harm. A little
opposition--"

"No," said Helen, "no. We don't want to drive her to--to being silly."

"She is silly," John said.

"No," Helen said again. "She ought not to live here, that's all."

"She'll have to learn to. Anyhow"--he put his hands into his
pockets--"we can't have Notya looking like that. It's--it won't do."

"It's quite easy not to hurt people," Helen murmured; "but you had to
hurt her yourself, John, about your gardening."

"That was different," he said. He was a masculine creature. "I was
fighting for existence."

"Miriam has an existence, too, you know," Rupert said.

From the other side of the hall there came a faint chink of plates and
Miriam's low voice singing.

"She's all right," John assured himself.

Helen was smiling tenderly at the sound. "But I wonder why Notya is so
hard on her," she sighed.

Rupert knocked his pipe against the fender. "I should be very glad to
know what our mother was like," he said.

Long ago, out of excess of loyalty, the Canipers had tacitly agreed not
to discuss those matters on which their stepmother was determinedly
reserved, and now a certain tightening of the atmosphere revealed the
fact that John and Helen were controlling their desires to ask Rupert
what he meant.


CHAPTER III


The Canipers had lived on the moor for sixteen years, and Rupert was the
only one of the children who had more distant memories. These were like
flashes of white light on general darkness, for the low house of his
memory was white and the broad-leaved trees of the garden cast their
shadows on a pale wall: there was a white nursery of unlimited
dimensions and a white bath-room with a fluffy mat which comforted the
soles of his feet and tickled his toes. Another recollection was of the
day when a lady already faintly familiar to him was introduced by an
officious nurse as his new mother, and when he looked up at her, with
interest in her relationship and admiration for her prettiness, he saw
her making herself look very tall and stern as she said clearly, "I am
not your mother, Rupert."

"Notya mother," he echoed amiably, and so Mildred Caniper received her
name.

As he grew older, he wondered if he really remembered this occasion or
whether Notya herself had told him of it, but he knew that the house and
the garden wall and the nursery were true. True, too, was a dark man
with a pointed beard whom he called his father, who came and went and at
last disappeared; and his next remembrance was of the moor, the biggest
thing he had ever seen, getting blacker and blacker as the carriage-load
of Canipers jogged up the road. The faces of his stepmother, the
nursemaid, John and the twins, were like paper lanterns on the
background of night, things pale and impermanent, swaying to the
movements of the carriage while this black, outspread earth threatened
them, and, with the quick sympathy natural to him even then, he knew
that Notya was afraid of something too. Then the horse stopped and
Rupert climbed stiffly to the ground and heard the welcome of the
friend whom he was to know thereafter as Mrs. Brent. Her voice and
presence were rich with reassurance: she was fat and hearty, and the
threatening earth had spared her, so he took comfort. The laurels by the
small iron gate rattled at him as he passed, but Mrs. Brent had each boy
by a hand, and no one could be afraid. It was, he remembered, impossible
for the three to go through the gate abreast.

"Run in now," said Mrs. Brent, and when he had obeyed he heard a tall
grandfather clock ticking in the hall. He could see a staircase running
upwards into shadows, and the half-opened doors made him think of the
mouths of monsters. It seemed a long time before Mrs. Brent followed him
and made a cheerful noise.

With these memories he could always keep the little girls entranced,
even when great adventures of their own came to them on the moor, for
Notya was a stepmother by her own avowal, and in fairy tales a
stepmother was always cruel. They pretended to believe that she had
carried them away by force, that some day they would be rescued and
taken back to the big white nursery and the fluffy white mat; but Helen
at last spoilt the game by asserting that she did not want to be rescued
and by refusing to allow Notya to be the villain of the piece.

"She isn't cruel. She's sad," Helen explained.

"Yes, really; but this is pretending," Rupert said.

"It's not pretending. It's true," Miriam said, and she went on with the
game though she had to play alone. At the age of twenty she still played
it: Notya was still the cruel stepmother and Miriam's eyes were eager on
a horizon against which the rescuer should stand. At one time he had
been splendid and invincible, a knight to save her, and if his place had
now been taken by the unknown Uncle Alfred, it was only that realism
had influenced her fiction, and with a due sense of economy she used the
materials within her reach.

Domestic being though Helen was, the white nursery had no attraction for
her: she was more than satisfied with her many-coloured one; its floor
had hills and tiny dales, pools and streams, and it was walled by
greater hills and roofed by sky. On it there grew thorn-bushes which
thrust out thin hands, begging for food, in winter, and which wore a
lady's lovely dress in summertime and a warm red coat for autumn nights.
There was bracken, like little walking-sticks in spring, and when the
leaves uncurled themselves and spread, they made splendid feathers with
which to trim a hat or play at ostrich farms; but, best of all and most
fearsome, as the stems shot upwards and overtopped a child, the bracken
became a forest through which she hardly dared to walk, so dense and
interminable it was. To crawl up and down a fern-covered hillock needed
all Helen's resolution and she would emerge panting and wild-eyed,
blessing the open country and still watchful for what might follow her.
After that experience a mere game of hunters, with John and Rupert
roaring like lions and trumpeting like elephants, was a smaller though
glorious thing, and for hot and less heroic days there was the game of
dairymen, played in the reedy pool or in Halkett's stream with the aid
of old milk-cans of many sizes, lent to the Canipers by the lovable Mrs.
Brent.

In those days Mrs. Brent furnished them with their ideas of motherhood.
She seemed old to them because her husband was long dead and she was
stout, but she had a dark-eyed girl no older than John, and her she
kissed and nursed, scolded, teased and loved with a joyous confidence
which impressed the Canipers. Their stepmother rarely kissed, her
reprimands had not the familiarity of scoldings, and though she had a
sense of fun which could be reached and used with discretion, there was
no feeling of safety in her company. They were too young to realize that
this was because she was uncertain of herself, as that puckered mouth
revealed. That she loved them they believed; with all the aloofness of
their young souls they were thankful that she did not caress them; but
they liked to see Lily Brent fondled by her mother, and they themselves
suffered Mrs. Brent's endearments with a happy sense of
irresponsibility. It was Mrs. Brent who gave them hot cakes when they
went to the dairy to fetch butter or eggs, and who sometimes let them
skim the milk and eventually lick the ladle, but she was chiefly
wonderful because she could tell them about Mr. Pinderwell. Poor Mr.
Pinderwell was the late owner of the Canipers' home. He had lived for
more than fifty years in the house chosen and furnished for a bride who
had softly fallen ill on the eve of her wedding-day and softly died, and
Mr. Pinderwell, distracted by his loss, had come to live in the big,
lonely house and had grown old and at last died there, in the hall, with
no voice to bewail him but the ticking of the grandfather clock. Going
on her daily visit, for she alone was permitted to approach him, Mrs.
Brent had found him lying with his face on his outflung arm, "just like
a little boy in his bed."

"And were you frightened?" Miriam asked.

"There was nothing to be afraid of, my dear," Mrs. Brent replied. "Death
comes to all of us. It's a good thing to get used to the look of him."

Mrs. Brent had been fond of Mr. Pinderwell. He was a gentleman, she
said, and though his mind had become more and more bewildered towards
the end, he had been unfailingly courteous to her. She would find him
wandering up and down the stairs, carrying a small basket of tools in
his hand, for he took to wood-carving at the last, as the panels of the
bedroom doors were witness, and he would stop to speak about the weather
and beg her to allow him to make her some return for all her kindness.

"I used to clean up the place for him," Mrs. Brent would always
continue, "and do a little cooking for him, poor old chap! I missed him
when he'd gone, and I was glad when your mother came and took the house,
just as it stood, with his lady's picture and all, and made the place
comfortable again."

Miriam would press against Mrs. Brent's wide knees. "Will you tell us
the story again, please, Mrs. Brent?"

"If you're good children, but not today. Run along home."

At that stage of their development they were hardly interested in the
portrait of Mr. Pinderwell's bride, hanging above the sofa in the
drawing-room. It was the only picture in the house, and from an oval
frame of gilt a pretty lady, crowned with a plait of hair, looked mildly
on these usurpers of her home. She was not real to them, though for
Helen she was to become so, but Mr. Pinderwell, pacing up and down the
stairs, carrying a little chisel, was a living friend. On the wide,
wind-swept landing, they studied his handiwork on the doors, and they
made a discovery which Mrs. Brent had missed. These roughnesses, known
to their fingers from their first day in the house, were letters, and
made names. Laboriously they spelt them out. Jane, on the door of
Helen's room, was easy; Phoebe, on Miriam's, was for a long time
called Pehebe; and Christopher, on another, had a familiar and
adventurous sound.

"Funny," Rupert said. "What are they?"

Helen spoke with that decision which often annoyed her relatives. "I
know. It's the names of the children he was going to have. Jane and
Pehebe and Christopher. That's what it is. And these were the rooms he'd
settled for them. Jane is a quiet little girl with a fringe and a white
pinafore, and Pehebe has a sash and cries about things, and Christopher
is a strong boy in socks."

"Stockings," Rupert said. "He's the oldest."

"He isn't. He's the baby. He wears socks. He's not so smooth as the
others, and look, poor Mr. Pinderwell hadn't time to put a full stop.
I'm glad I sleep in Jane."

"And of course you give me a girl who cries!" Miriam said. But the
characters of Mr. Pinderwell's children had been settled, and they were
never altered. Jane and Christopher and Phoebe were added to the
inhabitants whom Mildred Caniper did not see, but these three did not
leave the landing. They lived there quietly in the shadows, speaking
only in whispers, while Mr. Pinderwell continued his restless tramping
and his lady smiled, unwearied, in the drawing-room.

"He's the only one who can get at her and them," Helen said in pain. "I
don't know how their mother can bear it. I wonder if she'd mind if we
hung her on the landing, but then Mr. Pinderwell might miss her. He's so
used to her in the drawing-room, and perhaps she doesn't mind about the
children."

"I'm sure she doesn't," said John, for he thought she had a silly face.

This was when John and Rupert went to the Grammar School in the town,
while the girls did their lessons with Mildred Caniper in the schoolroom
of Pinderwell House. Enviously, they watched the boys step across the
moor each morning, but their stepmother could not be persuaded to allow
them to go too. The distance was so great, she said, and there was no
school for girls to which she would entrust them.

"The boys get all the fun," Miriam said. "They see the people in the
streets, and get a ride in Mrs. Brent's milk-cart nearly every day, and
we sit in the stuffy schoolroom, and Notya's cross."

"You make her cross on purpose," Helen said.

"She shouldn't let me," Miriam answered with perspicuity.

"But it's so silly to make ugliness. It's wicked. Do be good, and let's
try to enjoy the lessons and get them over."

But Miriam was not to be influenced by these wise counsels. During
lesson hours the strange antipathy between herself and Mildred Caniper
often blazed into a storm, and Helen, who loved to keep life smooth and
gracious, had the double mortification of seeing Miriam, whom she loved,
made naughtier, and Notya, whom she pitied, made more miserable.

"Oh, that we'd had an ignorant stepmother!" Miriam cried. "If
stepmothers are not witches they ought to be dunces. Everybody knows
that. I'll worry her till she sends us both to boarding-school."

Mildred Caniper was not to be coerced. Her mouth grew more puckered, her
eyes more serious, and her tongue sharper; for though anger, as she
found, was useless, sarcasm was potent, and in time Miriam gave up the
battle. But she did not intend to forgive Mildred Caniper for a single
injury, and even now that she was almost woman she refused her own
responsibility. Notya had arranged her life, and the evil of it, at
least, should be laid at Notya's door.


CHAPTER IV


For Helen, the moor was a personality with moods flecking the solid
substance of its character, and even Miriam, who avowed her hatred of
its monotony, had to admit an occasional difference. There were days
when she thought it was full of secrets and capable of harbouring her
own, and there were other days when she forgot its little hills and
dales and hiding-places and saw it as a large plain, spread under the
glaring eye of the sun, and shelterless, so that when she walked there
she believed that her body and, in some mysterious way, her soul, were
visible to all men.

Such a day was that on which Uncle Alfred was expected. Miriam went out
with a basket on her arm to find flowers for the decoration of his room,
and she had no sooner banged the garden door behind her and mounted the
first rise than she suffered from this sensation of walking under a
spyglass of great size. There was a wonderful clearness everywhere. The
grass and young heather were a vivid green, the blue of the sky had a
certain harshness and heavily piled clouds rolled across it. Miriam
stood on a hillock and gazed at the scene which looked as though
something must happen to it under the concentration of the eye behind
the glass, but she saw nothing more than the familiar things: the white
road cutting the moor, Brent Farm lying placidly against the gentle
hillside, the chimneys of Halkett's Farm rising amid trees, and her own
home in its walled garden, and, as she looked, a new thought came to
her. Perhaps her expectation was born of a familiarity so intense as to
be unreal and rarely recognized, and with the thought she shut her eyes
tightly and in despair. Nothing would happen. She did not live in a
country subject to convulsions, and when she opened her eyes the same
things would still be there; yet, to give Providence an opportunity of
proving its strength and her folly, she kept her eyelids lowered for a
while. This was another pastime of her childhood: she tried to tempt
God, failed, and laughed at Him instead of at herself.

She stood there, clad in a colour of rich earth, her head bare and
gilded by the sunlight, both hands on the frail basket, and the white
eyelids giving the strange air of experience to her face.

"I'm going to look in a minute," she said, and kept her word. Her dark
eyes illumined her face, searched the world and found nothing new. There
was, indeed, the smallest possible change, but surely it was not one in
which God would trouble to take a hand. She could see John's figure
moving slowly on the Brent Farm road. A woman's form appeared in the
porch and went to meet his: the two stood together in the road.

Miriam made an impatient noise and turned her back on them. She was
irritated by the sight of another woman's power, even though John were
its sole victim, for she knew that the world of men had only to become
aware of her existence and the track to Pinderwell House would be
impassable.

"There's no false modesty about me!" she cried to an astonished sheep,
and threw a tuft of heather at it.

Suddenly she lifted her chin and began to sing on notes too high for
her, and tunelessly, as sign of her defiance, and the words of her song
dealt with the dreariness of the moor and her determination to escape
from it; but in the midst of them she laughed delightedly.

"I'm an idiot! Uncle Alfred's coming. But if he fails me"--she kicked
the basket and ran after it--"I'll do that to him!"

She sang naturally now, in her low, husky voice, as she searched the
banks for violets, but once she broke off to murmur, without humour,
with serious belief, "He can't fail me. Who could? No one but Notya."
Such was her faith in the word's acknowledgement of charm.

She found the violets, but she would not pick them because they stared
at her with a confidence like her own, and with an appealing innocence,
and thinking she might get primroses under Halkett's larches she went on
swiftly, waving the basket as though it were an Indian club.

She stopped when she met the stream which foamed into the stealthy quiet
of the wood, and on a large flat stone she sat and was splashed by the
noisy water. The larch-trees were alive with feathery green, and their
arms waved with the wind, but when Miriam peered through their trunks,
all was grave and secret except the stream which shouted louder than
before in proof of courage. She did not like the trees, but the
neighbourhood of Halkett's Farm had an attraction for her. Down there,
in the hollow, old Halkett was drinking himself to death, after a life
which had been sober in no respect. Mrs. Samson, the charwoman, now
exerting herself at Pinderwell House, and the wife of one of Halkett's
hands, had many tales of the old man's wickedness and many nodded hints
that the son was taking after him. The Halketts were all alike, she
said. They married young and their wives died early, leaving their men
to take comfort, or celebrate relief, in their own way.

"Ah, yes! They're a hearty, jolly lot," she often said, and smacked her
lips. She was proud and almost envious of the Halketts' exploits, for
her own husband was a meek man who never misused her and seldom drank.

Widely different as Mrs. Samson and Miriam believed themselves to be,
they had a common elementary pleasure in things of ill report, a savage
excitement in the presence of certain kinds of danger, and Miriam sat
half fearfully by the larch-wood and hoped something terrible would
happen. If there was a bad old man on the moor it was a pity that she
should not benefit by him, yet she dreaded his approach and would have
run from him, for he was ugly, with a pendulous nose and a small leering
eye. She decided to stay at a safe distance from the house and not to
venture among the larches: any primroses growing there should live
undisturbed, timid and pale, within earshot of old Halkett's ragings,
and Uncle Alfred must go without his flowers. Helen had said he would
not like them, but that was only because Helen did not like the thought
of Uncle Alfred. Helen did not want new things: she was content: she was
not wearied by the slow hours, the routine of the quiet house with its
stately, polished furniture, chosen long ago by Mr. Pinderwell, the
rumbling of cart-wheels on the road, and the homely sounds of John
working in the garden. She belonged, as she herself averred, to people
and to places.

"And I," Miriam called aloud, touching her breast--"I belong to nobody,
though everything belongs to me."

In that announcement she outcried the stream, and through the
comparative quietness that followed a hideous noise rumbled and shrieked
upwards from the hollow. Bestial, but humanly inarticulate, it filled
the air and ceased: there was the loud thud of furniture overthrown, a
woman's voice, and silence. Then, while Miriam's legs shook and her back
was chilled, she heard a sweet, clear whistling and the sound of feet. A
minute later George Halkett issued from the trees.

"George!" she said, and half put out her hand.

He stood before her, his mouth still pursed for whistling, and jerked
his head over his shoulder.

"You heard that?"

"Yes. Oh, yes!"

"I'm sorry."

"It's my fault for being here. Was it--what was it?"

His eyes narrowed and she could see a blue slit between lashes so thick
that they seemed furred.

"My father. He's ill. I'm sorry you heard."

"Will he--do it again?"

"He's quiet now and Mrs. Biggs can manage him."

"Isn't she afraid?"

"Not she." His thoughts plainly left old Halkett and settled themselves
on her. "Are you?"

"Yes." She shuddered. "But then, I'm not used to it."

He was beating his leggings with his cane. "There's a lot in use," he
said vaguely. He was a tall man, and on his tanned face were no signs of
the excesses imputed to him, perhaps out of vainglory, by Mrs. Samson. A
brown moustache followed the line of a lip which was sometimes pouted
sullenly, yet with a simplicity which could be lovable. The hair was
short and crisp on his round head.

Miriam watched his shapely hands playing with the cane, and she looked
up to find his eyes attentively on her. She smiled without haste. She
had a gift for smiling. Her mouth stretched delicately, her lips parted
to show a gleam of teeth, opened widely for a flash, and closed again.

"What are you laughing at?" he asked her, and there was a faint glow in
his cheeks.

"That wasn't laughing. That was smiling. When I laugh I say ha, ha!"

"Well, you looked pleased about something," he mumbled.

"No, I was just being friendly to you."

He took a step nearer. "That's all very well. Last time I met you you
hadn't a look for me, and you saw me right enough."

"Yes, George, I saw you, but I wasn't in the mood for you."

"And now you are?"

She looked down. "Do you like people always to be the same? I don't."
Laughter bubbled in her voice. "I get moments, George, when my thoughts
are so--so celestial that though I see earthly things like you, I don't
understand them. They're like shadows, like trees walking." She pointed
a finger. "Tell me where that comes from!"

He looked about him. "What?"

She addressed the stream. "He doesn't know the foundation of the English
language, English morals--I said morals, George--the spiritual food of
his fathers. Do you ever go to church?"

He did not answer: he was frowning at his boots.

"Neither do I," she said. "Help me up."

His hand shot out, but she did not take it. She leapt to her feet and
jumped the stream, and when he said something in a low voice she put her
fingers to her ears and shook her head, pretending that she could not
hear and smiling pleasantly. Then she beckoned to him, but it was his
turn to shake his head.

"Puss, puss, puss!" she called, twitching her finger at him. "Don't
laugh! Well, I'll come to you." At his side, she looked up solemnly.
"Let us be sensible and go where we needn't shout at each other. Beside
that rock. I want to tell you something."

When they had settled themselves on a cushion of turf, she drew her
knees to her chin and clasped her hands round them, and in that position
she swayed lightly to and fro.

"I think I am going away," she said, and stared at the horizon. For a
space she listened to the chirping of a cheerful insect and the small,
regular noise of Halkett's breathing, but as he made no other sound she
turned sharply and looked at him.

"All right," he said.

She moved impatiently, for that was not what she wished to hear, and,
even if it expressed his feeling, it was the wrong word. He had
roughnesses which almost persuaded her to neglect him.

"Aren't you sorry?"

There was courage in his decision to be truthful. He showed her the full
blue of his eyes, and said "Yes" so simply that she felt compassionate.
"Where?" he added.

"I'm going to be adopted by an uncle," she said boldly.

"You'll like that?"

"I'm tired of the moor."

"You don't fit it. I couldn't tire of it, but it'll be--different when
you've gone."

She consoled him. "I may not go at once."

"How soon?"

"I don't know."

"Are you really going?" he asked and his look pleaded with her for
honesty.

"I shall have to arrange it all with Uncle Alfred."

He straightened himself against the rock, but he said nothing.

"And we're just beginning to be friends," she added sensibly, with the
faintest accent of regret.

At that he stirred again, and "No," he said steadily, "that's not true.
We're not friends--couldn't be. You think I'm a fool, but I can see
you're despising me all the time. I can see that, and I wonder why."

She caught her lip. "Well, George," she began, and thought quickly. "I
have heard dreadful stories about you. You can't expect me to be--not to
be careful with you."

"What stories?" he demanded.

"Oh! I couldn't tell you."

"H'm. There never was a Halkett but was painted so black that he got to
think it was his natural colour. That doesn't matter. And you don't care
about the stories. You've some notion--D'you know that I went to the
same school as your brothers?"

"Yes, I know." She swung herself to her knees. "But you're not like
them. But that isn't it either. It's because you're a man." She laughed
a little as she knelt before him. "I can't help feeling that I can--that
men are mine--to play with. There! I've told you a secret."

"I'd guessed it long ago," he muttered. He stood up and turned aside.
"You're not going to play with me."

"Just a little bit, George!"

"Not a little bit."

"Very well," she said humbly, and rose too. "I may never see you again,
so I'll say good-bye."

"Good-bye," he answered, and held her hand.

"And if I don't go away, and if I feel that I don't want to play with
you, but just to--well, really to be friends with you, can I be?"

"I don't know," he said slowly. "I don't trust you."

She nodded, teasing her lip again. "Very well," she repeated. "I shall
remember. Yes. You're going to be very unhappy, you know."

"Why?" he asked dully.

"For saying that to me."

"But it's the truth."

She shook her little hands at him and spoke loudly. "You seem to think
the truth's excuse enough for anything, but you're wrong, George, and if
you were worth it, I should hate you."

Then she turned from him, and as he watched her run towards home he
wished he had lied to her and risked bewitchment.


CHAPTER V


The efforts of Mildred Caniper, Helen and Mrs. Samson produced a
brighter polish on floors and furniture, a richer brilliance from brass,
a whiter gleam from silver, in a house which was already irreproachable,
and the smell of cleanliness was overcome by that of wood fires in the
sitting-rooms and in Christopher where Uncle Alfred was to sleep. A bowl
of primroses, brought by John from Lily Brent's garden and as yellow as
her butter, stood on a table near the visitor's bed: the firelight cast
shadows on the white counterpane, a new rug was awaiting Uncle Alfred's
feet. In the dining-room, the table was spread with the best cloth and
the candles were ready to be lighted.

"When we see the trap," Miriam said, "I'll go round with a taper. And
we'd better light the lamp in the kitchen passage or Uncle Alfred may
trip over something when he hangs up his coat."

"There won't be anything for him to trip over," Helen said.

"How do you know? It's just the sort of accident that happens to
families that want to make a good impression. We'd better do it. Where
are the steps?"

"The lamp hasn't been trimmed for months, and we can't have a smell of
oil. Leave it alone. The hall is so beautifully dim. Rupert must take
his coat and hang it up for him."

"Very well," Miriam said resignedly; "but if Notya or John had suggested
the lamp, you would have jumped at it."

"No, I should have fetched the steps."

"Oh, funny, funny! Now I'm going to dress."

"There are two hours."

"It will take me as long as that. What shall I wear? Black or red? It's
important, Helen. Tell me."

"Black is safer."

"Yes, if only I had pearls. I should look lovely in black and pearls."

"Pearls," Helen said slowly, "would suit me."

"You're better without them."

"I shall never have them."

"When I've a lot of money I'll give you some."

"Thank you," Helen said.

"Because," Miriam called out when she was half way up the stairs, "I'm
going to marry a rich man."

"It would be wise," Helen answered, and went to the open door.

She could hear Notya moving in her bedroom, and she wondered how a
sister must feel at the approach of a brother she had not seen for many
years. She knew that if she should ever be parted from John or Rupert
there would be no shyness at their meeting and no effusion: things would
be just as they had been, for she was certain of an affection based on
understanding, and now the thought of her brothers kept her warm in
spite of the daunting coldness of the light lying on the moor and the
fact that doors were opening to a stranger.

She checked a little sigh and stepped on to the gravel path, rounded the
house and crossed the garden to find John locking up the hen-house for
the night. He glanced at her but did not speak, and she stood with her
hands clasped before her and watched the swaying of the poplars. The
leaves were spreading and soon they would begin their incessant
whispering while they peeped through the windows of the house to see
what the Canipers were doing.

"They know all our secrets," she said aloud.

John dropped the key into his pocket. "Have we any?"

"Perhaps not. I should have said our fears."

"Our hopes," he said stubbornly.

"I haven't many of those," she told him and, to hide her trouble, she
put the fingers of both hands to her forehead.

"What's the matter with you? You sound pretty morbid."

"No, I'm only--careful. John, are you afraid of life?"

His eyes fell on the rows of springing vegetables. "Look at 'em coming
up," he murmured. "Rather not. I couldn't grow things." He gathered up
his tools and put them in the shed.

"You see," she said, "one never knows what's going to happen, but it's
no good worrying, and I suppose one must just go on."

"It's the only thing to do," John assured her gravely. "Have you made
yourself beautiful for the uncle?"

She pointed to an upper window smeared with light. "I have left that to
Miriam, but I must go and put on my best frock."

"You always look all right," he said. "I suppose it's because your
hair's so smooth."

"No," she answered, and laughed with her transforming gaiety, "it's just
because I'm mediocre and don't get noticed."

He hesitated and decided to be bold. "I'll tell you something, as you're
so down in the mouth. Rupert thinks you're better looking than Miriam.
There! Go and look at yourself." He waved her off, and the questions
fell from her lips unuttered.

She lighted a candle and went upstairs, but when she had passed into the
dark peace of Jane and put the candle on her dressing-table, she found
she needed more illumination by which to see this face which Rupert
considered fair.

"Miriam will have heaps of them," she said and knocked at Phoebe's
door.

"I've come to borrow a candle," she said as she was told to enter, and
added, "Oh, what waste! I hope Notya won't come in."

"She can't unless I let her," Miriam answered grimly.

There were lights on the mantelpiece, on the dressing-table, on the
washstand, and two in tall sticks burned before the cheval glass as
though it had been an altar.

"You can take one of them," Miriam said airily.

The warm whiteness of her skin gleamed against her under-linen like a
pale fruit fallen by chance on frozen snow: her hair was held up by the
white comb she had been using, and this stood out at an impetuous angle.
She went nearer to the mirror.

"I've been thinking," she said, "what a lovely woman my mother must have
been. Do you think I look like a Spanish dancer? Now, don't tell me
you've never seen one. Take your candle and go away."

Helen obeyed and shut both doors quietly. She put the second candle
beside the first and studied her pale face. She was not beautiful, and
Rupert was absurd. She was colourless and rather dull, and to compare
her with the radiant being in the other room was to hold a stable
lantern to a star.

She turned from her contemplation and, changing grey dress for grey
dressing-gown, she brushed her long, straight hair. Ten minutes later
she left the room and went about the house to see that all was ready for
the guest.

She put coal on the fire in Christopher and left the door ajar so that
the flames might cast warm light on the landing: she took a towel from
the rail and changed it for another finer one; then she went quietly
down the stairs, with a smile for Mr. Pinderwell, and fancied she smelt
the spring through the open windows. The hall had a dimness which hid
and revealed the rich mahogany of the clock and cupboard and the table
from which more primroses sent up a memory of moonlight and a fragrance
which was no sooner seized than lost. She could hear Mrs. Samson in the
kitchen as she watched over the turbot, and from the schoolroom there
came the scraping of a chair. John had dressed as quickly as herself.

In the dining-room she found her stepmother standing by the fire.

"Oh, you look sweet!" Helen exclaimed. "I love you in that dark blue."

"I think I'll wait in the drawing-room," Mildred Caniper said, and went
away.

Once more, Helen wandered to the doorway; she always sought the open
when she was unhappy and, as she looked over the gathering darkness, she
tried not to remember the tone of Notya's words.

"It's like pushing me off a wall I'm trying to climb," she thought, "but
I mean to climb it." And for the second time within an hour, she gave
tongue to her sustaining maxim: "I must just go on."

She hoped Uncle Alfred was not expectant of affection.

Night was coming down. The road was hardly separable from the moor, and
it was the Brent Farm dogs which warned her of the visitor's approach.
Two yellow dots slowly swelled into carriage lamps, and the rolling of
wheels and the thud of hoofs were faintly heard. She went quickly to the
schoolroom.

"John, the trap's coming."

"Well, what d'you want me to do about it? Stop it?"

"I wish you could."

"Now, don't get fussy."

"I'm not."

"Not get fussy?"

"Not getting fussy."

"That's better. If your grammar's all right the nerves must be in
order."

"You're stupid, John. I only want some one to support me--on the step."

"Need we stand there? Rupert's with him. Won't that do?"

"No, I think we ought to say how-d'you-do, here, and then pass him on to
Notya in the drawing-room."

"Very good. Stand firm. But they'll be hours rolling up the track. What
the devil do we want with an uncle? The last time we stood like this was
when our revered father paid us a call. Five years ago--six?"

"Six."

"H'm. If I ever have any children--Where's Miriam? I suppose she's going
to make a dramatic entry when she's sure she can't be missed."

"I hope so," Helen said. "The first sight of Miriam--"

"You're ridiculous. She's no more attractive than any other girl, and
it's this admiration that's been her undoing."

"Is she undone?"

"She's useless."

"Like a flower."

"No, she has a tongue."

"Oh, John, you're getting bad-tempered."

"I'm getting tired of this damned step."

"You swear rather a lot," she said mildly. "They're on the track. Oh,
Rupert's talking. Isn't it a comfortable sound?"

A few minutes later, she held open the gate and, all unaware of the
beauty of her manners, she welcomed a small, neat man who wore an
eyeglass. John took possession of him and led him into the hall and
Helen waited for Rupert, who followed with the bag. She could see that
his eyebrows were lifted comically.

"Well?" she asked.

"Awful. I know he isn't dumb because I've heard him speak, nor deaf
because he noticed that the horse had a loose shoe, but that's all I can
tell you, my dear. I talked--I had to talk. You can't sit in the dark
for miles with some one you don't know and say nothing, but I've been
sweating blood." He put the bag down and leaned against the gate. "That
man," he said emphatically, "is a mining engineer. He--oh, good-night,
Gibbons--he's been all over the globe, so Notya tells us. You'd think he
might have picked up a little small talk as well as a fortune, but no.
If he's picked it up, he's jolly careful with it. I tell you, I've made
a fool of myself, and talked to a thing as unresponsive as a stone
wall."

"Perhaps you talked too much."

"I know I did, but I've a hopeful disposition, and I've cured hard cases
before now. Of course he must have been thinking me an insufferable
idiot, but the darkness and his neighbourhood were too much for me. And
that horse of Gibbons's! It's only fit for the knacker. Oh, Lord! I
believe I told him the population of the town. There's humiliation for
you! He grunted now and then. Well, I'll show the man I can keep quiet
too. We ought to have sent John to meet him. They'd have been happy
enough together."

"You know," Helen said sympathetically, "I don't suppose he heard half
you said or was thinking about you at all."

Rupert laughed delightedly and put his arm through hers as he picked up
the bag.

"Come in. No doubt you're right."

"I believe he's really afraid of us," she added. "I should be."

As they entered the hall, they saw Miriam floating down the stairs. One
hand on the rail kept time with her descent; her black dress, of airy
make, fluffed from stair to stair; the white neck holding her little
head was as luminous as the pearls she wanted. She paused on one foot
with the other pointed.

"Where is he?" she whispered.

"Just coming out of the drawing-room," Rupert answered quickly,
encouraging her. "Stay like that. Chin a little higher. Yes. You're like
Beatrix Esmond coming down the stairs. Excellent!"

A touch from Helen silenced him as Mildred Caniper and her brother
turned the corner of the passage. They both stood still at the sight of
this dark-clad vision which rested immobile for an instant before it
smiled brilliantly and finished the flight.

"This is Miriam," Mildred Caniper said in hard tones.

Miriam cast a quick, wavering glance at her and returned to meet the
gaze of Uncle Alfred, who had not taken her hand. At last, seeing it
outstretched, he took it limply.

"Ah--Miriam," he said, with a queer kind of cough.

"She's knocked him all of a heap," Rupert told himself vulgarly as he
carried the bag upstairs, and once more he wished he knew what his
mother had been like.


CHAPTER VI


At supper, Uncle Alfred was monosyllabic, and the Canipers, realizing
that he was much shyer than themselves, became hospitable. Notya made
the droll remarks of which she was sometimes capable, and Miriam showed
off without fear of a rebuke. It was a comely party, and Mrs. Samson
breathed her heavy pleasure in it as she removed the plates. When the
meal was over and Uncle Alfred was smoking placidly in the drawing-room,
Helen wandered out to the garden gate. There she found John biting an
empty pipe.

After their fashion, they kept silence for a time before Helen said,
"Would it matter if I went for a walk?"

"I was thinking of having one myself."

"He won't miss you and me," she said. "May I come with you, or were you
going to Brent Farm?"

"I'm not going there. Come on."

The wind met them lightly as they headed towards the road. The night was
very dark, and the ground seemed to lift itself before them and sink
again at their approach.

"It's like butting into a wave," John said. "I keep shutting my eyes,
ready for the shock."

"Yes." Helen began to talk as though she were alone. "The moor is always
like the sea, when it's green and when it's black. It moves, too,
gently. And now the air feels like water, heavy and soft. And yet the
wind's far more alive than water. I'd like to have a wind bath every
day. Oh, I'm glad we live here."

She stumbled, and John caught her by the elbow.

"Want a hand?"

"No, thank you. It's these slippers."

"High heels?"

"No, a stone. I wonder if the fires are out. It's so long since last
night. We'd better not go far, John."

"We'll stop at Halkett's turning."

They took the road, and their pace quickened to the drum beats of their
feet.

"It sounds like winter," Helen said.

"But it feels like spring."

She thought she heard resentment for that season in his voice. "Well,
why don't you go and tell her?"

"Oh, shut up! What's the use? I've no money. A nice suitor I'd make for
a woman like that!"

Helen's voice sang above their footsteps and the swishing of her dress.
"Silly, old-fashioned ideas you've got! They're rather insulting to her,
I think."

"Perhaps, if she cares; but if she doesn't--She'd send me off like a
stray dog."

"That's pride. You shouldn't be proud in love."

"You should be proud in everything, I believe. And what do you know
about it?"

"Oh--I think. Can you hear a horse, a long way off? And of course I want
to be married, too, but Miriam is sure to be, and then Notya would be
left alone. Besides, I couldn't leave the moor, and there's no one but
George Halkett here!"

"H'm. You're not going to marry him."

"No, I'm not--but I'm sorry for him."

"You needn't be. He's no good. You must have nothing to do with him. Ask
Lily Brent. He tried to kiss her once, the beast, but she nearly broke
his nose, and serve him right."

"Oh? Did she mind?"

"Mind!"

"I don't think I should have. He looks clean, and if he really wanted to
kiss me very badly, I expect I should let him. It's such a little
thing."

"Good heavens, girl!" He stopped in a stride and turned to her. "That
kind of charity is very ill-advised."

Her laughter floated over his head with the coolness of the wind. "I
hope I shan't have to give way to it."

He continued to be serious. "Well, you're not ignorant. Rupert and I
made up our minds to that as soon as we knew anything ourselves; but
women are such fools, such fools! Tender-hearted idiots!"

"Is that why you're afraid to go to Lily Brent?" she asked.

"Ah, that's different," he mumbled. "She's more like a man."

Helen was smiling as they walked on. "If you could have Lily Brent and
give up your garden, or keep your garden and lose her--"

"I'm not going to talk about it," he said.

"I wanted to know how much love really matters. That horse is much
nearer now. We'll see the lights soon. And there's some one by the
roadside, smoking. It's George. Good-evening, George."

His deep voice rumbled through the darkness, exchanging salutations.
"I'm waiting for the doctor."

"Some one's coming now."

"Yes, it's his old nag. That horse makes you believe in eternity,
anyhow."

She felt a sudden, painful anger. "He's a friend of mine--the horse,"
and quietly, she repeated to herself, "The horse," because he had no
name by which she could endear him.

"Is Mr. Halkett worse?" John asked, from the edge of the road.

The red end of Halkett's cigar glowed and faded. "I'm anxious about
him."

The yellow lights of the approaching dog-cart swept the borders of the
moor and Helen felt herself caught in the illumination. The horse
stopped and she heard the doctor's clear-cut voice.

"Is that you, Helen?"

"Yes."

"Anything wrong?"

"No, I'm just here with John," she said and went close to the cart. "And
George is waiting for you."

"He'd better hop up, then." He bent towards her. "Did you find the
fires?"

She nodded with the vehemence of her gladness that he should remember.
"And," she whispered hurriedly, "you were quite right about the doors.
Uncle Alfred's going to be a friend."

"That's good. Hullo, Halkett. Get up, will you, and we'll go on. Where's
John?"

"Sitting on the bank."

The cart shook under Halkett's added weight, and as he took his seat he
bulked enormous in the darkness. Dwarfed by that nearness, the doctor
sat with his hat in one hand and gathered the reins up with the other.

"No, just a minute!" Helen cried. "I want to stroke the horse." Her
voice had laughter in it.

"There's a patient waiting for me, you know."

"Yes. There! It's done. Go on. Good-night."

The cart took the corner in a blur of lamplight and shadow, tipped over
a large stone and disappeared down the high-banked lane, leaving Helen
with an impressive, half-alarming memory of the two jolted figures,
black, with white ovals for faces, side by side, and Zebedee's spare
frame clearing itself, now and then, from the other's breadth.

In the drawing-room, Uncle Alfred sat on one side of the hearth and
Miriam on the other. The room was softly lighted by candles and the
fire, and at the dimmer end Mr. Pinderwell's bride was smiling. The
sound of Mildred Caniper's needle, as she worked at an embroidery
frame, was added to the noises of the fire and Uncle Alfred's regular
pulling at his pipe. Rupert was proving his capacity for silence on the
piano stool.

"And which country," Miriam asked, leaning towards her uncle, "do you
like best?"

"Oh--well, I hardly know."

"I never care for the sound of Africa--so hot."

"Hottish," conceded Uncle Alfred.

"Oh, Lord!" Rupert groaned in spirit.

"And South America, full of crocodiles, isn't it?"

"Is it?"

"Haven't you been there?"

"Yes, yes--parts of it."

"Miriam," said Mildred Caniper, "Alfred is not a geography book."

"But he ought to be," she dared.

"And," the cool voice went on, "you never cared for geography, I
remember."

Miriam sat back sullenly, stiffening until her prettily shod feet
reached an inch further along the fender. Rupert would not relieve the
situation and the visitor smoked on, watching Miriam through his tobacco
smoke, until a knock came at the door.

"I beg your pardon, M'm--"

"It's Mother Samson," said Rupert. "Shall I look after her?"

"No. I will go." The door closed quietly behind Mrs. Caniper.

Uncle Alfred lowered his pipe. "You are extraordinarily like your
mother," he said in quick and agitated tones, and the life of the room
was changed amazingly. Rupert turned on his seat, and his elbow scraped
the piano notes so that they jangled like a hundred questions. Miriam
slipped out of her chair.

"Am I?" she asked from her knees. "I knew I was. Tell me!"

He put his hand to his breast-pocket. "Ah," he said, as a step sounded
in the passage, "perhaps tomorrow--"

Miriam lifted the poker. "Because you mustn't poke the fire, Uncle
Alfred," she was saying as Mildred Caniper came back. "You haven't known
us long enough." She turned to her stepmother. "Did Mrs. Samson want her
money? She's saving up. She's going to have a new dress this summer
because she hasn't had one since she was married."

"And if she hadn't married," Rupert went on, feeling like a conspirator,
"she would have had one every year."

"That gives one something to think about--yes," said Uncle Alfred, doing
his share. He was astonished at himself. He had spent the greater part
of his life in avoiding relationships which might hamper him and already
he was in league with these young people and finding pleasure in the
situation.

Miriam was looking at him darkly, mischievously, from the hearthrug.
"Tomorrow," she said, resting on the word, "I'll take you for a walk to
see the sights. There are rabbits, sheep, new lambs, very white and
lively, a hare if we're lucky, ponies, perhaps, if we go far enough.
We've all these things on the moor. Oh," her grimace missed foolishness
by the hair's breadth which fortune always meted to her, "it's a
wonderful place. Will you come with me?"

He nodded with a guilty quickness. "What are these ponies?"

"Little wild ones, with long tails."

"I'm fond of horses," he said and immediately looked ashamed of the
confession. "Ha, ha, 'um," he half hummed, trying to cloak
embarrassment.

"I'm fond of all animals," Miriam said with loud bitterness, "but we are
only allowed to have a cat."

"Hens," Rupert reminded her.

"They're not animals; they're idiots."

"Would you like to keep a cow in the garden?" Mildred Caniper enquired
in the pleasantly cold tones which left Miriam powerless.

Uncle Alfred's tuneless humming began again. "Yes, fond of horses," he
said vaguely, his eyes quick on woman and girl.

"And can you ride?" Miriam asked politely, implying that it was not
necessary for the whole family to be ill-mannered.

"I've had to--yes, but I don't care about it. No, I like to look at
them."

"We rode when we were children," his sister said.

"Hung on."

"Well, yes."

Miriam would not encourage these reminiscences, so belated on the part
of her stepmother. "We have a neighbour who grows horses," she said.
"And he's a wonderful rider. Rupert, don't you think he'd like to show
them to Uncle Alfred? On Saturday afternoon, couldn't you take him to
the farm?"

"But I'm going on Saturday," Uncle Alfred interposed.

"Saturday! And today's Thursday! Oh!"

"At least I think so," he said weakly.

Secretly she shook her head at him. "No, no," she signed, and said
aloud, "A Sunday in the country--"

"No place of worship within four miles," Rupert announced.

"Ah," Uncle Alfred said with a gleam of humour, "that's distinctly
cheering."

Miriam beat her hands together softly. "And yet," she said, "I've
sometimes been to church for a diversion. Have you?"

"Never," he answered firmly.

"I counted the bald heads," she said mournfully, "but they didn't last
out." She looked up and saw that Uncle Alfred was laughing silently: she
glanced over her shoulder and saw Mildred Caniper's lips compressed, and
she had a double triumph. This was the moment when it would be wise for
her to go to bed. Like a dark flower, lifting itself to the sun, she
rose from her knees in a single, steady movement.

"Good-night," she said with a little air. "And we'll have our walk
tomorrow?"

He was at the door, holding it open. "Yes, but--in the afternoon, if we
may. I am not an early riser, and I don't feel very lively in the
mornings."

"Ah," she thought as she went upstairs, "he wouldn't have said that to
my mother. He's getting old: but never mind, I'm like a lady in a
romance! I believe he loved my mother and I'll make him love me."


CHAPTER VII


She was not allowed time for that achievement. On the morning of the day
which was to have been productive of so much happiness, the postman
brought a letter with a foreign stamp, and Miriam took it to the kitchen
where her stepmother and Helen were discussing meals.

"A letter," Miriam said flippantly, "from Italy."

"Thank you, Miriam. Put it on the table." The faint colour our deepened
on her cheeks. "I'm afraid one of you will have to go into the town
again. I forgot to ask Rupert to order the meat. Miriam--"

"No, I can't go. I'm engaged to Uncle Alfred."

"I think we might easily persuade him to excuse you. He really dislikes
walking, though he would not say so."

"Or," Helen said with tact, "we could get chickens from Lily Brent.
Wouldn't that be better?"

"Very well. Now, about sweets."

"This letter," Miriam said, bending over it and growing bold in the
knowledge that Uncle Alfred was not far off, "this letter looks as if it
wants to be opened. All the way from Italy," she mumbled so that Mildred
Caniper could not distinguish the words, "and neglected when it gets
here. If he took the trouble to write to me, I wouldn't treat him like
that. Poor letter! Poor Mr. Caniper! No wonder he went away to Italy."
She stood up. "His writing is very straggly," she said clearly.

Mildred Caniper put out a hand which Miriam pretended not to see.

"Shall I order the chickens?" she asked; but no one answered, for her
stepmother was reading the letter, and Helen preserved silence as though
she were in a church. With care that the dishes should not click
against each other, she put the newly washed china on the dresser and
laid the silver in its place, and now and then she glanced at Notya, who
stood beside the table. It was some time before she folded the letter
with a crackle and looked up. Her eyes wandered from Helen to Miriam,
and rested there with an unconsciousness so rare as to be startling.

"Philip is ill," she said in a voice carried by her thoughts to a great
distance. She corrected herself. "Your father is ill." She picked up the
envelope and looked at it. "That's why his writing is so--straggly." She
seemed to be thinking not only of Philip Caniper, but of many things
besides, so that her words, like her thoughts, came through obstacles.

Intensely interested in a Notya moved to some sign of an emotion which
was not annoyance, Miriam stood in the doorway and took care to make no
movement which might betray her; but Helen stared at the fire and
suffered the pain she had always felt for her stepmother's distresses.

"However--" Mildred Caniper said at last, and set briskly to work, while
Miriam disappeared into the shadows of the hall and Helen watched the
flames playing round the kettle in which the water for Uncle Alfred's
breakfast was bubbling.

"How ill is he?" she asked.

"Are you speaking of your father?"

"Yes--please."

"I wish you would use names instead of pronouns. A good deal worse, I am
afraid."

"And there's nobody to look after him--our father?"

"Certainly there is."

"Oh! I'm glad," Helen said, looking candidly at Notya. "We can't pretend
to care about him--can we? But I don't like to have a father who is
ill."

"If he had known that--" the other began, and stopped the foolish little
sarcasm in time. "It is no use discussing things, Helen. We have to do
them."

"Well, let us go to Italy," Helen said.

Mildred Caniper did not conceal her surprise. Her lips dropped apart,
and she stood, balancing in a spoon the egg she was about to boil for
Uncle Alfred, and gazed at Helen, before she recovered herself and said
easily, "You are rather absurd, Helen, aren't you?"

But Helen knew that she was not. "I thought that was just what you were
wanting to do," she answered.

The egg went into the saucepan and was followed by another.

"We can't," Mildred Caniper said with the admonishing air which sat like
an imposition on her; "we cannot always do as we wish."

"Oh, I know that," Helen said. She put on a pair of gloves, armed
herself with brooms and dusters, and left the room.

It seemed to her that people wilfully complicated life. She put a just
value on the restraint which had been a great part of her training, but
a pretence which had the transparency of its weakness moved her to a
patient kind of scorn, and in that moment she had a flash of insight
which showed her that she had sometimes failed to understand her
stepmother because she had not suspected the variability of the elder
woman's character. Mildred Caniper produced an impression of strength in
which she herself did not believe; she had imprisoned her impulses in
coldness, and they only escaped in the sharp utterances of her tongue;
she was uncertain of her power, and she insisted on its acceptance.

"And she's miserable, miserable," Helen's heart cried out, and she
laughed unhappily herself. "And Miriam's afraid of her! There's nothing
to be afraid of. She knows that, and she's afraid we'll find it out all
the time. And it might all have been so simple and so--so smooth."

Helen was considered by the other Canipers and herself as the dullest of
the family, and this morning she swept, dusted and polished in the old
ignorance of her acuteness, nor would the knowledge of it have consoled
her. She was puzzling over the cause which kept the man in Italy apart
from the woman here, and when she gave that up in weariness, she tried
to picture him in a white house beside an eternally blue sea. The
windows of the house had jalousies of a purplish red, there were
palm-trees in the sloping garden and, at the foot of it, waves rocked a
shallow, tethered boat. And her father was in bed, no doubt; the flush
redder on his thin cheeks, his pointed black beard jerked over the
sheet. She had seen him lying so on his last visit to the moor, and she
had an important little feeling of triumph in the memory of that
familiarity. She was not sentimental about this distant parent, for he
was less real than old Halkett, far less real than Mr. Pinderwell; yet
it seemed cruel that he should lie in that warm southern country without
a wife or daughter to care for him.

"Helen," Miriam said from Phoebe's door, "do you think he is going to
die?"

"How can I tell?"

"And you don't care?"

"Not much, of course, but I'm sorry for him."

"Sweet thing! And if he dies, shall we wear black?"

Helen's pale lips condescended to a rather mocking smile. "I see you
mean to."

"Well, if you can do the proper thing and look nice at the same time--"
She broke off and fidgeted. "I don't mind his dying if he does it far
away, but, oh, wouldn't it be horrible if he did it here? Ill people
make me sick."

"Why don't you go and do something yourself? Go and amuse Uncle Alfred."

"No, he's not nice in the mornings. He said so, and I've peeped at him.
Liverish."

"Order the chickens, then, but ask Notya first."

"Where is she?"

Together they peeped over the banisters and listened.

"You'd better ask," Miriam said. "I wonder where she is. Call her," she
added, daring Helen to break one of the rules of that quiet house; and
Helen, who had discovered the truth that day, lifted her voice clearly.

"If she's not cross," Miriam whispered, "we'll know she's worried."

"Oh," Helen said soberly, "how horrid of us! I wish I hadn't."

Miriam's elbow was in her side. "Here she comes, look!"

They could see the crown of Mildred Caniper's fair head, the white blot
of her clasped hands.

"What is it?" she asked quietly, turning up her face.

"Shall Miriam order the chickens?" Helen called down.

"Oh, yes--yes," she answered, and went away.

"Ha, ha! Quite successful! Any special kind of chicken? Black legs?
Yellow legs?"

"She'll give you the best she has," Helen said.

Miriam popped her head round the door of the dining-room where Uncle
Alfred was smoking, waved her hand, and spared him the necessity of
speech by running from the house. The sun shone in a callous sky and the
wind bit at her playfully as she went down the track, to remind her
that though she wore neither hat nor coat, summer was still weeks away.
Miriam faced all the seasons now with equanimity, for Uncle Alfred was
in the dining-room, and she intended that her future should be bound up
with his. Gaily she mounted the Brent Farm road, with a word for a
melancholy calf which had lost its way, and a feeling of affection for
all she saw and soon meant to leave. She liked the long front of the
farmhouse with its windows latticed into diamonds, the porch sentinelled
by large white stones, the path outlined with smaller ones and the green
gate with its two steps into the field.

The dairy door stood open, and Miriam found both Lily Brent and John
within. They stood with the whole space of the floor between them and
there was a certain likeness in their attitudes. Each leaned against the
stone shelf which jutted, waist high, from the wall, but neither took
support from it. Her brown eyes were level with his grey ones; her hands
were on her hips, while his arms were folded across his breast.

"Hullo, Napoleon!" Miriam said. "Good-morning, Lily. Is he being
tiresome? He looks it."

"We're only arguing," she said. "We often do it."

This was the little girl whom Mrs. Brent, now in her ample grave, had
slapped and kissed and teased, to the edification of the Canipers. She
had grown tall and very straight; her thick dark hair was twisted
tightly round her head; her skirt was short, revealing firm ankles and
wooden shoes, and she wore a jersey which fitted her body closely and
left her brown neck bare. Her watchful eyes were like those of some shy
animal, but her lips had the faculty of repose. Helen had once compared
her to a mettlesome young horse and there was about her some quality of
the male. She might have been a youth scorning passion because she
feared it.

"If it's a very important argument," said Miriam, "I'll retire. There's
a sad baby calf down by your gate. I could go and talk to him."

"Silly little beast!" Lily said; "he's always making a fuss. Listen to
this, Miriam. John wants to pay me for letting him work a strip of my
land that's been lying idle all these years."

"If you won't let me pay rent--"

"He hasn't any money, Lily."

"I can try to pay you by helping on the farm. You can lie in bed and let
me do your share of milking."

"He'll do no harm," Miriam asserted.

"I know that. He's been doing odd jobs for us ever since we began
carrying his vegetables to town. He likes to pay for all he gets. You're
mean-spirited, John."

"All right. I'll be mean-spirited, and I'll be here for this evening's
milking."

"That's settled, then," she said, with a great semblance of relief.

"And Mrs. Caniper of Pinderwell House will be very much obliged if
you'll let her have two chickens as soon as possible."

"Certainly, miss. I'll go and see about them."

Miriam let out a little scream and put her hands to her ears.

"No, no, don't kill them yet! Not till you're quite sure that I'm safely
on the other side of the road. John, stop her!"

"You're a little goose," Lily said. "They're lying quite comfortably
dead in the larder."

"Oh, thank Heaven! Shall I tell you a horrible secret of my past life?
Once when I was very small, I crept through Halkett's larch-wood just to
see what was happening down there, because Mrs. Samson had been hinting
things, and what I saw--oh, what do you think I saw?" She shuddered
and, covering her face, she let one bright eye peep round the protecting
hand. "I saw that idiot boy wringing a hen's neck! And now," she ended,
"I simply can't eat chicken."

"Dear, dear!" John said, and clucked his tongue. "Dreadful confession of
a young girl!"

Lily Brent was laughing. "And to think I've wrung their necks myself!"

"Have you? Ugh! Nasty!"

"It is, but some one had to do it."

"Don't do it again," said John quickly.

She raised her eyebrows, met his glance, and looked away.

"I can't get on with my work while you two are gossiping here."

"Come home, John. Father's iller. Notya's too much worried to be cross.
She had a letter--Aren't you interested?"

He was thinking, "I'll start breaking up that ground tomorrow," and
behind that conscious thought there was another: "I shall be able to
watch her going in and out."

"John--"

"No, I'm not interested. Go home and look after your uncle. I've a lot
to think about."

She left him sitting on a fence and staring creatively at his knees.


CHAPTER VIII


Helen met Miriam in the hall.

"There's been a telegram and Notya's going to Italy."

"Ah!" Miriam said, but her bright looks faded when Helen added, "With
Uncle Alfred."

Miriam dropped her head and thrust her doubled fists under her chin, in
the angry movement of her childhood. "Oh, isn't that just my luck!" she
muttered fiercely. "I--I hadn't done with Uncle Alfred."

"Perhaps father hasn't done with life," Helen remarked.

"Oh, don't be pious! Don't be pious! You're always adorning tales.
You're a prig!"

"Well, I haven't time to think about that now," Helen said with the
excellent humour which made amends for her many virtues. "I'm helping
Notya to pack and I want you to ask George Halkett if he will drive her
down. The train goes at a quarter to three."

"I'm sorry," Miriam said, looking like the heroine in a play, "but I
can't go there. I--don't approve of George."

"Oh!" Helen cried, screwing up her face. "Has John been telling you
about Lily Brent?"

"No. What? Tell me!" Miriam answered with complete forgetfulness of her
pose.

"Some nonsense. George tried to kiss her."

"Did he?" There was a flat tone in Miriam's voice.

"And she hit him, and now John thinks he's wicked."

"So he is." She was hardly aware of what she said, for she was
hesitating between the immediate establishment of her supremacy and the
punishment of George, and having decided that his punishment should
include sufficient tribute, she said firmly, "I won't have anything to
do with him."

"Then I'll go. Help Notya if you can."

Miriam took a step nearer. "What is she like?"

"Oh--queer."

"Then perhaps I'd rather go to George," she whispered.

"I'm halfway there already," Helen said from the door.

She slipped across the moor with the speed which came so easily to her,
and her breathing had hardly quickened when she issued from the
larch-wood and stood on the cobble-stones before the low white house.
Already the leaves of a rose-tree by the door were budding, for in that
sheltered place the sun was gathered warmly. So, too, she thought,
darkness would lie closely there and rain would shoot down in thick
splinters with intent to hurt. She was oppressed by a sense of
concentration in this tree-lined hollow, and before she stepped across
the yard she lifted and shook her shoulders to free them of the weight.
She remembered one summer day when the air had been clogged by the scent
of marigolds, but this was not their season, and the smell of the
larches came healthfully on the winds that struggled through the trees.

She had raised her hand to knock on the open door when she heard a step,
and turned to see George Halkett.

"George," she said without preamble, "I've come to ask you to do
something for us. Our stepmother has unexpectedly to catch a train.
Could you, would you, drive her down--and a box, and our uncle, and his
bag?"

She found, to her surprise, that John's story had given George a new
place in her mind. She had been accustomed to see him as a mere part of
the farm which bore his name, and now she looked at him with a different
curiosity. She imagined him bending over Lily Brent and, with a strong
distaste, she pictured him starting back at her assault. It seemed to
her, she could not tell why, that no woman should raise her hand against
a man, and that this restraint was less for her dignity than for his.

"I'll do it with pleasure," George was saying.

"Thank you very much," she murmured, and named the time. "Is Mr. Halkett
better?"

"I'm afraid he's never going to get better, Miss Helen," he said, using
the title he had given her long ago because of a childish dignity which
amused him.

"I'm sorry," she said, and wondered if she spoke the truth.

Her gaze, very wide and serious, affected his, and as they looked at
each other she realized that, with those half-closed eyes of his, he was
considering her as he had never done before. She became conscious of her
physical self at once, and this was an experience strange to her; she
remembered the gown she wore, the fashion of her hair, her grey
stockings and worn, low shoes; slowly, almost imperceptibly, she shifted
a foot which was twisted inwards, and having done this, she found that
she did not like George's appraisement. With a broken word of farewell
and thanks she quickly left him.

"I didn't like that," she said emphatically to the broad freedom of the
moor. George's interest was like the hollow: it hemmed her in and made
her hot, but here the wide winds swept over her with a cleansing cold.
Nevertheless, when she went to Notya's room, she took the opportunity of
scanning herself in the glass.

"You have been running," Mildred Caniper said.

"No, not lately."

"You are very pink."

"Yes."

Mildred Caniper's tone changed suddenly. "And I don't know where you
have been. I wish you would not run off without warning. And I could not
find Miriam anywhere." From anger she sank back to helplessness. "I
don't know what to take," she said, and her hands jerked on her lap.

"Let's see," Helen said cheerfully. "Warm things for the journey, and
cooler things for when you get there." She made no show of consulting
Notya and, moving with leisurely competence from wardrobe to chest of
drawers, she laid little heaps of clothing on the bed.

"Handkerchiefs: one, two, three, four--"

"I shan't need many."

"But you'd better take a lot."

"I shall soon come back."

"Five, six, seven," Helen counted on, and her whispers sounded loudly in
the room where Mildred Caniper's thoughts were busy.

"You haven't a very warm coat, so you must take mine," Helen said, and
when she looked up she discovered in her stepmother the extraordinary
stillness of a being whose soul has gone on a long journey. Her voice
came, as before, from that great distance, yet with surprising
clearness, as though she spoke through some instrument which reduced the
volume and accentuated the peculiarities of her tones.

"One ought never to be afraid of anything," the small voice
said--"never." Her lips tightened, and slowly she seemed to return to
the body which sat on the sofa by the window. "I don't know what to
take," she said again.

"I'm doing it," Helen told her. "You mustn't lose the train."

"No." She stood up, and, going to the dressing-table, she leaned on it
as though she searched intently for something lying there. "I expect he
will be dead," she said. "It's a long way. All those frontiers--"

Helen looked at the bent back, and her pity shaped itself in eager
words. "Shall I come with you? Let me! I can get ready--"

Mildred Caniper straightened herself and turned, and Helen recognized
the blue light in her eye.

"Your presence, Helen," she said distinctly, "will not reduce the number
of the frontiers." Her manner blamed Helen for her own lack of
self-control; but to this her stepchildren were accustomed, and Helen
felt no anger.

"Oh, no," she answered pleasantly; "it would not do that."

She packed on methodically, and while she feigned absorption in that
business her thoughts were swift and troubled, as they were when she was
a little girl and, suffering for Notya's sake, wept in the heather. It
was impossible to help this woman whose curling hair mocked her
sternness, whose sternness so easily collapsed and as easily recovered
at a word; it was, perhaps, intrusive to attempt it, yet the desire was
as quick as Helen's blood.

"You are much too helpful, Helen," Mildred Caniper went on, and softened
that harshness quickly. "You must learn that no one can help anybody
else." She smiled. "You must deny yourself the luxury of trying!"

"I shall remember," Helen said with her quiet acquiescence, "but I must
go now and see about your lunch. Would you mind writing the labels?
Uncle Alfred will want one for his bag. Oh, I know I'm irritating," she
added on a wave of feeling which had to break, "but I can't help it.
I--I'm like that." She reflected with humiliation that it was absurd to
obtrude herself thus on a scene shadowed by tragedy, yet when she saw a
glint of real amusement on Mildred Caniper's face, a new thought came to
her. Perhaps reserve was not so great a virtue as she had believed. She
must not forget; nor must she forget that Miriam considered her a prig,
that Mildred Caniper found her too helpful. She pressed her hands
against her forehead and concentrated her energies on the travellers'
food.

The minutes, busy as they were, dragged by like hours. Uncle Alfred ate
his luncheon with the deliberation of a man who cannot expect to renew
his digestive apparatus, and the road remained empty of George Halkett
and his trap. Mildred Caniper, calm now, and dressed for her journey,
had many instructions for Helen concerning food, the employment of Mrs.
Samson, bills to be paid, and other domestic details which at this
moment lacked reality.

"And," she ended, "tell Rupert not to be late. The house should be
locked up at ten o'clock."

"Yes," Helen answered, but when she looked at her stepmother she could
see only the distressed figure which had sat on the sofa, with hands
jerking on its knee. Did she love Philip Caniper? Had they quarrelled
long ago, and did she now want to make amends? No, no! She shut her
eyes. She must not pry. She felt as though she had caught herself
reading a letter which belonged to some one else.

Not deterred by such squeamishness, Miriam watched the luncheon-party
with an almost indecent eagerness. Her curiosity about Mildred Caniper
was blurred by pleasure in her departure, and each mouthful unwillingly
taken by that lady seemed to minister to Miriam's freedom. Now and then
she went to the garden gate to look for George, yet with her hurry to
drive out her stepmother there was that luckless necessity to let Uncle
Alfred go. On him her dark gaze was fastened expectantly. Surely he had
something to say to her; doubtless he waited for a fitting opportunity,
and she was determined that he should have it, but she realized that he
was past the age when he would leap from an unfinished meal to whisper
with her. This put a disturbing limit to her power, and with an
instinct for preserving her faith in herself she slightly shifted the
view from which she looked at him. So she was reassured, and she waited
like an affectionate grand-daughter in the dark corner of the passage
where his coat and hat were hanging.

"Let me help you on," she said.

"Thank you. Thank you. This is a sad business."

She handed him his hat. She found that, after all, she could say
nothing, and though hope was dying in her, she made no effort to revive
it.

"Well--good-bye," Uncle Alfred was saying, and holding out his hand.

She gave hers limply. "Good-bye." She hardly looked at him. Uncle
Alfred, who had loved her mother, was going without so much as a
cheering word. He looked old and rather dull as he went on with his
precise small steps into the hall and she walked listlessly behind him.

"He's like a little performing animal," she thought.

Fumbling in his breast pocket, he turned to her. "If you should need
me," he said, and produced his card. "I'll write and tell you what
happens--er--when we get there."

She thanked and passed him coldly, for she felt that he had broken faith
with her.

Outside the gate George Halkett sat in his high dog-cart and idly laid
the whip across the horse's back. John stood and talked to him with the
courtesy exacted by the circumstances, but George's eye caught the
sunlight on Miriam's hair, and sullenly he bowed to her. She smiled
back, putting the venom and swiftness of her emotion into that salute.
She watched until his head slowly turned towards her again, and then it
happened that she was looking far beyond the chimneys of Brent Farm.

"Now he's angry," she told herself, and pleasure went like a creeping
thing down her back. She could see by the stubborn set of his head that
he would not risk another glance.

Behind her, on the step, Notya was still talking to Helen.

Uncle Alfred stopped swinging his eyeglass and clicked the gold case of
his watch. "We must be going," he said, and Miriam's heart cried out,
"Yes; go, go, go!"

Lightly and strangely, Mildred Caniper kissed the cheeks of Miriam and
Helen and shook John's hand, before she took her place beside George
Halkett, with a word of thanks. Uncle Alfred stiffly climbed to his
perch at the back, and, incommoded by his sister's box, he sat there,
clasping the handrail. A few shufflings of his feet and rearrangements
of his body told of his discomfort, and on his face there was the
knowledge that this was but the prelude to worse things. Mildred Caniper
did not look back nor wave a hand, but Uncle Alfred's unfortunate
position necessitated a direct view of his young relatives. Three times
he lifted his hat, and at last the cart swung into the road and he need
look no more.

Miriam fanned herself with her little apron. "Now, how long can we count
on in the most unfavourable circumstances?" she asked, but, to her
astonishment, the others walked off without a word. She set her teeth in
her under-lip and stared through tears at the lessening cart. She began
to sing so that she might keep down the sobs that hurt her throat, and
the words told of her satisfaction that Uncle Alfred was perched
uncomfortably on the back seat of the cart.

"And I wish he would fall off," she sang. "Oh, dear, oh, dear, oh,
dear!"


CHAPTER IX


The three did not meet again until the sun had set and the brilliant sky
had taken on the pale, cold colour in which, like a reluctant bride, it
waited for the night. Then John put away his tools and Miriam began to
stir about the house which was alive with a secret life of stone and
woodwork, of footsteps silenced long ago, and thoughts which refused to
die: then, too, Helen came back from the moor where she had gone for
comfort. Her feet were wet, her hair was for once in disarray, but her
eyes shone with a faith restored. Warring in her always were two
beliefs, one bright with the beauty and serenity which were her idea of
good, the other dark with the necessity of sacrifice and propitiation.
She had not the freedom of her youth, and she saw each good day as a
thing to be accepted humbly and ultimately to be paid for, yet she would
show no sign of fear. She had to go on steadily under the banner of a
tranquil face, and now the moor and the winds that played on it had made
that going easier.

She passed through the darkening garden, glanced at the poplars, which
looked like brooms sweeping away the early stars, and entered the house
by the kitchen door. John and Miriam sat by a leaping fire, but the room
was littered with unwashed dishes and the remains of meals.

"Well," Miriam said in answer to Helen's swift glance and the immediate
upturning of her sleeves, "why should I do it all? Look at her, John,
trying to shame me."

"I'm not. I just can't bear it."

"Have some tea first," John said.

"Let me pile up the plates."

"Have some tea," Miriam echoed, "and I'll make toast; but you shouldn't
have gone away without telling me. I didn't know where you were, and the
house was full of emptiness."

"I found her snivelling about you," John said. "She wanted me to go out
and look for you with a lantern! After a day's work!"

"Things," Miriam murmured, "might have got hold of her."

"I shouldn't have minded moor things. Oh, these stained knives! John,
did she really cry?"

"Nearly, I did."

"Not she!"

"I did, Helen. I thought the dark would come, and you'd be lost perhaps,
out on the moor--O-oh!"

"I think I'd like it--wrapped up in the night."

"But the noises would send you mad. Your eyes are all red. Have you been
crying too?"

"It's the wind. Here's the rain coming. And where's my hair?" She
smoothed it back and took off her muddy shoes before she sat down in the
armchair and looked about her. "Isn't it as if somebody were dead?" she
asked. "There are more shadows."

"I'll turn up the lamp," John said.

The tinkle of Helen's cup and saucer had the clearness of a bell in the
quiet room, and she moved more stealthily. Miriam paused as she spread
butter on the toast.

"This house is full of dead people," she whispered. "If you begin to
think about them--John, you're not going, are you?"

"Only to draw the curtains. Yes, here's the rain."

"And soon Notya will be on the sea," Helen said, listening to the sounds
of storm.

"And I hope," Miriam added on a rich burst of laughter, "that Uncle
Alfred will be sea-sick. Oh, wouldn't he look queer!" She flourished the
knife. "Can't we be merry when we have the chance? Now that she's gone,
why should the house still feel full of her? It isn't fair!"

"You're dripping butter on the floor," Helen said.

"Make your old toast yourself, then!"

"It's not only Notya," Helen went on, as she picked up the knife. "It's
the Pinderwells and their thoughts, and the people who lived here before
them. Their thoughts are in the walls and they come out when the house
is quiet."

"Then let us make a noise!" Miriam cried. "Tomorrow's Saturday, and
Daniel will come up. Shall we ask him to stay? It would make more live
people in the house."

"If he stays, I'm not going to have Rupert in my room again. He talks in
his sleep."

"It's better than snoring," Helen said.

"Awful to marry a man who snores," Miriam remarked. "Uncle Alfred does.
I heard him."

"You're not thinking of marrying him?" John asked.

"No. I don't like the little man," she said incisively. "He gave me his
card as though he'd met me in a train. In case we needed him! I've
thrown it into Mrs. Pinderwell's desk." She looked frowningly at the
fire. "But he liked me," she said, throwing up her head and defying the
silent criticism of the company. "Yes, he did, but I hadn't enough
time."

"That's better than too much," Helen said shrewdly, and stretched her
stockinged feet to the bars. "Thank you for the tea, and now let us wash
up."

"You're scorching," Miriam said, and no one moved. The lamplight had
driven the shadows further back, and the room was the more peaceful for
the cry of the wind and the hissing of the rain.

"Rupert will get wet," Helen said.

"Poor lad!" John mocked drowsily over his pipe.

"And he doesn't know about our father," Miriam said from her little
stool. "Our father, who may be in Heaven."

"That's where Notya is afraid he is," Helen sighed remembering her
stepmother's lonely figure on the sofa backed by the bare window and the
great moor.

"Does she hate him as much as that?"

"Oh, I hate jokes about Heaven and Hell. They're so obvious," Helen
said.

"If they weren't, you wouldn't see them, my dear."

Helen let that pass, but trouble looked from her eyes and sounded in her
voice. "She wanted to see him and she was afraid, and no one should ever
be afraid. It's ugly."

"Perhaps," Miriam said hopefully, "he will be ill for a very long time,
and then she'll have to stay with him, and we can have fun. Fun! Where
can we get it? What right had she to bring us here?"

"For God's sake," John said, "don't begin that again. We're warm and fed
and roofed, and it's raining outside, and we needn't stir. That ought to
make you thankful for your mercies. Suppose you were a tramp."

"Yes, suppose I was a tramp." She clasped her knees and forgot her anger
in this make-believe. "A young tramp. Just like me, but ragged."

"Cold and wet."

"My hair would still be curly and my face would be very brown."

"You'd be dirty," Helen reminded her, "and your boots would be crumpled
and too big and sodden." She looked at her own slim feet. "That is what
I should hate."

"Of course there'd be disadvantages, but if I were a tramp and dwelt on
my mercies, what would they be? First--freedom!"

"Ha!" John snorted.

"Well?"

"Freedom! Where is it?"

"With the lady tramp."

"And what is it?"

"Being able to do what you like," Miriam said promptly, "and having no
Notya."

John was trying to look patient. "Very well. Let us consider that."

"Yes, grandpapa," Miriam answered meekly, and tweaked Helen's toe.

"You think the tramp can do what she likes, but she has no money in her
pocket, so she can't buy the comfortable bed and the good meal she is
longing for. She can only go to the first workhouse or sell herself for
the price of a glass of gin."

"A pretty tramp like me," Miriam began, and stopped at Helen's pleading.
"But John and I are facing facts, so you must not be squeamish. When you
come to think of it," she went on, "lady tramps generally have gentlemen
tramps with them."

"And there's your Notya."

"Ah!"

"And he'd beat you."

"I might like it."

"And he'd be foul-mouthed."

"Horrid!" Helen exclaimed.

"But I should be used to nothing else."

"And if you came down our high road one day and begged at our door, and
saw some one like yourself, some one clean and fresh and innocent--"

"So that's what he thinks of me!"

"Hush! I like this," Helen said.

"Even if there were a stern stepmother in the background, you'd be
envious of that girl. You might obey no laws, but you'd find yourself
the slave of something, your own vice, perhaps, or folly, or the will of
that gentleman tramp of yours." He ended with a sharp tap of his
emptied pipe, and sank back in a thoughtful silence.

Helen's hands slid down her stockings from knee to ankle and back again:
her eyes were on the fire, but they saw the wet high road and the ragged
woman with skirt flapping against shapeless boots. The storm's voice
rose and fell, and sometimes nothing could be heard but the howling of
the wind, and she knew that the poplars were bent under it; but when it
rested for a moment the steady falling of the rain had a kind of
reassurance. In the room, there were small sounds of shifting coals and
breathing people.

Miriam sat on her stool like a bird on a branch. Her head was on one
side, the tilted eyebrows gave her face an enquiring look, and she
smiled with a light mischief. "You ought to have been a preacher, John
dear," she said. "And you took--they always do--rather an unfair case."

"Take any case you like, you can't get freedom. When you're older you
won't want it."

"You're very young, John, to have found that out," Helen said.

"But you know it."

Miriam clapped her hands in warning. "Don't say," she begged, "that it's
because you are a woman!"

"Is that the reason?" Helen asked.

"No, it's because you are a Helen, a silly, a slave! And John makes
himself believe it because he's in love with a woman who is going to
manage him. Clever me!"

Colour was in John's cheeks. "Clever enough," he said, "but an awful
little fool. Let's do something."

"When I have been sitting still for a long time," Helen said, as though
she produced wisdom, "I'm afraid to move in case something springs on
me. I get stiff-necked. I feel--I feel that we're lost children with no
one to take care of us."

"I'm rather glad I'm not that tramp," Miriam owned, and shivered.

"And I do wish Notya were safe at home."

"I don't," said Miriam stubbornly.

The wind whistled with a shrill note like a call, and upstairs a door
banged loudly.

"Which room?" Miriam whispered.

"Hers, I think. We left the windows open," John said in a sensible loud
voice. "I'll go and shut them."

"Don't go. I won't be left here!" Miriam cried. "This house--this house
is too big."

"It's because she isn't here," Helen said.

"John, you're the oldest. Make us happy."

"But I'm feeling scared myself," he said comically. "And the front
door's wide open, I'll bet."

"And that swearing tramp could walk in if he liked!"

"But we mustn't be afraid of open doors," Helen said, and listened to
her own words for a moment. Then she smiled, remembering where she had
heard them. "We're frightening each other, and we must wash up. Look at
the muddle!"

"It will make a clatter," Miriam objected, "and if you hadn't gone for
that walk and made the house feel lonely, I shouldn't be like this now.
Something's peeping at me!"

"It's only Mr. Pinderwell," Helen said. "Come and dry."

"I shall sleep in your bed tonight."

"Then I shall sleep in yours."

"I wish Rupert would come."

"John, do go and shut the windows."

"But take a light."

"It would be blown out."

Helen lowered the mop she had been wielding. "And Notya--where is she?"

John lifted his shoulders and opened the door. A gust of wind came down
the passage, the front door was loudly shut, and Rupert whistled
clearly.

"Oh, here he is," Miriam said on a deep breath, and went to meet him.

John pointed towards the hall. "I don't know why he should make us all
feel brave."

"There's something--beautiful about him," Helen said.


CHAPTER X


Helen was ironing in the kitchen the next afternoon when Daniel
Mackenzie appeared in the doorway. She turned to him with a welcome, but
the perfection of her manner was lost on Daniel: for the kitchen was
empty of Miriam, and that was all he noticed.

"Hasn't Rupert come with you?" Helen asked.

"I missed him," he said in his melancholy voice. "Perhaps he missed me,"
he added with resignation. He was a tall young man with large hands and
feet, and his eyes were vague behind his spectacles. "I thought he would
be here. Is everybody out?"

"Notya's away, you know."

"He told me."

"And John and Miriam--I don't know where they are."

He found it difficult to talk to Helen, and as he sat down in the
armchair he searched his mind for a remark. "I thought people always
ironed on Tuesdays," he said at last.

"Some people do. These are just odd things."

"Eliza does. She makes us have cold supper. And on Mondays. It's too
bad."

"But there can't be much to do for you."

"I don't know. There's washing on Monday, and on Sunday she goes to
church--so she says."

Helen changed her iron and worked on. She moved rhythmically and her
bare forearms were small and shapely, but Daniel did not look at her. He
seemed to be interested in the wrinkled boots he wore, and occasionally
he uttered a sad; "Puss, Puss," to the cat sleeping before the fire. A
light breeze was blowing outside and Helen sometimes paused to look
through the open window.

"Our poplars are getting their leaves," she said. "It's strange that I
have never seen your garden. Are there any trees in it?"

He sat like a half-empty sack of grain, and slowly, with an effort, he
raised his head. "What did you say?"

"Have you any trees in your garden?"

"There's a holly bush in the front and one of those thin trees that have
berries--red berries."

"A rowan! Oh, I'm glad you have a rowan!" She looked as though he had
made a gift to her.

He was born to ask questions. "Why?" he said, with his first gleam of
interest.

"Oh, I like them. Is there a garden at the back?"

"Apple-trees," he sighed. "No fruit."

"They must want pruning. You know, gardening would do you good."

He shook his head. "Too long in the back."

"And Zebedee hasn't time?"

"No, he hasn't time." Daniel was wondering where Miriam was, and how
long Rupert would be, and though Helen knew she wearied him, she went on
serenely.

"Is he very busy now?"

"Yes."

"I can't think why people get ill in the spring, just when the lovely
summer's coming. Does he get called up at night?"

"I suppose so." He was growing tired of this. "But when I'm in bed, I'm
asleep, you know."

"Ah, that's nice for you," Helen said with a touch of irony as she
carefully pulled out the lace of a dainty collar. "Isn't he rather
lonely when you are up here?"

"Lonely!" Daniel's mouth dropped wider and while he tried to answer this
absurd question adequately, Rupert entered the room.

"I told you to meet me outside the Bull, you old idiot."

Like Miriam, Rupert had the effect of fortifying the life of his
surroundings, but, unlike her, he had a happy trick of seeming more
interested in others than in himself. He saw at once, with something
keener than his keen eyes, that Daniel was bored, that Helen was at work
on more than ironing, and with his entrance he scattered the vague
dissension which was abroad. The kitchen recovered from the gloom with
which Daniel had shadowed it and Daniel himself grew brighter.

"I thought you said the Plover."

"You didn't listen. Even you couldn't mistake one for the other, but
I've scored off you. Helen, we shall want a good tea. I drove up with
Zebedee, and he's coming here when he's finished with old Halkett."

She stood with a cooling iron in her hand. "I'll make some scones. I
expect Eliza gives him horrid food. And for supper there's cold chicken
and salad and plenty of pudding; but how shall we put up the horse?"

"Don't worry, Martha. He's only coming to tea. He won't stay long."

"Oh, yes, he will." She had no doubt of it. "I want him to. Make up the
fire for me, Daniel, please." She folded away the ironing cloth and
gathered up the little damp cuffs and collars she had not ironed. A
faint smile curved her steady lips, for nothing gave her more happiness
than serving those who had a claim on her, and Zebedee's claim was his
lack of womankind to care for him and her own gratitude for his
existence. He was the one person to whom she could give the name of
friend, yet their communion had seldom expressed itself in confidences:
the knowledge of it lay snugly and unspoken in her heart.

"He has never had anything to eat in this house before," she said with
a solemnity which provoked Rupert to laughter.

"What a sacrament women make of meals!"

"I wish they all did," Daniel said in the bass notes of genuine feeling.

"I don't know why you keep that awful woman," Helen said.

"Don't start him on Eliza," Rupert begged. "Eliza and the intricacies of
English law--"

"Have you seen her?" Daniel persisted.

"No, but of course she's awful if she doesn't give you proper food."

His look proclaimed his realization that he had never appreciated Helen
before. "I'm not greedy," he said earnestly, "but I've got to be fed."
He sent a wavering glance from his chest to his boots. "Bulk is what I
need, and fat foods, and it's a continuous fight to get them."

Rupert roared aloud, but there was sympathy in Helen's hidden mirth.
"I'll see what I can do for you today," she said, like an attentive
landlady. "And you are going to stay the night. I fry bacon--oh,
wonderfully, and you shall have some for breakfast. But now," she added,
with a little air of dismissal, "I am going to make the scones."

"Let's have a walk," Rupert said.

"I've walked enough." He had an impulse to stay with Helen.

"Then come outside and smoke. It's as warm as June."

Daniel rose slowly, lifting his body piece by piece. "I shouldn't like
you to think," he said, "that I care too much for food."

"I don't."

"But I've got to be kept going."

"I quite understand," she answered busily. Her hands were in the flour;
a patch of it, on her pale cheek, showed that her skin had a warm, faint
colour of its own.

"We'll sit outside and watch for Zebedee," Rupert told her.

She had baked the scones, changed her dress and made the table ready
before the guest arrived. From the dining-room she heard his clear
voice, broken by Miriam's low gay one, and, looking from the window, she
saw them both at the gate. Out of sight, behind the wall, Daniel and
Rupert were talking, involved in one of their interminable discussions,
and there were sounds made by the horse as he stretched to eat the
grass. For an instant, Helen felt old and forgotten; she remembered
Notya, who was in trouble, and she herself was shrouded by her own
readiness to see misfortune; all her little preparations, the flowers on
the table, the scones before the fire, her pretty dress, were gathered
into one foolishness when she saw Zebedee pushing open the gate and
looking down at Miriam. There was a sudden new pain in Helen's heart,
and in a blinding light which dazzled her she saw that the pain was
compounded of jealousy because Miriam was beautiful, and of renunciation
because it would be impossible to keep anything which Miriam wanted.

But in the hall, these feelings, like a nightmare in their blackness,
passed away when Zebedee uttered the cheerful "Hullo!" with which he had
so often greeted her. There were comfort and safety in his
neighbourhood, in his swift, judging way of looking at people, as
though, without curiosity, he wished to assure himself of their
well-being and health, and while there was something professional in the
glance, it seemed to be a guarantee of his own honesty. His eyes, grey
with brown flecks in them, expected people to be reasonable and happy.

Helen said simply, "I am so glad you have come."

"I made him," Miriam said, and put her hand fleetingly on his arm.

"You didn't. Rupert asked him."

"Yes, but I waylaid him. He was sneaking home."

"No, no, I wasn't."

"Somewhere else, then!"

He thrust his gloves into the pocket of his coat.

"You were coming, weren't you?" Helen asked.

"Of course I was."

She smiled with her extraordinary, almost comic, radiance. "I'll go and
make the tea."

Because Daniel blundered through the doorway at that moment, Miriam
followed Helen to the kitchen.

"He's going to teach me to drive," she said. "But what a horse! It goes
on from generation to generation, like the practice!"

George Halkett had laughed at the horse, too, and Helen felt a cold
resentment against him and Miriam.

"Your hair is very untidy, and your cheeks are blue," she said.

"Now you're being a cat. We certainly don't miss Notya when you are
here. I'm in the delightful position, my dear, of being able to afford
blue cheeks and untidy hair. Daniel won't notice them."

"No, he's arguing with Rupert."

"He came into the house after me. I'm going back to tease him."

"Oh, do leave the poor thing alone."

"No, I shan't. He'd be disappointed."

Helen stood by the fire and watched the kettle and listened to the
noises in the schoolroom. Then a shuffling step came down the passage
and Daniel spoke.

"Can I help you?"

"Thank you very much." She knew that he had come for refuge and she
filled the teapot and put it into his hands. "Don't drop it."

"I'll be careful," he said humbly.

Walking in the trail of the tea he spilt, she followed him with the
kettle. She had not the heart to scold him, and at the dining-room door
he let out a sharp sound.

"Oh, dear, has it gone through your boot?" she asked, checking her
laughter.

"I should just think it has!"

Miriam, whose ears were like a hare's, cried from the schoolroom: "Then
perhaps he'll have to have his boot cut off, and that would spoil that
lovely pair! Whatever you do, Zebedee, try to spare his boot!"

"She never leaves me alone," Daniel muttered to the pot.

"Don't take any notice of her," Helen said.

Daniel looked up mournfully. "Wouldn't you?"

"No. Sit here and talk to me." She called through the open door. "Come
in, everybody!" With Daniel on one side of the table and Zebedee on the
other, John's absence was the less apparent. Twilight had not yet come,
but Helen had lighted candles to give the room a festive look, and there
was a feeling of freedom and friendship in the house. They all talked of
unimportant things, and there was laughter amid the chinking of the
cups. For the young men, the presence of the girls had a potent, hardly
admitted charm: for Miriam there was the exciting antagonism of sex: for
Helen there was a pleasure which made her want to take deep breaths.

"Oh!" Miriam cried at last, and flung herself back in her chair. "Isn't
this good? Why can't it always be like this?"

"Hush!" Helen said.

"You know it's nicer without her."

"I didn't want you to tempt things," Helen explained.

"She's as superstitious as a savage," Rupert said. "Talk to her,
Zebedee, man of science."

"Yes, I will." His glance was humorous but not quite untroubled.

"When?" she said, with great willingness.

"After tea."

"We've finished, haven't we?" Miriam asked. "Daniel, be quick and drink
that. We're all waiting for you. And don't slop it on your waistcoat.
There's a good boy! Very nice. Come into the drawing-room and I'll play
to you. I might even sing. Ask Helen if you may get down."

"May I?" he asked, and went after Miriam.

The notes of the old piano tinkled through the hall. Miriam was playing
a waltz, lightly and gaily.

"I'll go and make Daniel dance with me," Rupert said.

"Don't tease him any more."

"It'll do him good, and I want Zebedee to have a chance of lecturing
you."

"It's not easy to lecture you," Zebedee said.

"Isn't it?"

Above their voices and the tinkling music there now came Daniel's
protest, Rupert's persuasions, and Miriam's laughter: then these all
died away and the waltz called out plaintively and with desire.

"She is making the piano cry," Helen said.

Zebedee did not speak, for he was listening: the whole house was
listening. No other sound came from the drawing-room, and Helen fancied
that Mr. Penderwell was standing on the stairs, held by the memory of
days when he had taken his lady by her tiny waist and felt the whiff of
her muslin skirts against him as they whirled. The children on the
landing were wide-eyed and hushed in their quiet play. The sounds grew
fainter; they faded away as though the ballroom had grown dark and
empty, and for a little space all the listeners seemed to be easing
themselves of sighs. Then Miriam's whistle, like a blackbird's, came
clearly. She did not know how well she had been playing.

Helen stood up. "I wonder if the horse has walked away. Go into the
drawing-room. I'll see."

"No. I'll come with you."

The music had subdued their voices and, because they had heard it
together, they seemed to be wrapped round by it in a world unknown to
anybody else. Quietly they went out of the house and found the horse,
only a few yards distant, with his feet tangled in the reins.

"You ought to have fastened him to the post," Helen said, and together
they led him back.

"Shall we take him out of the cart?"

"But I ought to go home."

"No," she said.

"Perhaps not."

The sunshine had gone, and over the moor the light was grey; grey clouds
hung low in the sky, and as he looked down at her, it seemed to Zebedee
that Helen was some emanation of grey earth and air.

"We'll take him out," she said.

"And then what shall we do with him?"

"I believe he'd be quite happy in the kitchen!"

"Yes, he's a domesticated old boy."

"We can't put him in the hen-house. Just tie him to the post and let him
eat."

When that was done, she would have gone into the house, but Zebedee kept
her back.

"Mayn't we stay in the garden? Are you warm enough?"

She nodded to both questions. "Let us go round to the back." The path at
the side of the house was dark with shrubs. "I don't like this little
bit," she said. "I hardly ever walk on it. It's--"

"What?"

"Oh, they don't come out. They stay there and get unhappy."

"The bushes?"

"The spirits in them."

He walked beside her with his hands behind his back and his head bent.

"You're thinking," she said.

"Yes."

"Don't," she begged, "think away from me."

He stopped, surprised. "I'm not doing that--but why?"

"I don't know," she said, looking him in the eyes, "but I should hate
it."

"I was wondering how to bring myself to scold you."

They had reached the lawn and, caught by the light from the
drawing-room, they stood under the poplars and watched the shadows
moving on walls and ceiling. The piano and the people in the room were
out of sight, and Miriam's small, husky voice came with a hint of
mystery.

"'Drink to me only with thine eyes,'" she sang.

"'And I will pledge with mine,'" Rupert joined in richly.

"'Or leave a kiss within the cup--'"

In silence, under the trees, Helen and Zebedee listened to the singing,
to voices wrangling about the words, and when a figure appeared at the
window they turned together and retreated beyond the privet hedge,
behind John's vegetable garden and through the door on to the moor.

The earth was so black that the rising ground was exaggerated into a
hill; against it, Helen's figure was like a wraith, yet Zebedee was
acutely conscious of her slim solidity. He was also half afraid of her,
and he had an easily controlled desire to run from the delight she gave
him, a delight which hurt and reminded him too clearly of past joys.

"Now," she said, and stood before him in her dangerous simplicity. "What
are you going to say?"

She seemed to have walked out of the darkness into his life, a few
nights ago, an unexpected invasion, but one not to be repelled, nor did
he wish to repel it. He was amazed to hear himself uttering his thoughts
aloud.

"I always liked you when you were a little girl," he said, as though he
accounted for something to himself.

"Better than Miriam?" she asked quickly.

"Of course."

"Oh," she said, and paused. "But I feel as if Miriam--" She stopped
again and waited for his next words, but he saw the steepness of the
path on which he had set his feet and he would not follow it.

"And I used to think you looked--well, brave."

"Did I? Don't I now?"

"Yes; so you see, you must be."

"I'll try. Three stars," she said, looking up. "But mayn't I--mayn't I
say the things I'm thinking?"

"I hope you will," he answered gravely; "but then, you must be careful
what you think."

"This is a very gentle lecture," she said. "Four stars, now. Five. When
I've counted seven, we'll go back, but I rather hoped you would be a
little cross."

Pleased, yet half irritated, by this simplicity, he stood in silence
while she counted her seven stars.


CHAPTER XI


It had long been a custom of the Canipers to spend each warm Sunday
evening in the heather, and there, if Daniel were not already with them,
they would find him waiting, or they would watch for his gaunt, loose
figure to come across the moor. This habit had begun when his father was
alive, and the stern chapel-goer's anger must be dared before Daniel
could appear with the light of a martyr on his brow. In those days,
Zebedee, who was working under the old doctor, sometimes arrived with
Daniel, and sank with an unexpressed relief into the lair which was a
little hollow in the moor, where heather grew thickly on the sides, but
permitted pale violets and golden tormentilla to creep about the grassy
bottom. Zebedee was more than ten years older than his brother, and he
suffered from a loneliness which made their honest welcome of great
value to him. He liked to listen to the boys' precocious talk and watch
the grace and beauty of the girls before he went back to the ugly house
in the town of dreary streets, to the work he liked and wearied himself
over, and the father he did not understand. Then he went away, and he
never knew how bitterly Helen missed him, how she had recognized the
tired look which said he had been working too hard, and the unhappy look
which betrayed his quarrels with his father, and how, in her own
fashion, she had tried to smooth those looks away, and now he had
returned with a new expression on his face. It was that, she thought, of
a man who, knowing misery like a great block in his path, had ridden
over it and not looked back. She knew what Rupert meant by saying he was
different, and again she felt a strong dislike for all his experiences
which she had not shared.

On the evening after his visit, the Canipers and Daniel went to the
trysting place. Helen wrapped herself in a shawl and lay down with her
head on her arms and one eye for the clouds, but she did not listen to
the talk, and she had no definite thoughts. The voices of Rupert and
Daniel were like the buzzing of bees, a sound of warmth and summer, and
the smell of their tobacco came and went on the wind. She was aware that
John, having smoked for a time and disagreed with everything that was
said, had walked off towards the road, and the succeeding peace was
proof that Miriam too, had disappeared.

Helen rolled on her back and went floating with the clouds. While she
merely watched them, she thought they kept a level course, but to go
with them was like riding on a swollen sea, and as she rose and fell in
slow and splendid curves, she discovered differences of colour and
quality in a medium which seemed invariable from below. She swooped
downwards like a bird on steady wings and saw the moor lifting itself
towards her until she anticipated a shock; she was carried upwards
through a blue that strained to keep its colour, yet wearied into a
pallor which almost let out the stars. She saw the eye of a hawk as its
victims knew it, and for a time she kept pace with a lark and saw the
music in his throat before he uttered it. Joy escaped her in a little
sound, and then she felt that the earth was solid under her.

Daniel and Rupert were still discussing the great things which did not
matter, and idly she marvelled at their capacity for argument and
quarrel; but she realized that for Rupert, at least, this was a sport
equivalent to her game of sailing with the clouds, and when she turned
to look at him, she saw him leaning against his heather bush, wearing
the expression most annoying to an antagonist, and flicking broken
heather stalks at Daniel's angular and monumental knees.

"You talk of the mind," Rupert said, "as though it were the stomach."

"I do," Daniel said heavily.

"And your stomach at that! Bulk and fat foods--"

"This is merely personal," Daniel said, "and a sign that you are being
beaten, as usual. I was going to say that in a day of fuller knowledge
we shall be able to predict the effect of emotions with the same
certainty--"

"With which you now predict the effect of Eliza's diet. God forbid!
Anyhow, I shall be dead. Come on."

Daniel stood up obediently, for they had now reached the point where
they always rose and walked off side by side, in the silence of
amusement and indignation.

There was a rustling in the heather, and she heard no more of them. Then
the thud of approaching footsteps ran along the ground, and she sat up
to see Miriam with Zebedee.

"I went fishing," Miriam said, "and this is what I caught."

He smiled at Helen a little uncertainly. "I had some time to spare, and
I thought you wouldn't mind if I came up here. You used to let me."

"I've always wanted you to come back," she said with her disconcerting
frankness.

"You may sit down," Miriam said, "and go on telling us about your
childhood. Helen, we'd hardly said how d'you do when he began on that.
It's a sure sign of age."

"I am old."

"Oh," Helen murmured. "No." She dropped back into her bed. She could see
Zebedee's grey coat sleeve and the movements of his arm as he found and
filled his pipe, and by moving her head half an inch she saw his collar
and his lean cheek.

"Yes, old," he said, "and the reason I mentioned my unfortunate
childhood was to point a moral in content. When I was young I was made
to go to chapel twice on Sundays, three times counting Sunday-school,
and here I find you all wandering about the moor."

"I'd rather have had the chapel," Miriam said. "One could at least look
at people's hats."

"The hats in our particular Bethel were chiefly bonnets. Bonnets with
things in them that nodded, and generally black." He stared across the
moor. "I don't know that the memory of them is a thing to cherish."

Helen tried to do justice to the absent. "We were never told not to go.
We could do what we liked."

"Ah, but we weren't encouraged," Miriam chuckled. "You have to be
encouraged, don't you, Zebedee, before you go into places like that?"

"My father had other methods," he said grimly.

The silence tightened on his memories, and no one spoke until Miriam
said, almost gently, "Please tell us some more."

"The pews were a bright yellow, and looked sticky. The roof was painted
blue, with stars. There was a man in a black gown with special knowledge
on the subject of sin."

"That," Miriam said pensively, "must have been amusing."

"No. Only dreary and somehow rather unclean. I liked to go to the
surgery afterwards and smell the antiseptics."

"I wish the horrible black-gowned man could know that," Helen said
fiercely.

He looked down, smiling tolerantly. "But it doesn't matter now."

"It does. It will always matter. You were little--" She broke off and
huddled herself closer in her shawl, as though she held a small thing in
its folds.

He found nothing to say; he was swept by gratitude for this tenderness.
It was, he knew, what she would have given to anything needing comfort,
but it was no less wonderful for that and he was warmed by it and, at
the same time, disturbed. She seemed to have her hands near his heart,
and they were pressing closer.

"Go on," said Miriam, unconscious of the emotions that lived near her.
"I like to hear about other people's miseries. Were you rather a funny
little boy?"

"I expect so."

"Pale and plain, I should think," she said consideringly, "with too big
a nose. Oh, it's all right now, rather nice, but little boys so often
have noses out of proportion. I shall have girls. Did you wear black
clothes on Sunday?"

"I'm afraid so."

"Poor little ugly thing! Helen, are you listening? Black clothes! And
your hair oiled?"

"No, not so bad as that. My mother was a very particular lady."

"Can you tell us about her?" Helen asked.

"I don't know that I can."

"You oughtn't to have suggested it," Miriam said in a reproof which was
ready to turn to mockery at a hint from Zebedee.

"He won't tell us if he doesn't want to. You wouldn't be hurt by
anything we said, would you?"

"Of course not. The difficulty is that there seems nothing to tell. She
was so quiet, as I remember her, and so meek, and yet one felt quite
safe with her. I don't think she was afraid, as I was, but there was
something, something that made things uncertain. I can't explain."

"I expect she was too gentle at the beginning," Helen said. "She let him
have his own way and then she was never able to catch up, and all the
time--all the time she was thinking perhaps you were going to suffer
because she had made that mistake. And that would make her so anxious
not to make another, wouldn't it? And so--"

"And so it would go on. But how did you discover that?"

"Oh, I know some things," she said, and ended feebly, "about some
things."

"She died when I was thirteen and Daniel three, and my father was very
unhappy."

"I didn't like your father a bit," Miriam said.

"He was a good man in his way, his uncomfortable way."

"Then I like them wickeder than that."

"It made him uncomfortable too, you know."

"If you're going to preach--"

He laughed. "I didn't mean to. I was only offering you the experience of
my maturity!"

"Well, I'm getting stiff and cold. Helen likes that kind of thing. Give
it to her while I get warm. Unless you'll lend me your shawl, Helen?"

"No, I won't."

"I must go too," said Zebedee, but he did not move and Helen did not
speak. His thoughts were on her while his eyes were on the dark line of
moor touching the sky; yet he thought less of her than of the strange
ways of life and the force which drew him to this woman whom he had
known a child so short a time ago. He wondered if what he felt were
real, if the night and the mystery of the moor had not bewitched him,
for she had come to him at night out of the darkness with the wind
whistling round her. It was so easy, as he knew, for a solitary being to
fasten eagerly on another, like a beaten boat to the safety of a buoy,
but while he thus admonished himself, he had no genuine doubt. He knew
that she was what he wanted: her youth, her wisdom, her smoothness, her
serenity, and the many things which made her, even the stubbornness
which underlay her calm.

Into these reflections her voice came loudly, calling him from the
heights.

"I do wish you wouldn't keep Eliza. She's a most unsuitable person to
look after you."

He laughed so heartily and so long that she sat up to look at him. "I
don't know what's amusing you," she said.

"It's so extraordinarily like you!"

"Oh!"

"And why don't you think her suitable?"

"From things Daniel has told me."

"Oh, Daniel is an old maid. She's ugly and disagreeable, but she
delivers messages accurately, and that's all I care about. Don't believe
all Daniel's stories."

"They worry me," she said.

"Do you worry about every one's affairs?" he asked, and feared she would
hear the jealousy in his voice.

"I know so few people, you see. Oughtn't I to?"

"I'm humbly thankful," he said with a light gravity.

"Then I'll go on. Aren't you lonely on Sundays in that house with only
the holly bush and the rowan and the apple-trees that bear no fruit? Why
don't you come up here?"

"May I?"

"You belong to the moor, too," she said.

He nodded his thanks for that. "Who told you about our trees? Daniel
again?"

"Yes; but I asked him."

He stood up. "I must go back. Thank you and good night."

It was getting dark and, with a heavy feeling in her heart, she watched
him walk away, while Miriam ran up with a whirl of skirts, crying out,
"Is he going? Is he going? Come and see him to the road."

Helen shook her head. She would let Miriam have anything she wanted, but
she would not share with her. She turned her back on the thin striding
figure and the small running one behind it, and she went into the house.
There, the remembrance of Mildred Caniper went with her from room to
room, and the house itself seemed to close on Helen and hold her in.

She stood at the schoolroom window and watched the twilight give place
to night. In the garden, the laurel bushes were quite black and it
seemed to her that the whole world was dead except herself and the
lurking shadows that filled the house. Zebedee, who tramped the long
road to the town, had become hardly more than a toy which had been wound
up and would go on for ever. Then, on the hillside, a spark leapt out,
and she knew that John or Lily Brent had lighted the kitchen lamp.


CHAPTER XII


Miriam took Zebedee to the road and, finding him uninteresting, she gave
him a scant good-night and left him. She sank into the heather and told
herself many times that she did not know what to do. She had wit enough
to realize that she was almost ridiculous in her discontent, but for
that Notya must be blamed, and her own immediate necessity was to find
amusement. In all the vastness of the moor, George Halkett was the only
being who could give her a taste of what she wanted, and she had
quarrelled with George Halkett. She sat and glowered at the white road
cutting the darkness of the moor and she thought it had the cruel look
of a sharp and powerful knife. It seemed to threaten her and, though she
had all youth's faith in her good fortune, at times she was taken by a
panic lest she should turn out to be one of those whom fate left
stranded. That fear was on her now, for there were such women, she knew,
and sometimes they were beautiful! Perhaps they were often beautiful,
and in the long run it might be better to be good, yet she would not
have exchanged her looks for all the virtues in the world.

"Nobody would!" she cried aloud, and, seizing two bunches of heather by
their stalks, she shook them violently.

Nevertheless, she might grow old on the moor and marry Daniel in
despair. She shuddered. No one could love Daniel enough to pardon his
appearance, and amusement would soon change to hatred. She tormented
herself with pictures of their common life. She saw his shapeless
clothes lying about the room she had to share with him; his boots stared
up at her from the hall with much of his own expression. She heard him
talking legally to her through their meals and saw him gazing at her
with his peculiar, timid worship. But if they had children, they would
have Daniel's stamp on them, and then he would grow bold and take all
she gave for granted. Girls and boys alike, they would be big and gaunt
and clumsy, but considerate and good.

She threw her arms across her breast and held herself in a fury of
self-possession. Marriage suddenly appeared to her as an ugly thing even
if it attained to the ideal. No, no! Men were good to play with, to
tease and torture, but she had fixed her limits, and she fixed them with
some astonishment for her own reserve. The discovery of this inherent
coldness had its effect: it bounded her future in a manner which was too
disturbing for much contemplation, but it also gave her a new freedom of
action, assuring her that she need have no fears for her own restraint,
that when her chance came, she might go into the world like a Helen of
Troy who could never be beguiled. In the meantime, though she had
quarrelled with George Halkett, she remembered that she had not forsworn
his company; she had only sworn to punish him for having told the truth,
and she easily pretended not to know that her resentment was no more
than an excuse.

She swung herself to her feet, and not without fear, for the moor had
never been her friend, she walked quickly towards the patch of darkness
made by the larch-trees. "I am being driven to this," she thought
dramatically and with the froth of her mind. She went with her head held
tragically high, but in her throat, where humour met excitement, there
was a little run of laughter.

The trees stood without movement, as though they were weighted by
foreknowledge and there was alarm in the voice of the stream. She
stopped short of the water and stood by the brown path that led down to
the farm, and her feet could feel the softness of many falls of larch
needles. She listened and she could hear nothing but the small noises of
the wood and all round it the moor was like a circle of enchantment
keeping back intruders. There was no wind, but she was cold and her
desire for George had changed its quality. She wanted the presence of
another human being in this stillness; she would have welcomed Mrs.
Samson with a shout and even Notya with a smile, but she found herself
unable to turn and make for home. It would have been like letting danger
loose on her.

"George!" she called loudly, before she knew she was going to do it.
"George, George, George!" Her voice, shriller than its wont, raged at
her predicament.

A dog barked in the hollow and came nearer. She heard George silence
him, and she knew that man and dog were approaching through the wood.
Then her fears vanished and she strolled a few paces from the trees and
stood, an easy mark for George when he appeared.

"Was it you who called?" he asked her from a little distance.

"Me?" Now he was close to her, and she saw his guarded eyes soften
unwillingly.

"Somebody called. Didn't you hear the dog barking? Somebody called
'George!'"

"Perhaps," she ventured in the falsely innocent manner which both
recognized as foolish and unworthy and in which both took a different
delight, "perhaps it was--thought-reading!"

"With the dog?" he sneered.

"You and the dog," she said, joining them deliberately. "It's getting so
dark that I can hardly see your cross face. That's a good thing, because
I want to say thank you for driving Uncle Alfred and Notya to the
station."

"That's all right," he said, and added with a sullen curiosity, "Is he
the one who's going to adopt you?"

"Yes."

"He hasn't done it yet?"

"I'm not sure that I want to go. George, shall I tell you something?
Something charming, a pillar of cloud by day and of fire by night--I did
call you!"

"Well," he said after a pause, "I knew that."

"You weren't certain. Tell the truth! Were you certain?"

"No, I was not," he said with the sulky honesty which should have moved
her.

"And had you been thinking of me?"

He would not answer that.

"I shan't be hurt," she said, swaying from foot to foot, "because I
know!" Against the invading blackness her face and teeth gleamed
clearly.

"You're like a black cat!" he burst out, in forgetfulness of himself.

"A witch's cat!"

"A witch."

"Do you think witches are ever afraid? Only when they see the cross,
isn't it? But I was, George, when I called out."

"What of?"

"I--don't know. The quietness and the dark."

He gave a short laugh which tried to conceal his pleasure in her
weakness.

"Aren't you ever?"

"Can't remember it."

"Not of anything?"

"No."

"How--stupid of you."

"Stupid?"

"Yes, when the world's full of things you don't understand."

"But nothing happens."

That was her own complaint, but from him the words came in the security
of content. "But tonight--" she began, shivered lightly and raised her
hand. "What's that?"

He lifted his head; the dog, sitting at his feet, had cocked his ears.
"Nothing."

"I heard something."

Hardly heeded, he put his strong fingers on her wrist and grasped it.
His voice was rich and soft. "What's the matter with you tonight?"

Unmistakably now, a sound came from the hollow; not, this time, the
raging of old Halkett, but a woman's cry for help, clear and insistent.

"It must be my father," he said, and his hand fell away from Miriam's;
but for a few seconds he stared at her as though she could tell him what
had happened. Then he went after the dog in his swift passage through
the trees, while, urged by an instinct to help and a need for George's
solid company, Miriam followed. She was soon outstripped, so that her
descent was made alone. Twigs crackled under her feet, the ranks of
trees seemed to rush past her as she went, and, with the return of
self-remembrance, she knew that this was how she had felt long ago when
she read fairy stories about forests and enchanted castles.

Yet she would have been less alarmed at the sight of a moated,
loop-holed pile than at this of Halkett's farm, a white-washed
homestead, with light beaming from a window on the ground floor, the
whole encompassed by a merely mortal possibility of strange events. Her
impulse had been to rush into the house, but she stood still, feeling
the presence of the trees like a thick curtain shutting away the outer,
upper world and, having paused, she found that she could not pursue her
course.

"I must go back," she whispered. After all, this was not her affair.

A murmur of voices came from the lighted room; the movement of a horse
in the stables was the friendliest sound she had ever heard.
Reluctantly, for she was alive with curiosity, she turned to go when a
step rang on the flagged passage of the farm and George stood in the
doorway. He beckoned and met her half way across the yard.

"He's gone," he said, and he looked dazed. "Can't believe it," he
muttered.

"Oh!" she said under her breath. "Oh, dear!" It was her turn to put a
hand on him, for she was afraid of death.

"Can't believe it," he said again, and taking her with him, he went as
though he were drawn, towards the lighted windows and looked in.

"Yes," he said, assuring himself that this thing really was.

Fascinated by the steadfastness of his gaze, Miriam looked too and drew
back with a muffled cry. She had seen the old man rigid on a red velvet
sofa, his head on a yellow cushion, his grey hair in some way coarsened
by the state of death, his limbs clad in the garments of every day and
strangely insulted by them. Near him, with her back to the window and
straight and stiff as a sentinel, sat Mrs. Biggs, the housekeeper, the
knob of her smooth black hair defying destiny.

Still whispering, Miriam begged, "George, don't look any more." Her
horror was as much for the immobile woman as for the dead man. "Come
away, before she turns round. I want to go home. George--I'm sorry."

"Yes," he said.

"Good-night."

"Good-night," he answered, and she saw him look through the window
again.

Going across the moor, she cried feebly. She wished old Halkett had not
been lying on the red sofa. He should have died in the big kitchen of
his fathers, or upstairs in a great bed, not in that commonly-furnished
little sitting-room where the work-basket of Mrs. Biggs kept company
with a cheap china lamp and photographs in frames. She wondered how they
would manage to undress him, and for how long Mrs. Biggs would sit
beside him like a fate, a fate in a red blouse and a brown skirt.
Perhaps even now they were pulling off his clothes. Terrible for George
to have to do that, she thought, yet it seemed natural enough work for
Mrs. Biggs, with her hard mouth and cold eyes, and no doubt she had
often put him to bed in the lusty days of his carousals. Perhaps the
dead could really see from under their stiff eyelids, and old Halkett
would laugh at the difficulty with which they disrobed him for this last
time. Perhaps he had been watching when George and she looked through
the window. Until now she had never seen him when he did not leer at
her, and she felt that he must still be leering under the mask of death.

The taint of what she had looked on hung heavily about her, and the
fresh air of the moor could not clear it away. Crying still, in little
whimpers which consoled her, she stole through the garden and the house
to the beautiful solitude of Phoebe's room and the cleanliness of
linen sheets.

Supperless she lay there, by turn welcoming and rejecting the pictures
which appeared on the dark wall of her mind, and when Helen knocked on
the door she was not bidden to enter.

"Don't you want anything to eat?" she called.

"No."

"What's the matter?"

"I--feel sick."

"Then mayn't I come in and look after you?" Helen asked in a voice
which impelled Miriam to bark an angry negative.

It was Helen, who liked to help people, to whom this thing should have
happened, yet Miriam possessed her experience jealously; it had broken
into the monotony of life and to that extent she was grateful.

"And I must be very kind to George," she decided before she went to
sleep.

She dropped her white eyelids the next morning when John gave the news
of the old man's death, for she did not want to betray her knowledge.

"Oh!" Helen said, and Rupert remarked lightly and watchfully that
Zebedee would now be less often on the moor.

"There's still the funeral," Helen said oddly.

"And let's hope they'll bury him soon," John added, and so finished with
old Halkett.

Helen was still thoughtful. "Perhaps we ought to go and be nice to
George. There won't be anything we can do, but we might ask him if there
is."

"The less you have to do with George--" John began, and Miriam
interrupted him, clicking her tongue.

"Helen, Helen, haven't you heard about George and Lily Brent? A dreadful
story. Ask John."

"If you're not careful," he said menacingly, "I'll do what she did to
him."

"No, no, you won't, Johnny; for, in spite of everything, you're a little
gentleman."

"Oh, do be quiet, you two! Rupert's trying to say something."

"Send a note of condolence to George," he advised, "and I'll go to the
funeral. It's no good asking John to do it. He wouldn't shine. Heavens!
it's late, and I haven't cleaned the boots!"

The boys went about their business and left the girls to theirs.

"I don't think a note is enough for George," Helen said as she rolled up
her sleeves. "A man without a mother or a father, and only a Mrs.
Biggs!"

"H'm," Miriam commented. "Except for Mrs. Biggs, I don't know that he's
to be pitied. Still, I'm quite willing to be agreeable, unless you mean
to go and knock at the farm door?"

"No. Couldn't we catch him somewhere!"

"Yes," Miriam said too promptly. She made a cautious pause. "He won't be
riding on the moor today, because there'll be undertakers and things. If
we went down the road--or shall I go alone?"

"Both of us--to represent the family. And we can say we're sorry--"

"But we're not."

"Yes, in a way. Sorry he hadn't a nicer father to be sorry for."

"What about ours?" Miriam asked.

"He may be dead, too, by now."

"And that will matter less to us than old Halkett does to George."

"But the great thing," Helen said, "is to have people one can't be
ashamed of."

"Oh!"

"I know; but it's true. And our father would always look nice and be
polite, even when he was dying. Old Halkett--"

"Don't talk about him! Come along. We'll catch George on his way to that
shop with the pictures of hearses in the window. If I die before you,
don't put me in one of those black carts."

"I don't think I could put you into anything," Helen said with simple
fervour.

"Then you'd have to mummify me and stick me up in the hall beside the
grandfather clock, and you'd think the ticking was my heart."

"There are hearts beating all over the house now," Helen said. "But this
is not meeting George," she added, and rolled her sleeves down again.

They waylaid him successfully where the road met Halkett's lane, and
from his horse he looked down on the two upturned faces.

"We've heard about Mr. Halkett," Helen said, gazing with friendliness
and without embarrassment into his eyes. "I suppose there's nothing we
can do?"

"Nothing, thanks."

"And Rupert said he would like to go to the funeral, if he may."

"Thank you. I'll let him know about it." He glanced at Miriam and
hesitated, yet when he spoke it was in a franker voice than the one she
was used to hear. "I'm afraid you were upset last night."

Her answering look made a pact between them. "We didn't hear about it
till this morning."

He nodded, watching her through his thick lashes. He gave her a strong
impression that he was despising her a little, and she saw him look from
her to Helen as though he made comparisons. Indeed, at that moment, he
thought that these sisters were like thirst and the means to quench it,
like heat and shade; and a sudden restlessness made him shift in his
seat.

"I expect you have a lot to do," Helen said. "Good-bye."

"Good-bye. And thank you," he said gruffly, and caught the flash of
Miriam's smile as he turned.

Helen stood looking after him. "Poor George!" she said. "I rather like
him. I wish he wouldn't drink."

"Exaggerated stories," Miriam remarked neatly.

"Oh, yes, but he looks as if he had never had a chance of being nice."

"I don't believe he has ever wanted one," Miriam said.


CHAPTER XIII


Uncle Alfred wrote a short note from Calais, and on the day when old
Halkett was taken to his grave another letter came to say that Philip
Caniper was dead before the travellers could reach him.

"Then we're poor little orphans, like George," Miriam said, and, with
the peering look which asked how far she might venture, she added, "And,
like George, we have our Mrs. Biggs."

If Helen heard those words, she made no sign. "She'll never be happy
again," she said.

"Well, she never has been happy, and she has never wanted us to be
happy, so nothing's changed."

"What can we do?" Helen went on, and her thoughts alighted on such
practical kindnesses as a perfect state of cleanliness in the house to
which Notya would return, flowers in her bedroom for a welcome, and a
great willingness to do what pleased her. "But we mustn't be too
obvious," she murmured to herself.

"And whatever you do, don't slobber."

"Is it likely?" Helen asked superbly.

The firmest intentions in that direction would have been frustrated by
the sight of Mildred Caniper's cold face, and Helen saw with surprise
that it was almost as it had always been. Her "Well, Helen!" was as calm
as her kiss, and only when she raised her veil was her bitter need of
sleep revealed. Then, too, Helen saw that her features and her fair,
bright colouring had suffered an indefinable blurring, as though, in
some spiritual process, their sharpness had been lost, and while she
looked at her, Helen felt the full weight of responsibility for this
woman settling once more on her own slim shoulders. Yet she noticed that
the shadows which had hung so thickly in the house became thinner as
soon as Mildred Caniper entered it. No doubt they had slipped into the
body which was their home.

"Daniel is here," Helen said, "because it's Saturday and we didn't know
you were coming."

"Well?"

"I thought you might be sorry. And we have asked him to stay the night."

"I promise not to turn him out," Mildred Caniper said, with her humorous
look, and Helen laughed back with a friendliness for which Miriam,
listening in a corner, admired her secretly.

"But I shall want to talk to you this evening when you are all
together," Notya said.

For that ceremony, Miriam wore her customary black with an air which at
once changed the dress into one of mourning; the fashion of her hair was
subdued to match her manners, and Daniel, having a dim notion that he
might unknowingly have offended, asked in his clumsy way what troubled
her.

She edged closer to him and looked up, and he could see that she was
laughing at herself, though that helped him not at all.

"Isn't my father dead? And aren't we going to have a family consultation
in the dining-room? Well, here am I."

"I see."

"What do you see?"

He turned away. "I'm not going to tell you."

"Ah, Daniel dear, do! I know I'm horrid and frivolous and vain, and I
tease you, but I'm very fond of you and I should love--oh, love--you to
tell me something nice. Quick, Daniel! Quick, before the others come
in!"

He was red, and his forehead glistened as he said, "You'll only throw it
up at me."

"Oh, as if I would! I don't care for that expression, but I won't.
Daniel, some one's coming!"

He blew his nose and bent over his book, yet through the trumpeting and
the manipulation of his handkerchief, she heard a word.

"Beautiful," he mumbled.

"Always?"

He nodded, and like a delighted child, she clapped her hands.

Rupert, less debonair than usual, opened the door. "Come on," he said.
"We're all ready. Daniel, stay where you are. We don't want you tumbling
into the conclave."

"All right, all right."

"Got something to keep you quiet?"

"Greek grammar."

"Good man. Now then!" He plunged across the hall as though it were an
icy bath.

In the candle-lighted dining-room, Mildred Caniper sat by a wood fire.
The table barricaded her from the four Canipers who sat and looked at
her with serious eyes, and suddenly she found that she had very little
to say. Those eyes and the four mouths curved, in their different ways,
for passion and resolve, seemed to be making courteous mock of her; yet
three at least of the Canipers were conscious only of pity for her
loneliness behind the shining table.

"After all," she said, trying to be at ease, "there is not much to tell
you; but I felt that, perhaps, you have never understood your father
very well."

"He did not give us the opportunity," Rupert said.

John had his shoulders raised as though he would shield his ears from
family discordances, and he swore inwardly at Rupert for answering back.
What was the good of that? The man was dead, and he might be allowed to
rest. It was strange, he thought, that Rupert, under his charming ways,
had a hardness of which he himself was not capable.

"No," Mildred Caniper was saying, and by her tone she shifted the blame
from her husband to his children. The word acted as a full stop to her
confidences, and there was an uneasy pause.

"But tell us, please," Helen said, leaning forward.

"Oh, please," Rupert added.

Mildred Caniper smiled waveringly, between pride and pain. "I was only
going to tell you a little about him, but now I don't know that I can."
She swallowed hard. "I wanted you to know how gifted he was."

"How?" Rupert asked.

"He wrote," she said, defying their criticism of what they had not seen,
"but he destroyed all he did because he was never satisfied. I found
nothing--anywhere."

Here was a father whom Rupert could understand, and for the first time
he regretted not having known him; but to John it was foolishness for a
man to set his hand to work which was not good enough to stand. He must
content himself with a humbler job.

"He liked only the best," Mildred Caniper said, doing her duty by him,
and the next moment she caught the full shaft of Miriam's unwary glance
which was bright with the conviction that her father's desertion needed
no more explanation.

Mildred Caniper's mind registered the personal affront, and swept on to
its implication as rain sweeps up a valley. The result was darkness, and
as she sat straight and motionless in her chair, she seemed to herself
to struggle, for her soul sighted despair. Long ago, she had taken life
into her hands and used it roughly, and life was taking its slow
revenge. In the shuttered room by the sea, the dead man, deaf to the
words with which she had hurried to him, and here, in this house, the
eyes of Miriam announced her failure, yet to that cold clay and to this
living flesh she had been, and was, a power.

She dropped her hands limply. She was tired of this fictitious power;
she was almost ready to pretend no longer; and with that thought she
found herself being observed by Helen with a tenderness she was not
willing to endure. She spoke abruptly, resigning the pious task of
sweetening Philip Caniper's memory.

"Your father has left you each nearly a hundred pounds a year"--she
glanced at Miriam--"to be handed over when you have reached the age of
twenty-one."

There was a feeling that some one ought to thank him, but no one spoke,
and his children left the room with an unaccountable sense of guilt.

In the safety of the schoolroom Miriam's voice rose bitterly: "Oh, why
aren't we an ordinary family? Why can't we cry for a father who leaves
us nearly a hundred pounds?"

"Try to," Rupert advised. He was smiling queerly to himself.

"Helen, isn't it horrid?"

"No: I don't like crying."

"John, you look as though you're going to refuse the money. I will if
you do. John--"

"Don't be a little fool," he said. "Refuse it! I'm holding on to it with
both hands."

She drooped forlornly, but no one seemed to notice her. Daniel was
absorbed in the Greek grammar, and the others were thinking their own
thoughts.

"I'll go on to the moor," she told herself, and she slipped through the
window in search of what adventure she could find. Outside the garden
she paused and nodded towards the house.

"I don't care," she said. "It's all their fault. And Helen--oh, I could
kill Helen!" Wickedly she tried to mimic Helen's face.

A few minutes later John followed through the window, and he went into
the darkness with a strange excitement. For a time he did not think, for
he was experiencing all the relief of daring to feel freely, and the
effect was at first only a lightening of the heart and feet. Hardly
knowing where he wandered, he found himself on the moor behind Brent
Farm, and there, in the heather, he sat down to light his pipe. He was
puzzled when the match quivered in his hand, and then he became aware
that innumerable pulses were beating in his body, and with that
realization others rushed on him, and he knew how he had held himself in
check for months, and how he desired the touch of Lily Brent's splendid
strength and the sight of her drowsy, threatening eyes. Picturing her,
he could not rest, and he rose and marched aimlessly to and fro. He had
been a fool, he told himself: he had denied his youth and doubted her:
proud in poverty, he should have gone to her and offered all he had, the
love and labour of his body and brain, honouring her in asking her to
take him empty-handed if she would take him at all. Now he must go to
her as though she could be bought at the price of a hundred pounds a
years and the poor thing he had once called his pride, known now for a
mere notion gathered from some source outside himself. He who had
scorned convention had been its easy victim, and he bit hard at his pipe
stem and grunted in disgust.

"We get half our ideas out of books," he said. "No woman would have been
such a fool. They get things at first hand."

He stopped and pointed at the farm. No doubt the woman down there had
read his thoughts and laughed at him, yes, loving him or not, she must
be laughing at him. He laughed himself, then listened for the chance
sound of her distant voice. He could hear footsteps on the cobbled yard,
the clattering of a pail, the shrill stave of a song uttered by the
maid-servant, but no more; and he paced on until the lights in Brent
Farm went out and his own home was darkened.

In the grey of the morning, he went down the track. Mists were lying on
the moor; above them, trees showed like things afloat, and when he
crossed the road he felt that he was breasting silent floods. Through
his thick boots he could feel the cold of ground soaked by a night of
unexpected rain, and against his gaiters the long grasses rid themselves
of their loads of drops and swung back to their places as he passed. He
turned at the sound of footsteps on the road and saw one of Halkett's
men walking through that semblance of grey water. The man gave a nod of
greeting, John raised a hand, and the peace of the waking day was not
shattered by human speech.

In the corner of the meadow near the house, the cows, looming large and
mysterious and unfamiliar, were waiting with hanging heads, and John
stood and looked at them in a kind of dream before he fetched his pail
and stool and settled down to work. His hands were not steady and the
cow was restless at his touch, and when he spoke to her the sound of his
own voice startled him, for the world was leagued with silence and even
the hissing of the milk into the pail had the extravagance of a cascade.

As he worked, he watched the house. No smoke came from its chimneys, but
at length he heard the opening of a door and Lily Brent appeared. He
thought she was like the morning, fresh and young, with all the promise
and danger of a new day, and while he looked at her his hands dropped
idle. She stood on the step and nodded to him before she walked across
the grass.

"You here alone?" she said, and there was a fine frown on her brow.
"Where's the rest of them? If I don't rout them out myself--"

"Don't," he said. "It's early, and it's Sunday morning. They'll come
soon enough." He stood up and rested his folded arms on the cow's back
and looked at Lily.

"She'll have the pail over," she warned him quickly.

He put it out of danger and returned.

"You haven't fetched my stool," she said.

"I forgot it. Wait a bit. I'll get it soon."

"What's the matter with you this morning? We're wasting time."

"Let's waste time," he said. He looked round at the mists floating off
the moor. The light was clearing; the cows had dwindled; the road was no
longer a fairy flood but a highway for the feet of men.

"I want you to pretend it's yesterday," he said.

"What's the matter with you, John?"

"I'm going to tell you. Will you pretend it's yesterday?"

"Yes. It's Saturday morning, a busy day for us. We ought to get to
work."

"Come a step nearer," he said, and she obeyed.

He clutched the hair on the cow's back and spoke in a harsh voice. "Will
you marry me?" he said, frowning and looking her in the eyes. "I've
hardly any money, but I love you. I want you. I didn't know what to do.
If I'd waited till I had as much as you, I might have lost you. I didn't
know what to do, but I thought I'd tell you."

"You needn't explain any more," she said. Her hands, too, fell on the
cow's back, and with a little movement she bade him take them. He
gathered her fingers into his and turned and twisted them.

"I thought--if you wanted me--why should we live on opposite sides of
the way? I can help you--and I love you." He relied on that.

"I love you," he said again.

He heard her ask softly, "Why?"

"Because--because--oh, you're all I want. You're like the earth, like
herbs, like fresh green grass. I've got your hands: give me the rest of
you!"

Her eyes flashed open, he saw and heard her laugh, and their lips met
across the bulky barrier.

"But I want you in my arms," he said, and in the clearing light he held
her there, though the sound of an opening window told them that the farm
was waking.


CHAPTER XIV


On the night of Mildred Caniper's return, Helen felt that the house had
changed. A new emotion was mingling with the rest, and it was as
unmistakable as a scent, and like a scent, it would grow fainter, but
now it hung in every room and on the stairs. Surely Mr. Pinderwell must
be disturbed by it. She fancied his grey old face puckered in
bewilderment and his steps going faster up and down the stairs. Helen,
too, was restless, and having slept uneasily, she woke in the dark of
the night.

Outside her widely-opened windows the poplars were moving gently. They
seemed near enough to touch, but she found something formidable in their
aspect. Black, tall and bare, they watched her to the accompaniment of
their indifferent whispering and swaying, and they warned her that
whatever might be her lot, theirs would continue to be this one of lofty
swinging. So, aware of all that happened they had always watched and
whispered, and only tonight was she resentful in her love for them.
Could they not feel a little sorrow for the woman burdened with trouble
who had come back to the house? Had not the sense of that trouble stolen
through the doors and windows? Beyond the garden walls there was, she
knew, immunity from human pain. The moor understood it and therefore
remained unmoved. It was the winds that grieved, the grey clouds that
mourned and the sunshine that exulted; under all these, and changed only
on the surface, the moor spread itself tranquilly, but the poplars were
different. For Helen, all trees were people in another shape and she
could not remember a time when these had not been her friends, but now
they seemed not to care, and she started up in the sudden suspicion that
nothing cared, that perhaps the great world of earth and sky and
growing things had lives as absorbing and more selfish than her own.

"But only perhaps," she said aloud, asserting her faith in what she
loved.

She pushed the pillow behind her back and stared into the clearing
darkness of Jane's large bare room. The curved front of her elegant
dressing-table with its oval mirror became distinct. Helen's clothes lay
like a patch of moonlight on a chair, the tallboy and the little stool
by which she reached the topmost drawers changed from their semblances
of beasts to sedate and beautiful furniture. By the bedside, soft
slippers waited with an invitation, and into them Helen soon slipped her
feet, for it seemed to her that the trouble thickened with each minute
and that Notya must be in need of help.

Yet, when she had noiselessly opened the door of the room opposite, she
found Mildred Caniper sleeping in her narrow bed with the steadiness of
complete fatigue, with something, too, touchingly childlike in her pose.
She might have been a child who had cried bitterly for hours before she
at last found rest, but Notya's grief, Helen divined, had not the
simplicity which allowed of tears nor the beauty which was Mr.
Pinderwell's consolation. It was not death which had hurt her.

Mildred Caniper's head had slid from the pillow and lay on her
outstretched arm; the other arm, slender and round as youth, was thrown
outside the bed-clothes, and only when Helen bent quite low could she
see the frown of trouble between the brows. Then, feeling like a spy,
she returned to the darkness of the landing where Phoebe and Jane and
Christopher were wondering what she did.

She might have been a mother who, waking from a bad dream, goes about
the house to see that all is safe: she wished she could go into each
room to make sure that its occupant was there, but such kindnesses had
never been encouraged in a family trained to restraint; moreover, Miriam
might wake in fright, Rupert was a light sleeper and John had an
uncertain temper. There was nothing to do but to go back to bed, and she
did not want to do that. She could not sleep, and she would rather stay
on the landing with the Pinderwells, so she leaned against the wall and
folded her arms across her breast. She wanted to be allowed to care for
people practically and she wished her brothers and sister were small
enough to be held in the arms which had to be contented with herself.
She had, she complained silently to the Pinderwells, to pretend not to
care for the others very much, lest she should weary them. But she had
her secret visions of a large house with unencumbered shining floors on
which children could slide, with a broad staircase down which they would
come heavily, holding to the rails and bringing both feet to each stair.
She lived there with them happily, not thwarted by moods and past
miseries, and though she had not yet seen the father of those children
about the house, tonight, as she stood in the covering darkness, she
thought she heard his footsteps in the garden where the children played
among the trees.

She moved abruptly, slipped, and sat down with a thud. Her laughter,
like a ghost's, trickled through the stillness, and even while she
laughed a door was opened and John appeared, holding a lighted candle in
his hand.

"It's only me," Helen said.

"What the devil are you up to?"

"I'm not up to anything. I'm on the floor."

"Ill?"

"No."

"I thought I heard some one prowling about."

"Couldn't you sleep either?"

He put his fingers through his hair. "No, I couldn't sleep."

"The house is full of--something, isn't it?"

"Fools, I think," he answered, laughing a little. "Look here, you
mustn't sit there. It's cold. Get up."

"Help me."

"Why didn't you put on your dressing-gown?"

"You didn't."

"I don't wear this flimsy rubbish. Go back to bed."

"Yes. What's the time?"

"One o'clock. The longest night I've ever known!"

Rather wistfully she looked at him. "What's the matter, John?"

"I'm waiting for tomorrow," he said almost roughly.

"So am I," she said, surprising herself so that she repeated the words
slowly, to know their meaning. "So am I--and it's here."

"Not till the dawn," he said. "Go to sleep."

Together their doors were softly closed and Helen knew now whose
footsteps were in the children's garden. She went to the window and
nodded to the poplars. "And you knew, I suppose; but so did I, really,
all the time."

She slept profoundly and woke to a new wonder for the possibilities of
life, a new fear for the dangers which might assail those who had much
to cherish; and now she descried dimly the truth she was one day to see
in the full light, that there is no gain without loss and no loss
without gain, that things are divinely balanced, though man may
sometimes throw his clumsy weight into the scale. Yet under these
serious thoughts there was a song in her heart and her pleasure in its
music shone out of her eyes so brilliantly that Rupert, watching her
with tolerant amusement, asked what had befallen her.

"It's only that it's Sunday," the quick-witted Miriam said and Helen
replied with the gravity which was more misleading than a lie: "Yes,
that's all."

Nevertheless, when Zebedee arrived on the moor, her brightness faded.
Already the desire of possession hurt her and Miriam had attached
herself to him as though she owned him. She was telling him about Philip
Caniper's death, about the money which was to come to them, and
asserting that Daniel now wanted to marry her more than ever. Daniel was
protesting through his blushes, and Zebedee was laughing. It all seemed
very foolish, and she was annoyed with Zebedee for even pretending to be
amused.

"Oh, don't," she murmured and lay back.

"Be quiet, prig!"

"She's not that, is she?" Zebedee asked, his strangely flecked eyes
twinkling.

"Oh, a bad one. She disapproves of everything she doesn't like herself."

"Helen, wake up! I want to know if this is true."

"Do you think it is?"

"I'm afraid it's very likely."

"Oh, dear!" she sighed, "I don't know what to do about it. A person
without opinions is just nothing, and you really were being very silly
just now. I hate jokes about marrying."

"H'm, they are rather feeble," Zebedee owned.

"Vulgar, I think," she said, with her little air of Mildred Caniper.

"Ah," said Rupert, tapping Daniel lightly on the head, "a man with a
brain like this can't develop a taste for the real thing. I've seen him
shaking over jokes that made me want to cry, but you mustn't expect too
much of him. He does very well. Come along, my boy, and let's have some
reasonable talk."

"He doesn't want to go!" Miriam cried.

"But he must. I know what's good for him."

"He looks just like an overgrown dancing bear," Miriam said as she
watched the two figures stepping across the moor.

Helen continued her own gloomy thoughts. "No one can like a prig."

"Oh, yes," Zebedee assured her cheerfully, "I can. Besides, you'll grow
out of it."

"She never will! She's getting worse, and it's with living here. As a
doctor, I think you might prescribe a change for her--for all of us.
What will become of us? I can't," she added bitterly, "be expected to
marry a dancing bear!"

"If you're speaking of Daniel--" Zebedee began sharply.

"Oh, don't you be cross, too! I did think I had one friend!"

"Daniel's a good man. He may be queer to look at, but he's sound. You
only hurt yourself, you know, when you speak like that."

Miriam pouted and was silent, and Helen was not sure whether to be angry
with Zebedee for speaking thus to her who must be spoiled, or glad that
he could do it to one so beautiful, while he could preserve friendliness
for a prig. But her life-long loyalty refused this incipient rivalry;
once more she decided that Miriam must have what she wanted, and she lay
with clenched hands and a tranquil brow while she listened to the
chatter which proclaimed Miriam's recovery.

Helen could see nothing but a sky which was colourless and unclouded,
and she wished she could be like that--vague, immaterial, without form.
Perhaps to reach that state was happiness; it might be negation, but it
would be peace and she had a young, desperate wish to die and escape the
alternations of joy and pain. "And yet this is nothing," she said with
foresight, and she stood up. "I'm going home."

"No!" Zebedee exclaimed in the middle of one of Miriam's sentences.

"I must. Notya's all alone. Good-night."

He would not say the word, and he walked beside her. "But I'm your
guest," he reminded her.

"I know. But you see, she's lonely."

"And I've been lonely all my life."

She caught her breath. "Have you?" Her hands moved against her skirt and
she looked uneasily about her. "Have you?" She was pulled two ways, and
with a feeling of escape, she found an answer for him. "But you are you.
You're not like her. You're strong. You can manage without any one."

"I've had to."

"Oh," she moaned, "don't make me feel unhappy about going."

"I wouldn't have you unhappy about anything."

"You're a wonderful friend to me. Good-night."

He watched her move away, but when she had gone a few paces she ran
back.

"It wasn't quite the truth," she said. "It was only partly Notya."

"You're not angry with me?"

"With you? I couldn't be. It was just my silly self, only I didn't want
to be half truthful with you."

Their hands touched and parted, and he waited until she was out of sight
before he went back to Miriam.

"You're a little pest," he said, "wasting my time--"

"Ha, ha! I knew. I won't waste any more of it. Wasn't it horrid of me?
If you hadn't scolded me I might have been kind; but I always, always
pay people out."

"Silly thing to do," he muttered, and went off.

Miriam chuckled under her whistling as she strolled across the moor.
She did not whistle a tune, but uttered sweet, plaintive notes like a
bird's call, and as she reached the stream a tall figure rose up from
the darkness of the ground.

"Oh, are you here, George?" she said. "I'm glad. I'm sick of
everything."

"H'm. I'm glad I'm useful. Are the others having their usual
prayer-meeting?"

"What do you mean?"

"That Mackenzie of yours and your brother, sitting in the dip and
talking. I can't think what on earth they find to say."

"Well, you see, George, they are very clever people. Let us sit down.
You can't--I mean you and I can't appreciate them properly."

"The Mackenzie looks a fool."

"He is a great friend of mine. You must not be rude. Manners makyth man.
According to that, you are not always a man when you're with me."

He breathed deeply. "There's something about you--"

"Now you're blaming me, and that's not gallant."

"You think I'm not fit to breathe the same air with you, don't you?"

"Yes, sometimes." She sat hugging her knees and swaying to and fro, and
with each forward movement her face neared his. "But at others you are
quite presentable. Last night you were charming to me, George."

"I can be what I choose. D'you know that I had the same education as
your brothers?"

"You're always saying that. But you forget that you didn't have me for a
sister."

"No, thank God."

"Now--!"

"That's a compliment."

"Oh! And, George," she peered at him and dared herself to say the
words, though old Halkett's ghost might be lurking among the trees: "I
don't think your father can have been a ve-ry good influence on a wild
young man like you."

"The old man's dead. Leave it at that. And who says I'm wild?"

"Aren't you? Don't disappoint me."

"I'm all right," he said with admirable simplicity, "if I don't drink."

"Then you mustn't, and yet I love to think that you're a bold, bad man."

His eyes, which rarely widened, did so now, and in the gathering dusk
she saw a flash of light.

"You see, it makes me feel so brave, George."

"It ought to."

There was danger in his presence and she liked invoking it; but there
was a certain coarseness, also invoked by her, from which she shrank,
towards which she crept, step by step, again. She made no answer to his
words. In her black dress and against the darkness of the wood, she was
hardly more than a face and two small hands. There was a gentle movement
among the trees; they were singing their welcome of a peaceful night;
the running of the stream came loudly, giving itself courage for the
plunge into the wood.

Miriam spoke in a low voice. "It's getting late. The others must have
gone in. They'll wonder where I am."

"And they'd be horrified, I suppose, if they knew."

She bent towards him so that he might see her reproachful face.

"You've spoilt this lovely night. You don't match the sky and stars. I
wish I hadn't met you."

"You needn't have done," he said.

"Are you sorry I did?" she challenged him.

"Oh, I don't know," he muttered almost to himself. "That's it. I never
know."

She choked down the lilt of triumph in her voice. "I'll leave you to
think, about it," she said and, looking at the high fir-wood, she added,
"But I thought we were going to be such friends, after all."

Halkett stood up, and he said nothing, for his feelings were not to be
put into words he could say to her. In her presence he suffered a
mingling of pain and pleasure, anger and delight; cruelty strove in him
with gentleness, coarseness with courtesy; he wanted to kiss her roughly
and cast her off, yet he would have been grateful for the chance of
serving her.

"George," she said quietly.

"Yes?"

"When you think of life, what do you see?"

"I--don't know."

"But you must."

He compelled his imagination. "The moor, and the farm, and the folks in
the town, standing on the pavement, and Oxford Street in London--and
Paris."

"Have you been to Paris?"

"I couldn't think about it if I hadn't."

She gave the laugh which coolly put him from her. "Couldn't you? Poor
George!" She balanced from her heels to her toes and back again, with
steadying movements of her arms, so that she was like a bird refusing to
take flight. "I don't see things plainly like that," she murmured. "It's
like a black ball going round and round with sparks inside, and me; and
the blackness and the sparks are feelings and thoughts, and things that
have happened and are going to happen, all mixing themselves up with the
me in the middle. George, do you feel how strange it is? I can't
explain, but here we are on the moor, with the sky above us, and the
earth underneath--and why? But I'm really rolling over and over in the
black ball, and I can't stop and I can't go on. I'm just inside."

"I know," he said. "It's all mixed. It's--" He kicked a heather-bush.
"You want a thing and you don't want it--I don't know."

"I always know what I want," she said, and into her thoughtfulness there
crept the personal taint. "I want every one to adore me. Good-night,
George. I wonder if we shall ever meet again!"

In the garden, with her hands folded on her knee, Helen was sitting
meekly on a stool under the poplars and watching the swaying of the
tree-tops.

"The young nun at prayer," Miriam said. "I thought you came back to be
with Notya."

"She seemed not to want me."

"Then you sacrificed me for nothing. That's just like you."

"How?"

"By throwing me into the alluring company of that young man. If I love
him and he doesn't love me, well, you've blighted my life. And if he
loves me and I don't love him--"

"You are always talking about love," Helen said with an accent of
distaste.

"I know it's not the sort of thing a young virgin should be interested
in; but after all, what else can be so interesting to the Y. V.?"

"But you spoil it."

"I don't. Do you mind if I put my head on your knee? No, I'm not
comfortable. That's better. It's you who spoil it with being sentimental
and one-love-one-life-ish. Now for me it's a game that nymphs and
goddesses might play at."

"But you can't play it alone," said Helen, troubled.

"No, that's the fun of it." She smiled against Helen's dress. "I wonder
if my young man is at home yet. And there's only a cold supper for him!
Dear, dear, dear!"

With her apparent obtuseness, Helen said, "It won't matter so much in
the summertime."

"Ah, that's a comfort," Miriam said, and rolled her head luxuriously.

John came through the French window.

"I've been looking for you both," he said. "I want to tell you
something."

"Now it's coming," Miriam muttered.

"Sit down, then," Helen said. "We can't see you so high up."

"What! in my best clothes? All right." The light was dim, but they felt
the joviality that hung about him and saw his teeth exposed in a smile
he could not subdue. "The ground's damp, you know. There's a heavy dew."

There was a silence through which the poplars whispered in excitement.

"Perhaps I am a little deaf," Miriam said politely, "but I haven't heard
you telling us anything."

"Yes; he said the ground was damp."

"So he did! Come along, we'll go in."

"No, don't!" he begged. "I know I'm not getting on very fast, but the
fact is--I can't bear women to be called after flowers. If it weren't
for that I should have told you long ago. And hers is one of the worst,"
he added sadly.

Miriam and Helen shook each other with their silent laughter.

"You can call her something else," Helen said.

"Mrs. C. would be a jaunty way of addressing her."

"Well, anyway, she's going to marry me, bless her heart. Get up! Notya
wants to know why supper isn't ready." He did a clumsy caper on the
grass. "Who's glad?"

"I am," Helen said.

"When?" Miriam asked.

"Soon."

"What did Notya say?" was Helen's question.

"Nothing worth repeating. Don't talk of that."

"Well," Miriam remarked, "it will be a very interesting affair to
watch."

"Confound your impudence!"

"You're sure to have heaps of children," she warned him.

"Hope so."

"You'll forget how many there are, and mix them up with the dogs and the
cats and the geese. They'll be very dirty."

"And perfectly happy."

"Oh, yes. Now Helen's will always be clean little prigs who couldn't be
naughty if they tried. I shall like yours best, John, though they won't
be clean enough to kiss."

"Shut up!" he said.

"I shall be a lovely aunt. I shall come from London Town with a
cornucopia of presents. We're beginning to go," she went on. "First
John, and then me, as soon as I am twenty-one."

"But Rupert will be here," Helen said quickly.

"He'll marry, too, and you'll be left with Notya. Somebody will have to
look after her old age. And as you've always been so fond of her--!"

"There would be the moor," Helen said, answering all her unspoken
thoughts.

"It wouldn't comfort me!"

"Don't worry, my dear," John said kindly; "the gods are surely tender
with the good."

"But she won't grow old," Helen said earnestly. "I don't believe she
could grow old. It would be terrible." And it was of Mildred Caniper and
not of herself she thought.


CHAPTER XV


Mildred Caniper was wearing her deaf expression when they went into the
house, and getting supper ready as a form of reproof. John was another
of her failures. He had chosen work she despised for him, and now,
though it was impossible to despise Lily Brent, it was impossible not to
disapprove of such a marriage for a Caniper. But when she was helpless,
Mrs. Caniper had learnt to preserve her pride in suavity, and as they
sat down to supper she remarked that she would call on Lily Brent
tomorrow.

"How funny!" Helen said at once.

Miriam darted a look meant to warn Helen that Notya was in no mood for
controversy, and John frowned in readiness to take offence.

"Why funny?" he growled.

"I was just wondering if Notya would put on a hat and gloves to do it."
She turned to Mildred Caniper. "Will you?"

"I'm afraid I have not considered such a detail."

"None of us," Helen went on blandly, "has ever put on a hat to go to the
farm. I should hate any of us to do it. Notya, you can't."

"You forget," Mildred Caniper said in her coldest tones, "that I have
not been accustomed to going there."

"Well, do notice Lily's primroses," Helen said pleasantly. "They're like
sunshine, and she's like--"

"No, please," John begged.

"I wonder why Rupert has not come to supper," Mildred Caniper said,
changing the subject, and Helen wondered pityingly why one who had known
unhappiness should not be eager to spare others.

"But," Miriam began, her interest overcoming dread of her stepmother's
prejudices, "we shall have to wear hats for John's wedding. I shall
have a new one and a new dress, a dusky blue, I think, with a sheen on
it."

"Did you mention my wedding?" John asked politely.

"Yes. And a peacock's feather in my hat. No, that's unlucky, but so
beautiful."

"Nothing beautiful," Helen said, "can be unlucky."

"I wouldn't risk it. But what can I have?"

"For my wedding," John announced, "you'll have nothing, unless you want
to sit alone in the garden in your new clothes. You're not going to be
present at the ceremony. Good Lord! I'll have Rupert and Daniel for
witnesses, and we'll come home in time to do the milking, but there'll
be no show. It would make me sick."

"Not even a party?"

"What the--what on earth should we have a party for?"

"For fun, of course. Daniel and Zebedee and us." She leaned towards him.
"And George, John, just to show that all's forgiven!" To see if she had
dared too much, she cast a glance at Mildred Caniper, but that lady sat
in the stillness of determined indifference.

"Not one of you!" John said. "It's our wedding, and we're going to do
what we like with it."

"But when you're going to be happy--as I suppose you think you are--you
ought to let other people join in. Here's a chance of a little fun--"

"There's nothing funny about being married," Helen said in her deep
tones.

"Depends who--whom--you're marrying, doesn't it?" Miriam asked, and
looking at Mildred Caniper once more, she found that she need not be
afraid, for though the expression was the same, its effect was
different. Notya looked as though she could not rouse her energies to
active disapproval; as though she would never say her rare, amusing
things again, and Miriam was reminded of the turnip lanterns they had
made in their youth--hollowness and flickering light within.

The succeeding days encouraged that reminder, for something had gone
from Mildred Caniper and left her stubbornly frail in mind and body.
Rupert believed that hope had died in her but the Canipers did not speak
of the change which was plain to all of them. She was a presence of
flesh and blood, and she would always be a presence, for she had that
power, but she approached Mr. Pinderwell in their thoughts, and they
began to use towards her the kind of tenderness they felt for him.
Sometimes she became aware of it and let out an irony with a sharpness
which sent Helen about the house more gaily and persuaded her that Notya
would be better when summer came, for surely no one could resist the
sun.

John's soft heart forgave his stepmother's coldness towards his marriage
and his bride, and prompted him to a generous suggestion. He made it
shyly and earnestly one night in the drawing-room where Mildred Caniper
sat under the picture of Mr. Pinderwell's lady.

"Notya," he began, "we want you to come to our wedding, too. Just you
and Rupert and Daniel. Will you?"

She looked faintly amused, yet, the next moment, he had a fear that she
was going to cry. "Thank you, John."

"We both want you," he said awkwardly, and went nearer.

"I'm glad you have asked me, but I won't come. I'm afraid I should only
spoil it. I do spoil things." She smiled at him and looked at the hands
on her knee. "It seems to me that that's what I do best."

He did not know what to say and, having made inarticulate noises in his
throat, he went quickly to the schoolroom.

"Go to Notya, some one, and make her angry. She's being miserable in the
drawing-room. Tell her you've broken something!"

"I won't," Miriam said. "I've had too much of that, and I'm going to
enjoy the unwonted peace. You go, Helen."

"Leave her alone," Rupert advised. "You won't cure Notya's unhappiness
so easily as that."

"When the summer comes--" Helen began, cheerfully deceiving herself, and
John interrupted.

"Summer is here already. It's June next week."

He was married in his own way on the first day of that month, and Miriam
uttered no more regrets. She was comparatively contented with the
present. Mildred Caniper seldom thwarted her, and she knew that every
day George Halkett rode or walked where he might see her, and her memory
of that splendid summer was to be one of sunlight blotted with the
shapes of man and horse moving across the moor. George was not always
successful in his search, for she knew that he would pall as a daily
dish, but on Sundays if Daniel would not be beguiled, and if it was not
worth while to tease Helen through Zebedee, she seldom failed to make
her light secret way to the larch-wood where he waited.

Her excitement, when she felt any, was only sexual because the danger
she sought and the power she wielded were of that kind, and she was
chiefly conscious of light-hearted enjoyment and the new experience of
an understanding with the moor. Secrecy quickened her perceptions and
she found that nature deliberately helped her, but whether for its own
purposes or hers she could not tell. The earth which had once been her
enemy now seemed to be her friend, and where she had seen monotony she
discovered delicate differences of hour and mood. If she needed shelter,
the hollows deepened themselves at her approach, shadows grew darker and
the moor lifted itself to hide her. She seemed to take a friend on all
her journeys, but she was not quite happy in its company. It was a
silent, scheming friend and she was not sure of it; there were times
when she suspected laughter at which she would grow defiant and then,
pretending that she went openly in search of pleasure, she sang and
whistled loudly on her way.

There was an evening when that sound was answered by the noise of hoofs
behind her, the music of a chinking bridle, the creaking of leather and
the hard breathing of a horse. She did not turn as George drew rein
beside her and said "Good-evening," in his half sulky tones. She had her
hands behind her back and she looked at the sky.

"'Sunset and evening star,'" she said solemnly, "'and one clear call for
me.' Do you know those beautiful words, George?"

He did not answer. She could hear him fidgeting with whip and reins, but
she gazed upward still.

"I'm sorry I can't recite the rest. I have forgotten it, but if you will
promise to read it, I'll lend you a copy. On Sunday evenings you ought
to sit at home and improve your mind."

He gave a laugh like a cough. "I don't care about my mind," he said, and
he touched the horse with his heel so that she had to move aside. He saw
warm anger chase the pious expression from her face.

"Ah!" she cried, "that is the kind of thing you do! You're rough! You
make me hate you! Why!" her voice fell from its height, "that's a new
horse!" Her hands were busy on neck and nose. "I like him. What is he
called?"

Halkett was looking at her with an eagerness through which her words
could hardly pierce. She was wonderful to watch, soft as a kitten, swift
as a bird.

"What do you call him, George?" she said again, and tapped his boot.

"'Charlie'--this one."

She laughed. "You choose dull names. Is he as wicked as Daisy?"

"Nothing like."

"Why did you get him, then?"

"I want him for hard work."

"I believe you're lazy. If you don't walk you'll get fat. You're the
kind of man that does."

"Perhaps, but that's a long way off. Riding is hard work enough and my
father was a fine man up to sixty."

A thin shock of fear ran through her at the remembrance of old Halkett's
ruined shape. "I was always frightened of him," she said in a small
voice, and she looked at George as though she asked for reassurance.
There was a cold grey light on the moor; darkness was not far off and it
held a chill wind in leash.

"Do you wish he wasn't dead?" she whispered.

He lifted his shoulders and pursed his mouth. "No," he said.

"Are you lonely in that house?"

"There's Mrs. Biggs, you know," he said with a sneer.

"Yes, I know," she murmured doubtfully, and drew closer.

"So you don't think she's enough for me?"

"Of course I don't. That's why I'm so kind to you. She couldn't be
listening to us, could she? Everything seems to be listening."

"So you're kind to me, are you?"

"Yes," she said, raising her eyebrows and nodding her head, until she
looked like a dark poppy in a wind.

"And when I saw you on the road the other day you wouldn't look at me.
That's the second time."

"I did."

"As if I'd been a sheep."

"Oh!" Laughter bubbled in her. "You did look rather like one. I was
occupied in thinking deeply, seriously, intently--"

"That's no excuse."

"My good George, I shouldn't think of excusing myself to you. I chose to
ignore you and I shall probably ignore you again."

"Two can play at that game."

"Well, dear me, I shan't mind."

He bent in the saddle, and she did not like the polished whiteness of
his eyeballs. His voice was very low and heavy. "You think you can go on
making a mock of me for ever."

She started back. "No, George, no."

"You do, by God!" He lifted his whip to shake it in the face of heaven.

"Oh, don't, George, please! I can't stay"--she crept nearer--"if you go
on like that. What have I done? It's you who treat me badly. Won't you
be nice? Tell me about something." She put her face against the horse's
neck. "Tell me about riding. It must be beautiful in the dark. Isn't it
dangerous? Dare you gallop?"

"Well, we do."

"Such lots of rabbit-holes."

"What does it matter?"

"Oh, dear, you're very cross."

"I can't help it," he said like an unhappy child. "I can't help it." And
he put his hand to his head with an uncertain movement.

"Oh." With a practical air she sought for an impersonal topic. "Tell me
about Paris."

"Paris." There was no need for him to speak above a murmur. "I want to
take you there."

"Do you?"

He leant lower. "Will you come?"

Her eyes moved under his, but they did not turn aside. "I think I'm
going there with some one else," she said softly, and before her vision
of this eager lover there popped a spruce picture of Uncle Alfred.

"That isn't true," Halkett said, but despair was in his voice.

She was angered instantly. "I beg your pardon?"

"It isn't true," he said again.

"Very well," she said, and she began to walk away, but he called after
her vehemently, bitterly, "Because I won't let you go!"

She laughed at that and came back to her place, to say indulgently, "How
silly you are! I'm only going with an aged uncle!"

"But he's not the man to take you there."

"No."

"Come with me now."

"Shall I?"

"Get up beside me and I'll carry you away."

She was held by his trouble, but she spoke lightly. "Could he swim with
us both across the Channel? No, I don't think I want to come tonight.
Some day--"

"When?"

"Oh," she said on a high note, "perhaps when I'm very tired of things."

"You're tired already."

"Not so much as that. And we're talking nonsense, and I must go."

"Not yet."

"I must. It's nearly time for bed, and I'm not sure that it's polite of
you to sit on that horse while I stand here."

"Come up and you'll see how well he goes."

"He wouldn't bear us both."

"Pooh! You're a feather."

"Oh, I couldn't. Wouldn't he jump?"

"He'd better try!"

"Now, don't be cruel to him."

"What do you know about it? I've ridden since I could walk."

"Lucky you!"

"I'll teach you."

"Could you?"

"Give me a chance."

"Here's one! No, no, I didn't mean it," she cried as he dismounted and
lifted her to the saddle. "Oh, I feel so high up. Don't move him till I
get used to it. I'm not safe on this saddle. Put me a little further on,
George. That's further forward! I'm nearly on his neck. No, I don't
think I like it. Take me down."

"Keep still." The words were almost threatening in the gloom. "Sit
steady. I'm coming up."

"No, don't. I shall fall off!"

But already he was behind her, holding her closely with one arm. "There!
He's quiet enough. I couldn't do this with Daisy. And he's sure-footed.
He was bred on the moor." He set the horse trotting gently. "He goes
well, doesn't he?"

"Yes."

"Don't you like it?"

"Ye-es."

"What's the matter?"

"There isn't room enough," she said, and moved her shoulders.

He spoke in her ear. "If I don't hold you, you'll fall off. Here's a
smooth bit coming. Now, lad, show us what you can do and remember what
you're carrying!"

The saddle creaked and the bit jangled and George's arm tightened round
her. Though she did not like his nearness, she leaned closer for safety,
and he and the horse seemed to be one animal, strong and swift and
merciless. Once or twice she gasped, "Please, George, not quite so
fast," but the centaur paid no heed. She shut her eyes because she did
not like to see the darkness sliding under them as they passed, and they
seemed to be galloping into a blackness that was empty and unending. Her
hands clutched the arm that fenced her breasts: her breath came quickly,
exhilaration was mixed with fear, and now she was part of the joint body
that carried her and held her.

She hardly knew when the pace had slackened; she was benumbed with new
sensations, darkness, speed and strength. She had forgotten that this
was a man she leaned against. Then the horse stood still and she felt
Halkett's face near hers, his breath on her cheeks, a new pressure of
his arm and, unable to endure this different nearness, she gave his
binding hand a sharp blow with her knuckles, jerked her head backwards
against his and escaped his grasp; but she had to fall to do it, and
from the ground she heard his chuckle as he looked down at her.

At that moment she would have killed him gladly; she felt her body
soiled by his, but her mind was curiously untouched. It knew no disgust
for his desire nor for her folly, and while she hated him for sitting
there and laughing at her fall, this was still a game she loved and
meant to play. In the heather she sat and glowered at him, but now she
could hardly see his face.

"That was a silly thing to do," she heard him say. "You might easily
have been kicked. What did you do it for?"

She would not own her knowledge of his real offence, and she muttered
angrily, "Galloping like that--"

"Didn't you like it? He's as steady as a rock."

"How could I know that?"

"And I thought you had some pluck."

"I have. I sat quite still."

Again he laughed. "I made you."

"Oh," she burst out. "I'll never trust you again."

"You would if you knew--if you knew--but never mind. I wanted to see you
on a horse. You shall have him to yourself next time. I'll get a side
saddle."

"I don't want one," she said.

"Oh, yes, you do. Let me help you up. Say you forgive me."

With her hand in his she murmured, "But you are always doing something.
And my head aches."

"Does it? I'm sorry. What made it ache?"

"It--I--I bumped myself when I fell."

"Poor little head! It was silly of you, wasn't it? Let me put you on his
back again, and I'll walk you slowly home."

He was faithful to his word, letting her go without a pressure of the
hand, and she crept into the house with the uneasy conviction that Helen
was right, that George wanted the chance he had never had, and her own
responsibility was black over her bed as she tried to sleep. Turning
from side to side and at last sitting up with a jerk, she decided to
evade responsibility by evading George, and with that resolution she
heaved a deep sigh at the prospect of her young life despoiled by duty.


CHAPTER XVI


Zebedee had the lover's gift of finding time which did not exist for
other men, and there were few Sundays when he did not spend some minutes
or some hours on the moor. There were blank days when Helen failed him
because she thought Mildred Caniper was lonely, others when she ran out
for a word and swiftly left him to the memory of her grace and her
transforming smile; yet oftenest, she was waiting for him in the little
hollow of earth, and those hours were the best he had ever known. It was
good to sit and see the sky slowly losing colour and watch the moths
flit out, and though neither he nor she was much given to speech, each
knew that the other was content.

"Helen," he said one night in late September when they were left alone,
"I want to tell you something."

She did not stir, and she answered slowly, softly, in the voice of one
who slept, "Tell it."

"It's about beauty. I'd never seen it till you showed it to me."

"Did I? When?"

"I'm not sure. That night--"

"On the moor?"

"Always on the moor! When you had the basket. It was the first time
after I came back."

"But you couldn't see me in the darkness."

"Yes, a little. You remember you told me to light the lamps. And I could
hear you--your voice running with the wind--And then each day since. I
want to thank you."

"Oh--" She made a little sound of depreciation and happiness.

"Those old Sundays--"

"Ah, yes! The shining pews and the painted stars. This is better."

"Yes, this is better. Heather instead of the sticky pews--"

"And real stars," she murmured.

"And you for priestess."

"No, I'm just a worshipper."

"But you show the way. You give light to them that sit in darkness."

"Ah, don't." There was pain in her voice. "Don't give me things. At
least, don't give me praise. I'm afraid of having things."

"But why, my dear?" The words dropped away into the gathering dusk, and
they both listened to them as they went.

"I'm afraid they will be taken away again."

"Don't have that feeling. It will be hard on those who want to give
you--much."

"I hadn't thought of that," she cried, and started up as though she were
glad to blame him. "And you never tell me anything. Why don't you? Why
don't you tell me about your work? I could have that. There would be no
harm in that."

"Harm? No. May I?"

"Why shouldn't you? They all tell me things. Don't you want somebody to
talk to?"

"I want you, if you care to hear."

"Oh, Zebedee, yes," she said, and sank into her place.

"Helen," he said unsteadily, "I wish you would grow up, and yet, Helen,
what a pity that you should change."

She did not answer; she might have been asleep, and he sat in a
stillness born of his disturbance at her nearness, her pale smooth skin,
her smooth brown hair, the young curves of her body. If he had moved, it
would have been to crush her beautiful, firm mouth, but her youth was a
chain wound round him, and though he was in bonds he seemed to be alive
for the first time. He and Helen were the sole realities. He could see
Miriam's figure, black against the sky as she stood or stooped to pick a
flower, but she had no meaning for him, and the voices of the young men,
not far off, might have been the droning of some late bee. The world was
a cup to hold him and this girl, and over that cup he had a feeling of
mastery and yet of helplessness, and all his past days dwindled to a
streak of drab existence. Life had begun, and it went at such a pace
that he did not know how much of it was already spent when Helen sat up,
and looking at him with drowsy eyes, asked, "What is happening?"

"There was magic abroad. The sun has been going down behind the moor,
and night is coming on. I must be going home."

"Don't go. Yes, it's getting dark. There will be stars soon. I love the
night. Don't go. How low the birds are flying. They are like big moths.
The magic hasn't gone."

Grey-gowned, grey-eyed, white-faced, he thought she was like a moth
herself, fragile and impalpable in the gloom, a moth motionless on a
flower, and when he saw her smile he thought the moth was making ready
for flight.

"I want this to go on for ever," she said. "The moor and the night and
you. You're such a friend--you and the Pinderwells. I don't know how I
should live without you."

"Do you know what you're saying to me?"

"I'm telling you I like you, and it's true. And you like me. It's so
comfortable to know that."

"Comfortable!"

"Isn't it?"

"Comfortable?" he said again. "Oh, my love--" He broke off, and looking
at each other, both fell dumb.

He got to his feet and looked down with an expression which was strange
to her, for into that moment of avowal there had come a fleeting
antagonism towards the woman who, in spite of all her gifts to him, had
taken his possession of himself: yet through his shamed resentment, he
knew that he adored her.

"Zebedee," she said in a broken voice. "Oh, isn't it a funny name!
Zebedee, don't look at me like that."

"How shall I look at you?" he asked, not clearly.

"In the old way. But don't say things." She sprang up. "Not tonight."

"When?" he asked sternly.

"I--don't know. Tonight I feel afraid. It's--too much. I shan't be able
to keep it, Zebedee. It's too good. And we can't get this for nothing."

"I'm willing to pay for it. I want to pay for it, in the pain of parting
from you now, in the work of all my days--" He stopped in his
realization of how little he had to give. "I can't tell you," he added
simply.

"Will it hurt you to leave me tonight?" she whispered.

"Yes."

She touched his sleeve. "I don't like you to be hurt, yet I like that.
Will you come next Sunday?"

"Not if you're afraid. I can't come to see you if you won't let me say
things."

"I'll try not to be afraid; only, only, say them very softly so that
nothing else can hear."

He laughed and caught her hand and kissed it. "I shall do exactly what I
like," he said; but as he strode away without another word he knew from
something in the way she stood and looked at him, something of patience
and resolve, that their future was not in his hands alone.

When he was out of sight and hearing, Helen moved stiffly, as though she
waked from a long sleep and was uncertain where she was. The familiar
light shone in the kitchen of Brent Farm, yet the house seemed unreal
and remote, marooned in the high heather. The heather was thick and rich
that year, and the flowers touched her hands. The smell of honey was
heavy in the air, and thousands of small, pale moths made a
honey-coloured cloud between the purple moor and the night blue of the
sky. If she strained her ears, Helen could hear the singing of Halkett's
stream and it said things she had not heard before. A sound of voices
came from the road and she knew that some faithful Christians of the
moor were returning from their worship in the town: she remembered them
crude and ugly in their Sunday clothes, but they gathered mystery from
distance and the night. Perhaps they came from that chapel where Zebedee
had spent his unhappy hours. She turned and her hands swept the heather
flowers. This was now his praying place, as it had always been hers, and
when the Easter fires came again they would pray to them together.

At the garden door her hand fell from the latch and she faced the moor.
She lifted her arms and dropped them in a kind of pleading for mercy
from those whom she had served faithfully; then she smoothed her face
and went into the house.

In the drawing-room, Mildred Caniper was sitting on the sofa, and near
her John and Lily had disposed themselves like guests.

Helen stopped in the doorway. "Then the light in your house meant
nothing," she said reproachfully.

"What should it mean?" John asked.

"Happiness and peace--somewhere," she said.

"It does mean that," and turning to Lily, he asked, "Doesn't it?"

"Yes, yes, but don't brag about it."

They laughed together, and they sat with an alert tranquillity of
health which made Mildred Caniper look very small and frail. She was
listening courteously to the simple things John told her about animals
and crops and butter-sales, but Helen knew that she was almost too tired
to understand, and she felt trouble sweeping over her own happiness.

To hide that trouble, she asked quickly, "Where are the others?" and an
invisible Rupert answered her.

"You're the last in." He sat outside the window, and as she approached,
he added, "And I hope you have had a happy time."

"Yes." She looked back into the room.

"Daniel wouldn't stay," Rupert went on, smoking his pipe placidly. "If
it hadn't been for my good offices, my dear, he'd have hauled Zebedee
off long ago. He suddenly thought of a plan for getting rid of Eliza.
Why aren't you thanking me?"

"He wouldn't have gone."

"Oh, ho!"

"But they ought to get rid of Eliza. I've told Zebedee."

"Quite right," Rupert said solemnly. His dark eyes twinkled at the
answering stars. "When I have lunch with Daniel, I'm afraid of being
poisoned, though she rather likes me, and she's offensively ugly--ugh!
Yet I like to think that even Eliza has had her little story. Are you
listening, Helen? I'm being pastoral and kind. I'm going to tell you how
Eliza fell in love with a travelling tinker."

"Is it true?"

"As true as anything else."

"Go on."

"It happened when Eliza was quite young, not beautiful, but fresh and
ruddy. She walked out one summer night to meet the farm hand who was
courting her, but he was not at the appointed place, so Eliza walked
on, and she had a sore heart because she thought her lover was
unfaithful. She was walking over high downs with hollows in them and the
grass cropped close by sheep, and there was a breeze blowing the smell
of clover from some field, and suddenly she stood on the edge of a
hollow in which a fire was burning, and by the fire there sat a man. He
looked big as he sat there, but when he stood up he was a giant, in
corduroys, and a check cap over his black eyes. Picturesque beggar. And
the farm hand had deserted her, and there was a smell of burning wood,
and the sky was like a velvet curtain. What would you? Eliza did not go
home that night, nor the next, nor the next. She stayed with the
travelling tinker until he tired of her, and that was very soon. For
him, she was no more than the fly that happened to get into his web, but
for Eliza, the tinker--the tinker was beauty and romance. The tinker was
life. And he sent her back to the ways of virtue permanently soured, yet
proud. Thus, my dear young friend, we see--"

"Don't!" Helen cried. "You're making me sorry for Eliza. I don't want to
be sorry for her. And you're making me like the tinker. He's attractive.
How horrid that he should be attractive." She shuddered and shook her
head. "Your story is too full of firelight--and the night. I'll go and
get supper ready."

"Miriam's doing it. Stay here and I'll tell you some more."

But she slipped past him and reached the kitchen from the garden.

"Rupert has been telling me a story," she said a little breathlessly to
Miriam who was filling a tray with the noisy indifference of a careless
maid-servant.

"Hang the plates! Hang the dishes! What story?"

"It's rather wonderful, I think. It's about the Mackenzies' Eliza."

"Then of course it's wonderful. And hang the knives and forks!" She
threw them on the tray.

"And there's a travelling tinker in it." With her hands at her throat,
she looked into the fire and Miriam looked at her.

"I'll ask him to tell it to me," she said, but very soon she returned to
the kitchen, grumbling. "What nonsense! It's not respectable, and it
isn't even true."

"It's as true as anything else," Helen said.

"Oh, you're mad. And so is Rupert. Let's have supper and go to bed. Why
can't we have a servant to do all this? Why don't we pay for one
ourselves?"

"I don't want one."

"But I do, and my hands are ruined."

"Upstairs in Jane," Helen said, "in the small right-hand drawer of my
chest of drawers, there's the lotion--"

"It's not only my hands! It's my whole life! Your lotion isn't going to
cure my life!" She sat on the edge of a chair and drooped there.

"No," Helen said. "But what's the matter with your life?"

Miriam flapped her hands. "I'm so tired of being good. I want--I want--"

Helen knelt beside her. "Is it Zebedee you want?" Her voice and her body
shook with self-sacrifice and love and when Miriam's head dropped to her
shoulder Helen was willing to give her all she had.

"I'm not crying," Miriam said, after an agitated pause. "I'm not
overcome. I'm only laughing so much that I can't make a sound! Zebedee!
Oh! No! That's very funny." She straightened herself. "Helen dear, did
you think you'd discovered my little secret, my maidenly little secret?
I only want Uncle Alfred to come and take me away. This is a dreadful
family to belong to, but there are humorous moments. It's almost worth
while. John, here's Helen suggesting that I'm in love with Zebedee!"

"Well, why not?" he asked, but he was hardly thinking of what he said.
"I've left Lily on guard in there. Notya has gone to sleep."

"But she can't have," Helen said.

"She has, my child."

"Are you sure she's not--are you sure she is asleep?"

"Like a baby."

"Then we shall have to make a noise and wake her. She would never
forgive us if she found out that we knew, so tell Lily to come out and
then we must all burst in."


CHAPTER XVII


Lily and John went down the track: Mildred Caniper climbed slowly, but
with dignity, up the stairs; Miriam was heard to bang her bedroom door
and Rupert and Helen were left together in the schoolroom.

"I can't get the tinker out of my head," she told him.

"I must have done it very well."

"Miriam didn't like it. She thought it silly."

"So it is."

"No, it's real, so real that he has been sitting in our hollow," she
complained.

"That won't do. Turn him out. He doesn't belong to our moor."

"No. I think I'll go for a walk and forget him."

"I should," he said, in his sympathetic way. "I won't go to bed till you
come back." He pulled his chair nearer to the lamp, opened a book and
contentedly heard Helen leave the house, for though he was fond of her
there were times when her forebodings and her conscience became
wearisome. Let the moor be her confessor tonight!

Helen dropped into the darkness like a swimmer taking deep water quietly
and at once she was immersed in happiness. She forgot her stepmother
sitting so stiffly on the sofa and for a little while she forgot that
the future which held her and Zebedee in its embrace held a solitary
Mildred Caniper less warmly. In the scented night, Helen allowed herself
to taste joy without misgiving.

She walked slowly because she was hemmed in by feelings which were
blissful and undefined: she knew only that the world smelt sweeter than
it had ever done, that the stars shone with amazing brightness. Through
the darkness she could see the splendid curves of the moor and the
shapes of thorn bushes thick with leaves. The familiar friends of other
days seemed to wait upon her happiness, but the stars laughed at her as
they had always done. She looked up and saw a host of them, clear and
distant, shining in a sky so blue and vast that to see it was like
flight. They were secure in their high places, and with the smiling
benignity of gods they assured her of her littleness, and gladly she
accepted that assurance, for she shared her littleness with Zebedee, and
now she understood that her happiness was made of small great things, of
the hope of caring for him, of keeping that shining house in order, of
cradling children in wide, airy rooms. She had a sudden desire to mend
Zebedee's clothes and put them neatly in their places, to feel the
smoothness of his freshly-laundered collars in her hand.

She sat down in the heather and it was her turn to laugh up at the stars
who could do none of these things and lived in isolated grandeur. The
earth was nearer to her finite mind. It was warm with the sunshine of
many days and trodden by human, beloved feet; it offered up food and
drink and consolation. Darker than the sky, it had no colour but its
own, yet Helen sat among pale spikes of blossom.

It was a night when even those beings who could not wander in the
daytime must be content to lie and listen to the silence, when evil must
run from the face of beauty and hide itself in streets. All round her,
Helen fancied shapes without substance, lying in worship of the night
which was their element, and when she rose from her bed at last she
moved with quietness lest she should disturb them.

She had not gone far before she was aware that some one else was walking
on the moor. For a moment she thought it must be Rupert in search of
her, but Rupert would have called out, and this person, while he
rustled through the heather, let forth a low whistled note, and though
he went with care, it was for some purpose of his own and not for
courtesy towards the mystery of the night.

She could not decide from what direction the sounds came; she stopped
and they stopped; then she heard the whistle again, but nearer now, and
with a sudden realization of loneliness and of the womanhood which had
seldom troubled her, she ran with all her strength and speed for home.

Memories ran with her strangely, and brought back that day when she had
been hotly chased by Mrs. Brent's big bull, and she remembered how,
through all his fears for her, Rupert had laughed as though he would
never stop. She laughed in recollection, but more in fear. The bull had
snorted, his hoofs had thundered after her, as these feet were
thundering now.

"But this is the tinker, the tinker!" her mind cried in terror, and
overcome by her quickened breathing, by some sense of the inevitable in
this affair, she stumbled as she ran. She saved herself, but a hand
caught at her wrist and some one uttered a sound of satisfaction.

She did not struggle, but she wondered why God had made woman's strength
so disproportionate to man's, and looking up, she saw that it was George
Halkett who held her. At the same moment he would have loosed her hand,
but she clung to his because she was trembling fiercely.

"Oh, George," she said, "it's you! And I thought it was some one
horrid!"

She could not see him blush. "I'm sorry," he mumbled. She gleamed, in
the starlight, as he had seen pale rocks gleaming on such a night, but
she felt like the warm flesh she was, and the oval of her face was plain
to him; he thought he could see the fear leaving her widely-opened eyes.
"I'm sorry," he said again, and made an awkward movement. "I
thought--I--Wouldn't you like to sit down? There's a stone here."

"It's the one I fell against!" She dropped on to it and laughed. "You
weren't there, were you, years and years ago, when the bull chased me?
That red bull of Mrs. Brent's? He was old and cross. No, of course you
weren't."

"I remember the beast. He had a broken horn."

"Yes. Just a stump. It made him frightful. I dream about him now. And
when you were running after me--"

He broke in with a muffled exclamation and shifted from one foot to the
other like a chidden child. "I'm sorry," he said again, and muttered,
"Fool!" as he bent towards her. "Did you hurt yourself against that
stone? Are you all right? You've only slippers on."

"I've nearly stopped shaking," she said practically. "And it doesn't
matter. You didn't mean to do it. I must go home. Rupert is waiting for
me."

His voice was humble. "I don't believe I've spoken to you since that day
in the hollow."

She remembered that occasion and the curious moment when she felt his
eyes on her, and she was reminded that though he had not been running
after her, he had certainly been running after somebody. She glanced at
him and he looked very tall as he stood there, as tall as the tinker.

"Why don't you sit down?" she asked quickly, and as he did so she added,
on a new thought, "But perhaps I'm keeping you. Perhaps--Don't wait for
me."

"I've nothing else to do," he told her.

"I spoke to you," she said, "the day after your father died."

"I meant alone," he answered.

They sat in silence after that, and for Helen the smell of heather was
the speech of those immaterial ones who lay about her. Some change had
taken place among the stars: they were paler, nearer, as though they had
grown tired of eminence and wanted commerce with the earth. The great
quiet had failed before the encroachment of little sounds as of
burrowing, nocturnal hunting, and the struggles of a breeze that was
always foiled.

"Do you know what time it is?" Helen asked in a small voice.

He held his watch sideways, but he had to strike a match, and its light
drew all the eyes of the moor.

"Quick!" Helen said.

He was not to be hurried. "Not far off midnight."

"And Rupert's waiting! Good-night, George."

"And you've forgiven me?" he asked as they parted at the gate.

"No." She laughed almost as Miriam might have done, and startled him.
"I'll forgive you," she said, "I'll forgive you when you really hurt
me." She gave him her cool hand and, holding it, he half asked, half
told her, "That's a promise."

"Yes. Good-night."

Slowly she walked through the dark hall, hesitated at the schoolroom
door and opened it.

"I've come back," she said, and disappeared before Rupert could reply,
for she was afraid he would make some allusion to the tinker.

It was characteristic of her that, as she undressed, carefully laying
her clothes aside, her concern was for George's moral welfare rather
than for the safety of the person for whom he had mistaken her, and this
was because she happened to know George, had known him nearly all her
life, while the identity of the other was a blank to her, because she
had no peculiar feeling for her sex; men and women were separated or
united only by their claim on her.

Mildred Caniper, whose claim was great, came down to breakfast the next
morning with a return of energy that gladdened Helen and set Miriam
thinking swiftly of all the things she had left undone. But Mildred
Caniper was fair, and where she no longer ruled, she would not
criticize. She condescended, however, to ask one question.

"Who was on the moor last night?"

"Daniel," Helen said.

"Zebedee," said Miriam.

"Zebedee?" she said, pretending not to know to whom that name belonged.

"Dr. Mackenzie."

"Oh."

"The father of James and John," Miriam murmured.

"So he has children?" Mrs. Caniper went on with her superb assumption
that no one joked in conversation with her.

"Oh, I don't think so," Helen said earnestly. "He isn't married! Miriam
meant the gentleman in the Bible."

"I see." Her glance pitied Miriam. "But this was early in the evening.
Some one came in very late. Rupert, perhaps."

"No, it was me," Helen said.

"I," Mildred Caniper corrected.

"Yes. I."

"Did I hear voices?"

"Did you?" Helen returned in another tone and with an innocence that
surprised herself and revealed the deceit latent in the mouth of the
most truthful. It was long since she had been so near a lie and lying
was ugly: it made smudges on the world; but disloyalty was no better,
and though she could not have explained the debt, she felt that she owed
George silence. She had to choose. He had been like a child as he
fumbled over his apologies and she could not but be tender with a
child. Yet only a few seconds earlier she had thought he was the tinker.
Oh, why had Rupert ever told her of the tinker?

"I would rather you did not wander on the moor so late at night,"
Mildred Caniper said.

"But it's the best time of all."

"I would rather you did not."

"Very well. I'll try to remember."

A sign from Miriam drew Helen into the garden.

"Silly of you to come in by the front way. Of course she heard. If the
garden door is locked, you can climb the wall and get on to the scullery
roof. Then there's my window."

Helen measured the distance with her eye. "It's too high up."

"Throw up a shoe and I'll lower a chair for you."

"But--this is horrid," Helen said. "Why should I?"

Miriam's thin shoulders went up and down. "You never know, you never
know," she chanted. "You never know what you may come to."

"Don't!" Helen begged. She leaned against a poplar and looked mournfully
from the window to Miriam's face.

"No," Miriam said, "I've never done it. I only planned it in case of
need. It would be a way of escape, too, if she ever locked me up. She's
capable of that. Helen, I don't like this rejuvenation!"

"Don't," Helen said again.

"I haven't mended the sheets she gave me weeks ago."

"I'll help you with them."

"Good, kind, Christian girl! There's nothing like having a reputation to
keep up. That's why I told you about my secret road."

"You're--vulgar."

"No, I'm human, and very young, and rather beautiful. And quite
intelligent." There came on her face the look which made her seem old
and tired with her own knowledge. "Was it Zebedee last night?"

Heat ran over Helen's body like a living thing.

"You're hateful," she stammered. "As though Zebedee and I--as though
Zebedee and I would meet by stealth!"

"Honestly, I can't see why you shouldn't. Why shouldn't you?"

Helen smoothed her forehead with both hands. "It was the way you said
it," she murmured painfully and then straightened herself. "Of course
nothing Zebedee would do could be anything but good. I beg his pardon."
And in a failing voice, she explained again, "It was the way you said
it."

"I suppose I'm not really a nice person," Miriam replied.


CHAPTER XVIII


During the week that followed, a remembrance of her responsibilities
came back to Helen and when she looked at Mildred Caniper, alternating
between energy and lassitude, the shining house seemed wearily far off,
or, at the best, Notya was in it, bringing her own shadows. Helen had
been too happy, she told herself. She must not be greedy, she must hold
very lightly to her desires lest they should turn and hurt her, yet with
all her heart she wanted to see Zebedee, who was a surety for everything
that was good.

By Rupert he sent letters which delighted her and gave her a sense of
safety by their restraint, and on Sunday another letter was delivered by
Daniel because Zebedee was kept in town by a serious case.

"So there will be no fear of my saying all those things that were ready
on my tongue," he wrote, to tease, perhaps to test her, and she cried
out to herself, "Oh, I'd let him say anything in the whole world if only
he would come!" And she added, on her own broken laughter, "At least, I
think so."

She felt the need to prove her courage, but she also wanted an excuse
fit to offer to the fates, and when she had examined the larder and the
store cupboard she found that the household was in immediate need of
things which must be brought from the town. She laughed at her own
quibble, but it satisfied her and, refusing Miriam's company, she set
off on Monday afternoon.

It was a soft day and the air, moist on her cheek, smelt of damp, black
earth. The moor would be in its gorgeous autumn dress for some months
yet and the distances were cloaked in blue, promising the wayfarer a
heaven which receded with every step.

With a destination of her own, Helen was not daunted. Walking with her
light long stride, she passed the side road leading to Halkett's farm
and remembered how George and Zebedee, seated side by side, something
like figures on a frieze, had swung down that road to tend old Halkett.
Beyond the high fir-wood she came upon the fields where old Halkett had
grown his crops: here and there were the cottages of his hands, with
dahlias and staring children in the gardens, and before long other
houses edged the road and she saw the thronging roofs of the town.

It was Zebedee who chanced to open to her when she knocked and she saw a
grave face change to one of youth as he took her by the wrist to draw
her in.

"Do you always look like that when I'm not here?" she asked anxiously,
quickly, but he did not answer.

"It's you!" he said. "You!"

In the darkness of the passage they could hardly see each other, but he
had not loosed his grasp and with a deft turn of the wrist she thrust
her whole hand into his.

"I was tired of waiting for you," she said. "A whole week! I was afraid
you were never coming back!"

"You know I'd come back to you if I were dead."

"Yes, I know." She leaned towards him and laughed and, wrenching himself
free from the contemplation of her, he led her to his room. There he
shut the door and stood against it.

"I want to look at you. No, I don't think I'd better look at you." He
spoke in his quick usual way. "Come and sit down. Is that chair all
right? And here's a cushion for you, but I don't believe it's clean.
Everything looks dirty now that you are in the room. Helen, are you sure
it's you?"

"Yes. Are you sure you're glad? I want to sit and laugh and laugh, do
all the laughing I've never had. And I want to cry--with loud noises.
Which shall I do? Oh--I can't do either!"

"I've hardly ever seen you in a hat before. You must take it off. No,
let me find the pins. Now you're my Helen again. Sit there. Don't move.
Don't run away. I'm going to tell Eliza about tea."

She heard a murmur in the passage, the jingle of money, the front door
opened and shut and she knew the Eliza had been sent out to buy cakes.

"I had to get rid of her," Zebedee said. "I had to have you to myself."
He knelt before her. "I'm going to take off your gloves. What do you
wear them for? So that I can take them off?"

He did it slowly. Each hand was like a flower unsheathed, and when he
had kissed her fingers and her palms he looked up and saw a face made
tragic by sudden knowledge of passion. Her eyes were dark with it and
her mouth had shaped itself for his.

"Helen--!"

"I know--I know--"

"And there's nothing to say."

"It doesn't matter--doesn't matter--" His head was on her knees and her
hands stroked his hair. He heard her whispering: "What soft hair! It's
like a baby's." She laughed. "So soft! No, no. Stay there. I want to
stroke it."

"But I want to see you. I haven't seen you since I kissed you. And
you're more beautiful. I love you more--" He rose, and would not see the
persuasion of her arms. "Ah, dear, dearest one, forget I love you. You
are too young and too beautiful for me, Desire."

"But I shall soon be old. You don't want to wait until I'm old."

"I don't want to wait at all."

"And I'm twenty, Zebedee."

"Twenty! Well, Heaven bless you for it," he said and swung the hand she
held out to him.

"And this is true," she said.

"It is."

"And I never thought it would be. I was afraid Miriam was loving you."

"But," he said, still swinging, "I was never in any danger of loving
Miriam."

She shook her head. "I couldn't have let her be unhappy."

"And me?"

She gave him an illuminating smile. "You're just myself. It doesn't
matter if one hurts oneself."

"Ah!" He bent her fingers and straightened them. "How small they are. I
could break them--funny things. So you'd marry me to Miriam if she
wanted me. That isn't altogether satisfactory, my dear. To be
you--that's perfect, but treat me more kindly than you treat yourself."

"Just the same--it must be. Swing my hand again. I like it." She went on
in a low voice. "All the time, I've been thinking she would come
between."

"She can't now."

She looked up, troubled, and begged, "Don't say so. Sometimes she's just
like a bat, flying into one's face. Only more lovely, and I can't be
angry with her."

"I could. But let's talk about you and me, how much we love each other,
and how nice we are."

"We do, don't we?"

"We are, aren't we?"

"Oh, how silly!"

"Let's be sillier than any one has ever been before."

"Listen!" Helen said and Zebedee stopped on his way to her.

"It's that woman. Why didn't something run over her? Is my hair
ruffled?"

"Come quickly and let me smooth it. Nice hair."

"Yours is always smooth, but do you know, it curls a little."

"Oh, no."

"It does, really, on the temples. Come and look. No, stay there. She'll
be in soon, confound her."

"We ought to be talking sensibly."

"Can we?"

"I can. Shall I put my hat on?"

"No, no, not for one greater than Eliza. I'm afraid of you in a hat. Now
I'll sit here and you can begin your sensible conversation."

"I'm serious, truly. It's about Notya. She's funny, Zebedee. At night I
can hear her walking about her room and she's hardly ever strict. She
doesn't care. I wish you would make her well."

"Will she let me try?"

"I couldn't ask her that because I pretend not to notice. We all do.
She's like a person who--who can't forget. I--don't know."

"I'm sorry, darling."

"Don't be. I'm always afraid of being sorry or glad because you don't
know what will happen. Father leaving us like that, making her
miserable--it's given you to me." She looked up at him. "The world's
difficult."

"Always; but there are times when it is good. Helen--"

Eliza entered, walking heavily in creaking boots, and when Helen looked
at her, she wondered at the tinker. Eliza was hard-featured: she had not
much hair, and on it a cap hung precariously. Spreading a cloth on a
small table, she went about her business slowly, carrying one thing at a
time and leaving the door open as a protest against Helen's presence.

"Who'll pour?" she asked.

"You can leave the table there."

"They were out of sugar cakes. I got buns."

He looked at them. "If that's the best they can do, they ought to be
ashamed of themselves."

"If you want cakes you should get them in the morning. I've kept the
change to pay the milkman."

With a flourish of the cosy Zebedee turned to Helen as the door was
shut.

"Isn't she dreadful?"

"She wants a new pair of boots."

"And a new face."

"I know she doesn't clean the house properly. How often does she sweep
this carpet? It isn't clean, but I wouldn't mind that if she took care
of you."

"Daniel beat her on the supper question. He thought she'd leave rather
than give in, and he was hopeful, but she saw through that. She stuck."

"Isn't she fond of you?" Helen asked wistfully.

"No, darling, we detest each other. Do I put the milk in first?"

"Bring the table to me and I'll do it. Is she honest?"

"Rigidly. I notice that the dishonest are generally pleasing. No, you
can't have the table. It would hide a lot of you. I want to talk to you,
Helen. Have one of these stale buns. What a meal for you! We've got to
settle this affair."

"But it is settled."

"Eat your bun and listen, and don't be forward."

She laughed at him. "It was forward to come here, wasn't it?"

"It was adorable. But since last Sunday, I have been thinking. What do
you know about life, about men? I'm just the one who has chanced across
your path. It's like stealing you. It isn't fair."

"There's Daniel," she said solemnly. "And the dentist. And your father
when we had measles. And George Halkett--"

"Be serious."

"There's the tinker."

"Who on earth is he?"

"A man Rupert told me about, a made-up man, but he has come alive in my
mind. I wish he hadn't. I might meet him. Once I nearly did, and if I
met him, Zebedee--"

"Darling, I wish you'd listen. Suppose you married me--"

"You want me to marry you?"

"My dear, precious child--"

"I wasn't sure. Go on."

"If you married me, and afterwards you found some one you liked better,
as well you might, what would happen then?"

"I should make the best of you."

"You wouldn't run away?"

"If I went, I should walk, but I shouldn't go. I'm like that. I belong
to people and to places."

"You belong to me."

"Not yet. Not quite. I wish I did, because then I should feel safe, but
now I belong to the one who needs me most. Notya, perhaps."

"And if we were married?"

"Then I should just be yours."

"But we are married."

"No," she said.

"I don't see the distinction."

"But it's there," she said, and once more he felt the iron under her
grace.

"This isn't modern, Helen."

"No, I'm simple."

"And I don't like it." He was grave; the muscles in his cheek were
twitching and the brown flecks in his eyes moved quickly. "Marry me at
once."

"You said I was too young!"

"I say it still." He paced the room. "It's true, but neither your youth
nor anything else shall take you from me, and, oh, my little heart, be
good to me."

"I can't be good enough and I'll marry you when you want me."

"This week?"

She caught his hand and laid her cheek against it. "Oh, I would, I
would, if Notya didn't need me."

"No one," he said, "needs you as I do. We'll be married in the spring."

Her hand and her smile acknowledged what he said while her eyes were
busy on his thin face, his worn, well-brushed clothes, the books and
papers on his desk, the arrangements of the room.

"I don't like any of your furniture," she said suddenly. "And those
ornaments are ugly."

He took them from the mantelpiece and threw them into the waste-paper
basket.

"Anything else? It won't hold the furniture."

"Ah, you're nice," she said, and, going to the window, she looked out on
the garden, where the apple-trees twisted themselves out of a rough
lawn.

"When you marry me," Zebedee said, standing beside her and speaking
quietly, "we'll leave this house to Daniel and Eliza. There's one
outside the town, on the moor road, but set back in a big garden, a
square house. Shall we--shall we go and look at it?"

"Shall we?" she repeated, and they faced each other unsmiling.

"It's an old house, with big square windows, and there's a rising copse
behind it."

"I know," Helen said.

"There's a little stream that falls into the road."

"Does it run inside the garden?"

"That's what I'm not sure about."

"It must."

He put his hand on her shoulder. "We could peep through the windows. Are
you coming?"

"I don't know," she said and there was a fluttering movement in her
throat. "Don't you think it's rather dangerously near the road?"

"We could lock the gate," he said.

She dropped her face into her hands. "No, I can't come. I'm afraid. It's
tempting things to happen."

"It has been empty for a long time," he went on in the same quiet tones.
"I should think we could get it cheap."

She looked up again. "And I shall have a hundred pounds a year. That
would pay the rent and keep the garden tidy."

He turned on her sharply. "Mind, I'm going to buy your clothes!"

"I can make them all," she said serenely. She leaned against him. "We
love each other--and we know so little about each other. I don't even
know how old you are!"

"I'm nearly thirty-one."

"That's rather old. You must know more than I do."

"I expect I do."

A faint line came between her eyebrows. "Perhaps you have been in love
before."

"I have." His lips tightened at the memory.

"Very much in love?"

"Pretty badly."

"Then I hope she's dead!"

"I don't know."

"I can't bear her to be alive. Oh, Zebedee, why didn't you wait for
me?"

"I should have loved you less, child."

"Would you? You never loved her like this?"

"She wasn't you."

In a little while she said, "I don't understand love. Why should we
matter so much to each other? So much that we're afraid? Or do we only
think we do? Perhaps that's it. It can't matter so much as we make out,
because we die and it's all over, and no one cares any more about our
little lives." On a sigh he heard her last words. "We mustn't struggle."

"Struggle?"

"For what we want."

To this he made no answer, but he had a strange feeling that the firm,
fine body he held was something more perishable than glass and might be
broken with a word.

He took her to the moor, but when they passed the empty house she would
not look at it.

"The stream does run through the garden," he said. "We could sail boats
on it." And he added thoughtfully, "We should have to dam it up
somewhere to make a harbour."


CHAPTER XIX


Disease fell heavily on the town that autumn and Zebedee and Helen had
to snatch their meetings hurriedly on the moor. She found that Miriam
was right and she had no difficulty and no shame in running out into the
darkness for a clasp of hands, a few words, a shadowy glimpse of Zebedee
by the light of the carriage lamps, while the old horse stood patiently
between the shafts and breathed visibly against the frosty night. Over
the sodden or frozen ground, the peat squelching or the heather stalks
snapping under her feet, she would make her way to that place where she
hoped to find her lover with his quick words and his scarce caresses
and, returning with the wind of the moor on her and eyes wide with
wonder and the night, she would get a paternal smile from Rupert and a
gibing word from Miriam, and be almost unaware of both. For weeks, her
days were only preludes to the short perfection of his presence and her
nights were filled with happy dreams: the eyes which had once been so
watchful over Mildred Caniper were now turned inwards or levelled on the
road; she went under a spell which shut out fear.

In December she was brought back to a normal world by the illness of
Mildred Caniper. One morning, without a word of explanation or
complaint, she went back to her bed, and Helen found her there, lying
inert and staring at the ceiling. She had not taken down her hair and
under the crown of it her face looked small and pinched, her eyes were
like blue pools threatening to over-run their banks.

"Is your head aching?" Helen said.

"I--don't think so."

"What is it, then?"

"I was afraid I could not--go on," she said carefully. "I was afraid of
doing something silly and I was giddy."

"Are you better now?"

"Yes. I want to rest."

"Try to sleep."

"It isn't sleep I want. It's rest, rest."

Helen went away, but before long she came back with a dark curtain to
shroud the window.

"No, no! I want light, not shadows," Mildred cried in a shrill voice. "A
dark room--" Her voice fell away in the track of her troubled memories,
and when she spoke again it was in her ordinary tones. "I beg your
pardon, Helen. You startled me. I think I must have dozed and dreamed."

"And you won't have the curtain?"

"No. Let there be light." She lay there helpless, while thoughts preyed
on her, as vultures might prey on something moribund.

At dinner-time she refused to help herself to food, though she ate if
Helen fed her. "The spoon is heavy," she complained.

Miriam was white and nervous. "She ought to have Zebedee," she said.
"She looks funny. She frightens me."

"We could wait until tomorrow," Helen said. "He is so busy and I don't
want to bring him up for nothing. He's being overworked."

"But for Notya!" Miriam exclaimed. "And don't you want to see him?" She
could not keep still. "I can't bear people to be ill. He ought to come."

"Go and ask John."

"What does he know about it?" she whispered. "I keep thinking perhaps
she will go mad."

"That's silly."

"It isn't. She looks--queer. If she does, I shall run away. I'm going to
George. He'll drive into the town. You mustn't sacrifice Notya to
Zebedee, you know."

Helen let out an ugly, scornful sound that angered Miriam.

"Old sheep!" she said, and Helen had to spare a smile, but she was
thoughtful.

"Perhaps John would go."

"But why not George?"

"We're always asking favours."

"Pooh! He likes them and I don't mind asking."

"Well, then, it would be rather a relief. I don't know what to do with
her."

The sense of responsibility towards George which had once kept Miriam
awake had also kept her from him in a great effort of self-denial, and
it was many days since she had done more than wave a greeting or give
him a few light words.

"I believe I've offended you," he had told her not long ago, but she
assured him that it was not so.

"Then I can't make you out," he muttered.

She shut her eyes and showed him her long lashes. "No, I'm a mystery.
Think about me, George." And before he had time to utter his genuine,
clumsy speech, she ran away.

"But I can't avoid temptation much longer," she told herself. "Life's
too dull."

And now this illness which alarmed her was like a door opening slowly.

"And it's the hand of God that left it ajar," she said as she sped
across the moor.

Her steps slackened as she neared the larch-wood, for she had not
ventured into it since the night of old Halkett's death; but it was
possible that George would be working in the yard and, tiptoeing down
the soft path, she issued on the cobble-stones.

George was not there, nor could she hear him, and she was constrained to
knock on the closed door, but the face of Mrs. Biggs, who appeared
after a stealthy pause, was not encouraging to the visitor. She looked
at Miriam and her thin lips parted and joined again without speech.

"I want Mr. Halkett," Miriam said, straightening herself and speaking
haughtily because she guessed that Mrs. Biggs was suspicious of her
friendliness with George.

"He's out. You'll have to wait," she said and shut the door.

A cold wind was swooping into the hollow, but Miriam was hot with a
gathering anger that rushed into words as Halkett appeared.

"George!" She ran to him. "I hate that woman. I always did. I wish you
wouldn't keep her. Oh, I hate her!"

"But you didn't come here to tell me that," he said. In her haste she
had allowed him to take her hand and the touch of her softened his
resentment at her neglect; amusement narrowed his eyes until she could
not see their blue.

"She's horrid, she's rude; she left me on the step. I didn't want to go
in, but she oughtn't to have left me standing there."

"She ought not. I'll tell her."

"Dare you?"

"Dare I!" he repeated boastfully.

"But you mustn't! Don't, George, please don't. Promise you won't.
Promise, George."

"All right."

"Thank you." She drew her hand away.

"The fact is, she's always pretty hard on you."

Miriam's flame went out. "You don't mean," she said coldly, "that you
discuss me with her?"

"No, I do not."

"You swear you never have?"

He had a pleasing and indulgent smile. "Yes, I swear it, but she
dislikes the whole lot of you, and you can't always stop a woman's
talk."

"You should be able to," she said. She wished she had not come for
George did not realize what was due to her. She would go to John and she
nodded a cold good-bye.

Her hands were in the pockets of her brown woollen coat, her shoulders
were lifted towards her ears; she was less beautiful than he had ever
seen her, yet in her kindest moments she had not seemed so near to him.
He was elated by this discovery; he did not seek its cause and, had he
done so, he was not acute enough to see that hitherto the feelings she
had shown him had been chiefly feigned, and that this real resentment,
marking her face with petulance, revealed her nature to be common with
his own.

"But you've not told me what you came for," he said.

She was reluctant, but she spoke. "To ask you to do something for us."

"You know I'll do it."

Still sulky, she took a few steps and leaned against the house wall; she
had the look of a boy caught in a fault.

"We want the doctor."

"Who's ill?"

"It's Notya."

"What's the matter?"

"I don't know." She forgot her grievance. "I don't like thinking of it.
It makes me sick."

"Is she very bad?"

"No, but I think he ought to come."

"Must I bring him back?"

"Just leave a message, please, if it doesn't put you out."

In the pause before he spoke, he studied the dark head against the
white-washed wall, the slim body, the little feet crossed on the
cobbles, and then he stammered:

"You--you're like a rose-tree growing up."

She spread her arms and turned and drooped her head to encourage the
resemblance. "Like that?"

He nodded, with the clumsiness of his emotions. "Look here--"

"Now, don't be tiresome. Oh, you can tell me what you were going to
say."

"All these weeks--"

"I know, but it was for your sake, George."

"How?"

"It's difficult to explain, but one night my good angel bent over my
bed, like a mother--or was it your good angel?"

He grinned. "I don't believe you'd know one if you saw one."

"I'm afraid I shouldn't," she admitted, with a laugh. "Would you?"

"I fancy I've seen one."

"Mrs. Biggs?" she dared. "Me?"

"I'm not going to tell you."

"I expect it's me. But run away and bring the doctor."

"I say--will you wait till I get back?"

"I couldn't. Think of Mrs. Biggs!"

"Not here. Up in the wood. But never mind. Come and see me saddle the
little mare."

She liked the smell of the long, dim stable, the sound of the horses
moving in their stalls, the regular crunching as they ate their hay.
Years ago, she had been in this place with John and Rupert and she had
forgotten nothing. There were the corn-bins under the windows and the
pieces of old harness still hanging on big nails; above, there was the
loft that looked as vast as ever in the shadowy gloom, and again it
invited her ascent by the iron steps between the stalls.

From the harness-room Halkett fetched a saddle, and as he put it on the
mare's back, he said, "Come and say how d'you do to her."

"It's Daisy. She'll go fast. Isn't she beautiful! She's rubbing her nose
on me. I wish I could ride her."

"She might let you--for half a minute. Charlie's the boy for you. Come
and see what's in the harness-room."

"Not now. There isn't time."

"Wait for me then." There was pleading in his voice. "Wait in the wood.
I've something to show you. Will you do that for me?"

He was standing close to her, and she did not look up. "I ought to go
back, but I don't want to. I don't like ill people. They sicken me."

"Don't go, then."

Now she looked at him in search of the assurance she wanted. "I needn't,
need I? Helen can manage, can't she?"

He forgot to answer because she was like a flower suddenly brought to
life in Daisy's stall, a flower for grace and beauty, but a woman for
something that made him deaf to what she said.

"She can manage, can't she?"

"Of course." He snatched an armful of hay from a rack and led her to the
larch trees and there he scraped together the fallen needles and laid
the hay on them to make a bed for her.

"Rest there. Go to sleep and I'll be back before you wake."

She lay curled on her side until all sounds of him had passed and then
she rolled on to her back and drew up her knees. It was dark and warm in
the little wood; the straight trunks of the larches were as menacing as
spears and the sky looked like a great banner tattered by their points.
Though she lay still, she seemed to be marching with a host, and the
light wind in the trees was the music of its going, the riven banner was
a trophy carried proudly and, at a little distance, the rushing of the
brook was the sound of feet following behind. For a long time she went
with that triumphant army, but at length there came other sounds that
forced themselves on her hearing and changed her from a gallant soldier
to a girl half frightened in a wood.

She sat up and listened to the galloping of a horse and a voice singing
in gay snatches. The sounds rose and sank and died away and came forth
lustily again, and in the singing there was something full-blooded and
urgent, as though the singer came from some danger joyfully escaped or
hurried to some tryst. She stood up and, holding to a tree, she leaned
sideways to listen. She heard Halkett speaking jovially to the mare as
he pulled her up on the cobbles and gave her a parting smack of his open
hand: then there began a sweet whistling invaded by other sounds, by
Daisy's stamping in her stall, a corn-bin opened and shut, and Halkett's
footsteps in the yard. Soon they were lost in the softness of the larch
needles, but the whistling warned her of his coming and alarmed her with
its pulsing lilt, and as she moved away and tried to make no noise, a
dry branch snapped under her feet.

"Where are you?" he called out.

"Here," she answered, and awaited him. She could see the light gleaming
in his eyes.

"Were you running off?"

"I didn't run."

He wound his arm about a tree and said, "We came at a pace, the mare and
I."

