"Not on my part," said I; "but call I must, for I solemnly promised"
and presented the miniature to Don Ricardo.

Campana looked at it.  It was exquisitely finished, and represented a
most beautiful girl, a dark, large--eyed, sparkling, Spanish beauty.
"Oh, my dear, dear child," murmured Don Ricardo, "how like this was to
what you were; how changed you are now from what it is--alas! alas!  But
come, gentlemen, my wife is ready, and my two nieces," the pretty girls
who were of our party the previous evening--"and here are the horses."

At this moment the little midshipman, Master Reefpoint, a great
favourite of mine, by the by, reappeared, with Tailtackle behind him,
carrying my bundle.  I was regularly caught, as the clothes, on the
chance of a lark, had been brought from the ship, although stowed out of
sight under the stern--sheets of the boat.

"Here are your clothes, Mr Cringle," quoth middy.

"Devil confound your civility," internally murmured I.

The captain twigged, and smiled.  Upon which little Reefy stole up to me
"Lord, Mr Cringle, could you but get me leave to go, it would be such
a"

"Hold your tongue, boy, how can I"

Transom struck in--"Master Reefpoint, I see what you are driving at; but
how shall the Firebrand be taken care of when you are away, eh? besides,
you have no clothes, and we shall be away a couple of days most
probably."

"Oh, yes, sir, I have clothes; I have a hair--brush and a tooth--brush,
and two shirt collars, in my waistcoat pocket."

"Very well, can we venture to lumber our kind friends with this giant,
Mr Cringle, and can we really leave the ship without him?" Little Reefy
was now all alive.  "Tailtackle, go on board--say we shall be back to
dinner the day after tomorrow," said the Captain.

We now made ready for the start, and certainly the cavalcade was rather
a remarkable one.  First, there was an old lumbering family volante, a
sort of gig, with four posts or uprights supporting a canopy covered
with leather, and with a high dash--iron or splashboard in front.  There
were curtains depending from this canopy, which on occasion could be let
down, so as to cover in the sides and front.  The whole was of the most
clumsy workmanship that can be imagined, and hung by untanned leather
straps in a square wooden frame, from the front of which again protruded
two shafts, straight as Corinthian pillars, and equally substantial,
embracing an uncommonly fine mule, one of the largest and handsomest of
the species which I had seen.  The harnessing partook of the same kind
of unwieldy strength and solidity, and was richly embossed with silver
and dirt.  Astride on this mulo sat a household negro, with a huge thong
of bullock's hide in one hand, and the reins in the other.  In this
voiture were ensconced La Senora Campana, a portly concern, as already
mentioned, two of her bright black--eyed laughing nieces, and Master
Reefpoint, invisible as he lay smothered amongst the ladies, all to his
little glazed cocked hat, and jabbering away in a most unintelligible
fashion, so far as the young ladies, and eke the old one, were
concerned.  However, they appeared all mightily tickled by little Reefy,
either mentally or physically, for off they trundled, laughing and
skirting loud above the noise and creaking of the volante.  Then came
three small, ambling, stoutish long--tailed ponies, the biggest not
above fourteen hands high; these were the barbs intended for mine host,
the skipper, and myself, caparisoned with high demipique old--fashioned
Spanish saddles, mounted with silver stirrups, and clumsy bridles, with
a ton of rusty iron in each poor brute's mouth for a bit, and curbs like
a piece of our chain cable, all very rich, and, as before mentioned with
regard to the volante, far from clean.  Their pace was a fast run, a
compound of walk, trot, and canter, or rather of a trot and a canter,
the latter broken down and frittered away through the instrumentality of
a ferocious Mameluke bit, but as easy as an armchair; and this was, I
speak it feelingly, a great convenience, as a sailor is not a Centaur,
not altogether of a piece with his horse, as it were; yet both Captain
Transom and myself were rather goodish horsemen for nauticals, although
rather apt to go over the bows upon broaching--to suddenly.  Don
Ricardo's costume would have been thought a little out of the way in
Leicestershire; most people put on their boots "when they do a riding
go,' but he chose to mount in shoes and white cotton stockings, and
white jean small--clothes, with a flowing yellow--striped gingham coat,
the skirts of which fluttered in the breeze behind him, his withered
face shaded by a huge Panama hat, and--with enormous silver spurs on his
heels, the rowels two inches in diameter.

Away lumbered the volante, and away we pranced after it.  For the first
two miles the scenery was tame enough; but after that, the gently
swelling eminences on each side of the road rose abruptly into rugged
mountains; and the dell between them, which had hitherto been verdant
with waving guinea grass, became covered with large trees, under the
dark shade of which we lost sight of the sun, and the contrast made
every thing around us for a time almost undistinguishable.  The forest
continued to overshadow the high--road for two miles further, only
broken by a small cleared patch now and then, where the sharp--spiked
limestone rocks shot up like minarets, and the fire scathed stumps of
the felled trees stood out amongst the rotten earth in the crevices,
from which, however, sprang yams and cocoas, and peas of all kinds, and
granadillos, and a profusion of herbs and roots, with the greatest
luxuriance.

At length we came suddenly upon a cleared space; a most beautiful spot
of ground, where, in the centre of a green plot of velvet grass,
intersected with numberless small walks, gravelled from a neighbouring
rivulet, stood a large one--story wooden edifice, built in the form of a
square, with a court--yard in the centre.  From the moistness of the
atmosphere, the outside of the unpainted weatherboarding had a green
damp appearance, and so far as the house itself was concerned, there was
an air of great discomfort about the place.  A large open balcony ran
round the whole house on the outside; and fronting us there was a clumsy
wooden porch supported on pillars, with the open door yawning behind it.

The hills on both sides were cleared, and planted with most luxuriant
coffee--bushes, and provision grounds, while the house was shaded by
several splendid star--apple and kennip--trees, and there was a border
of rich flowering shrubs surrounding it on all sides.  The hand of woman
had been there!

A few half--naked negroes were lounging about, and on hearing our
approach they immediately came up and stared wildly at us.

"All fresh from the ship these," quoth Bang.

"Can't be," said Transom.  "Try and see."

I spoke some of the commonest Spanish expressions to them, but they
neither understood them, nor could they answer me.  But Bang was more
successful in Eboe and Mandingo, both of which he spoke fluently
accomplishments which I ought to have expected, by the by, when I
declared he was little skilled in any tongue but English.

Large herds of cattle were grazing on the skirts of the wood, and about
one hundred mules were scrambling and picking their food in a rocky
river--course which bisected the valley.  The hills, tree--covered, rose
around this solitary residence in all directions, as if it had been
situated in the bottom of a punch--bowl; while a small waterfall, about
thirty feet high, fell so near one of the corners of the building, that
when the wind set that way, as I afterwards found, the spray moistened
my hair through the open window in my sleeping apartment.  We proceeded
to the door and dismounted, following the example of our host, and
proceeded to help the gentlewomen to alight from the volante.  When we
were all accounted for in the porch, Don Ricardo began to shout,
"Criados, criados, ven aca--pendejos, ven aca!" the call was for some
time unattended to; at length, two tall, good--looking, decently--
dressed negroes made their appearance, and took charge of our bestias
and carriage; but all this time there was no appearance by any living
creature belonging to the family.

The dark hall, into which the porch opened was paved with the usual
diamond--shaped bricks or tiles, but was not ceiled, the rafters of the
roof being exposed; there was little or no furniture in it, that we
could see, except a clumsy table in the centre of the room, and one or
two of the leather--backed reclining chairs, such as Whiffle used to
patronize.  Several doors opened from this comfortless saloon, which was
innocent of paint, into other apartments, one of which was ajar.

"Estrailo," murmured Don Ricardo, "muy estrailo!"

"Coolish reception this, Tom." quoth Aaron Bang.

"Deucedly so," said the skipper.

But Campana, hooking his little fat wife under his arm, while we did the
agreeable to the nieces, now addressed himself to enter, with the
constant preliminary ejaculation of all well--bred Spaniards in crossing
a friend's threshold, "Ave Maria purissima," when we were checked by a
loud tearing fit of coughing, which seemed almost to suffocate the
patient, and female voices in great alarm, proceeding from the room
beyond.

Presently a little anatomy of a man presented himself at the door of the
apartment, wringing his hands, and apparently in great misery.  Campana
and his wife, with all the alacrity of kind hearted people, immediately
went up to him, and said something which I did not overhear, but the
poor creature to whom they spoke appeared quite bewildered.  "What is
it, Don Picador?" at length we could hear Campana say,--"what is it?  Is
it my poor dear Maria who is worse, or what--speak, man--may my wife
enter?"

"Si, si--yes, yes," said the afflicted Don Picador--"yes, yes, let her
go in--send--for I am unable to think or act--send one of my people back
post to Santiago for the doctor--haste, haste.  Sangre--hecha sangre por
la boca."

"Good God, why did you not say so before?" rejoined Campana.

Here his wife called loudly to her husband, "Ricardo, Ricardo, por amor
de su alma, manda por el medico, she has burst a blood vessel Maria is
dying!"

"Let me mount myself; I will go myself."--And the excellent man rushed
for the door, when the poor heart--broken Picador clung to his knees.

"No, no, don't leave me.  Send some one else"

"Take care, man, let me go"

Transom and I volunteered in a breath--"No, no, I will go myself,"
continued Don Ricardo; "let go, man--God help me, the old creature is
crazed,--el viejo no vale."

"Here, here! help, Don Ricardo!" cried his wife.

Off started Transom for the doctor, and into the room rushed Don Picador
and Campana, and, from the sounds in the sick--chamber, all seemed
bustle and confusion; at length the former appeared to be endeavouring
to lift the poor sufferer, so as to enable her to sit up in bed; in the
meantime her coughing had gradually abated into a low suffocating
convulsive gasp.

"So, so, Ii ft her up, man,' we could hear Campana say; 'lift her up
quick--or she will be suffocated."

At length, in a moment of great irritation, excited on the one hand by
his intense interest in the poor suffering girl, and anger at the
peevish, helpless Don Picador, Don Ricardo, to our unutterable surprise,
rapped out, in gude broad Scotch, as he brushed away Senor Cangrejo from
the bedside with a violence that spun him out of the door--"God--the
auld doited deevil is as fusionless as a docken."

My jaw dropped--I was thunderstruck--Bang's eye met mine "Murder!" quoth
Bang, so soon as his astonishment let him collect breath enough, "and
here I have been for two whole days practising Spanish, to my great
improvement no doubt, upon a Scotchman how Edified he must have been!"

"But the docken, man," said I--"fusionless as a docken--how classic!
what an exclamation to proceed from the mouth of a solemn Don!"

"No gibes regarding the docken," promptly chimed in Bang; "it is a
highly respectable vegetable, let me tell you, and useful on occasion,
which is more."

The noise in the room ceased, and presently Campana joined us.  "We must
proceed," said he, "it will never do for you to deliver the jewels now,
Mr Cringle; she is too much excited already, even from seeing me."

But it was more easy to determine on proceeding than to put it in
execution, for a heavy cloud, that had been overhanging the small valley
the whole morning, had by this time spread out and covered the entire
face of nature like a sable pall; the birds of the air flew low, and
seemed perfectly gorged with the superabundance of flies, which were
thickly betaking themselves for shelter under the evergreen leaves of
the bushes.  All the winged creation, great and small, were fast
hastening to the cover of the leaves and branches of the trees.  The
cattle were speeding to the hollows under the impending rocks; negroes,
men, women, and children, were hurrying with their hoes on their
shoulders past the windows to their huts.  Several large bloodhounds had
ventured into the hall, and were crouching with a low whine at our feet.
The huge carrion crows were the only living things which seemed to brave
the approaching chubasco, and were soaring high up in the heavens,
appearing to touch the black agitated fringe of the lowering
thunderclouds.  All other kinds of winged creatures, parrots, and
pigeons, and cranes, had vanished by this time under the thickest trees,
and into the deepest coverts, and the wild--ducks were shooting past in
long lines, piercing the thick air with outstretched neck and clanging
wing.

Suddenly the wind fell, and the sound of the waterfall increased, and
grew rough and loud, and the undefinable rushing noise that precedes a
heavy fall of rain in the tropics, the voice of the wilderness, moaned
through the high woods, until at length the clouds sank upon the valley
in boiling mists, rolling halfway down the surrounding hills; and the
water of the stream, whose scanty rill but an instant before hissed over
the precipice, in a small transparent ribbon of clear glass--green,
sprinkled with white foam, and then threaded its way round the large
rocks in its capacious channel, like a silver eel twisting through a dry
desert, now changed in a moment to a dark turgid chocolate colour; and
even as we stood and looked, lo! a column of water from the mountains
pitched in thunder over the face of the precipice, making the earth
tremble, and driving up from the rugged face of the everlasting rocks in
smoke, and forcing the air into eddies and sudden blasts which tossed
the branches of the trees that overhung it, as they were dimly seen
through clouds of drizzle, as if they had been shaken by a tempest,
although there was not a breath stirring elsewhere out of heaven; while
little wavering spiral wreaths of mist rose up thick from the surface of
the boiling pool at the bottom of the cataract, like miniature water
spouts, until they were dispersed by the agitation of the air above.

At length the swollen torrent rolled roaring down the narrow valley,
filling the whole water--course, about fifty yards wide, and advancing
with a solid front a fathom high--a fathom deep does not convey the idea
like a stream of lava, or as one may conceive of the Red Sea, when, at
the stretching forth of the hand of the prophet of the Lord, its mighty
waters rolled back and stood heaped up as a wall to the host of Israel.
The channel of the stream, which but a minute before I could have leaped
across, was the next instant filled, and utterly impassable.

"You can't possibly move," said Don Picador; "you can neither go on nor
retreat; you must stay until the river subsides." And the rain now began
pattering in large drops, like scattering shots preceding an engagement,
on the wooden shingles with which the house was roofed, gradually
increasing to a loud rushing noise, which, as the rooms were not ceiled,
prevented a word being heard.

Don Ricardo began to fret and fidget most awfully,--"Beginning of the
seasons--why, we may not get away for a week and all the ships will be
kept back in their loading."

All this time, the poor sufferer's tearing cough was heard in the lulls
of the rain; but it gradually became less and less severe, and tile lady
of the house, and Senora Campana, and Don Picador's daughter, at length
slid into the room on tiptoe, leaving one of Don Ricardo's nieces in the
room with the sick person.

"She is asleep--hush." The weather continued as bad as ever, and we
passed a very comfortless forenoon of it, Picador, Campana, Bang, and
myself, perambulating the large dark hall, while the ladies were
clustered together in a corner with their work.  At length the weather
cleared, and I could get a glimpse of mine hostess and her fair
daughter.  The former was a very handsome woman, about forty; she was
tall, and finely formed; her ample figure set off by the very simple,
yet, to my taste, very elegant dress formerly described: it was neither
more nor less than the plain black silk petticoat over a chemise, made
full at the bosom, with a great quantity of lace frills; her dark glossy
hair was gathered on the crown of her head in one long braid, twisted
round and round, and rising up like a small turret.  Over all she wore a
loose shawl of yellow silk crape.  But the daughter, I never shall
forget her!  Tall and full, and magnificently shaped--every motion was
instinct with grace.  Her beautiful black hair hung a yard down her
back, long and glossy, in three distinct braids, while it was shaded,
Madonna--like, off her high and commanding forehead; her eyebrows--to
use little Reefy's simile--looked as if cut out of a mouse's skin; and
her eyes themselves, large, dark, and soft, yet brilliant and sparkling
at the same time, however contradictory this may, read; her nose was
straight, and her cheeks firm and oval, and her mouth, her full lips,
her ivory teeth, her neck and bosom, were perfect, the latter if any
giving promise of too matronly a womanhood; but at the time I saw her,
nothing could have been more beautiful; and, above all, there was an
inexpressible charm in the clear transparent darkness of her colourless
skin, into which you thought you could look; her shoulders, and the
upper part of her arms, were peculiarly beautiful.  Nothing is so
exquisitely lovely as the upper part of a beautiful woman's arm, and yet
we have lived to see this admirable feature shrouded and lost in those
abominable gigots.--Why won't you, Master Kit North, lend a hand, and
originate a crusade against those vile appendages?  I will lead into
action if you like--"Woe unto the women that sew pillows to all
armholes," Ezekiel, xiii. I8.  May I venture on such a quotation in such
a place?--She was extremely like her brother; and her fine face was
overspread with the pale cast of thought a settled melancholy, like the
shadow of a cloud in a calm day on a summer landscape, mantled over her
fine features; and although she moved with the air of a princess, and
was possessed of that natural politeness which far surpasses all
artificial polish, yet the heaviness of her heart was apparent in every
motion, as well as in all she said.

Many people labour under an unaccountable delusion, imagining, in their
hallucination, that a Frenchwoman, for instance, or even an Englishwoman
nay, some in their madness have been heard to say that a Scotchwoman
has been known to walk.  Egregious errors all!  An Irishwoman of the
true Milesian descent can walk a step or two sometimes, but all other
women, fair or brown, short or tall, stout or thin, only stump, shuffle,
jig, or amble--none but a Spaniard can walk.

Once or twice she tried to enter into conversation with me on
indifferent subjects; but there was a constant tendency to approach
(against her own prearranged determination) the one, all--absorbing one,
the fate of her poor brother.  "Oh, had you but known him, Mr Cringle
had you but known him in his boyhood, before bad company had corrupted
him!" exclaimed she, after having asked me if he died penitent and she
turned away and wept. "Francisca," said a low hoarse female voice from
the other room; "Francisca, ven aca, mi querida hermana." The sweet girl
rose, and sped across the floor with the grace of Taglioni, (oh, the
legs Taglionis! as poor dear Bang would have ventured to have said, if
the sylphide had then been known,) and presently returning, whispered
something to her mother, who rose and drew Don Picador aside.  The
waspish old man shook himself clear of his wife, as he said with
indecent asperity--"No, no, she will but make a fool of herself."

His wife drew herself up.

"She never made a fool of herself, Don Picador, but once; and God
forgive those who were the cause of it.  It is not kind of you, it is
not kind."

"Well, well," rejoined the querulous old man, "do as you will, do as you
will,--always crossing me, always crossing."

His wife took no farther notice, but stepped across the room to me,
"Our poor dying Maria knows you are here; and probably you are not aware
that he wrote to her after his"--her voice quavered after his
condemnation, the night before he suffered, that you were the only one
who shewed him kindness; and she has also read the newspapers giving an
account of the trial.  She wishes to see you will you pleasure her?
Senora Campana has made her acquainted that you are the bearer of some
trinkets belonging to him, from which she infers you witnessed his last
moments, as one of them, she was told, was her picture, poor dear girl;
and she knew that must have grown to his heart till the last.  But it
will be too agitating. I will try and dissuade her from the interview
until the doctor comes, at all events.'

The worthy lady stepped again into Maria's apartment, and I could not
avoid hearing what passed.

"My dear Maria, Mr Cringle has no objection to wait on you; but after
your severe attack this morning, I don't think it will be wise.  Delay
it until Dr Bergara comes--at any rate, until the evening, Maria."

"Mother," she said, in a weak, plaintive voice, although husky from the
phlegm which was fast coagulating in her throat--"Mother, I already have
ceased to be of this world; I am dying, dearest mother, fast dying; and
oh, thou All--good and AR--merciful Being, against whom I have fearfully
sinned, would that the last struggle were now o'er, and that my weary
spirit were released, and my shame hidden in the silent tomb, and my
sufferings and very name forgotten!" She paused and gasped for breath; I
thought it was all over with her; but she rallied again and proceeded
"Tune is rapidly ebbing from me, dearest mother,--for mother I must call
you, more than a mother have you been to me--and the ocean of eternity
is opening to my view.  If I am to see him at all, I must see him now; I
shall be more agitated by the expectation of the interview than by
seeing him at once.  Oh! let me see him now, let me look on one who
witnessed his last moments."

I could see Senora Cangrejo where she stood.  She crossed her hands on
her bosom, and looked up towards heaven, and then turned mournfully
towards me, and beckoned me to approach.  I entered the small room,
which had been fitted up by the poor girl with some taste; the furniture
was better than any I had seen in a Spanish house before, and there was
a mat on the floor, and some exquisite miniatures and small landscapes
on the walls.  It was her boudoir, opening apparently into a bedroom
beyond.  It was lighted by a large open unglazed window, with a row of
wooden balustrades beyond it, forming part of a small balcony.  A
Carmelite friar, a venerable old man, with the hot tears fast falling
from his old eyes over his wrinkled cheeks, whom I presently found to be
the excellent Padre Carera, sat in a large chair by the bedside, with a
silver cup in his hand, beside which lay a large crucifix of the same
metal; he had just administered extreme unction, and the viaticum, he
fondly hoped, would prove a passport for his dear child to another and a
better world.  As I entered he rose, held out his hand to me, and moved
round to the bottom of the bed.

The shutters had been opened, and, with a suddenness which no one can
comprehend who has not lived in these climates, the sun now shone
brightly on the flowers and garden plants which grew in a range of pots
on the balcony, and lighted up the pale features of a lovely girl,
lovely even in the jaws of death, as she lay with her face towards the
light, supported in a reclining position on cushions, on a red morocco
mattrass, laid on a sort of frame or bed.

"Light was her form, and darkly delicate, that brow, whereon her native
sun had sat, but had not marr'd."

She was tall, so far as I could judge, but oh, how attenuated!  Her
lower limbs absolutely made no impression on the mattrass, to which her
frame appeared to cling, giving a ghastly conspicuousness to the
oedematoust swelling of her feet, and to her person, for, alas! She was
in a way to have become a mother.

The offspring of his wayward youth,
When he betrayed Bianca's truth;
The maid whose folly could confide
In him, who made her not his bride.

Her hand, grasping her pocket--handkerchief, drenched, alas, with blood,
hung over the side of the bed, thin and pale, with her long taper
fingers as transparent as if they had been fresh cut alabaster, with the
blue veins winding through her wrists, and her bosom wasted and shrunk,
and her neck no thicker than her arm, with the pulsations of the large
arteries as plain and evident as if the skin had been a film, and her
beautiful features, although now sharpened by the near approaching death
agony, her lovely mouth, her straight nose, her arched eyebrows, black,
like pencilled jet lines, and her small ears,--and oh, who can describe
her rich black raven hair, lying combed out, and spread all over the bed
and pillow?  She was dressed in a long loose gown of white crape; it
looked like a winding--sheet; but the fire of her eyes--I have purposely
not ventured to describe them--the unearthly brilliancy of her large,
full, swimming eye!

When I entered, I bowed, and remained standing near the door.  She said
something, but in so low a voice that I could not catch the words; and
when I stepped nearer, on purpose to hear more distinctly, all at once
the blood mantled in her cheeks and forehead and throat, like the last
gleam of the setting sun; but it faded as rapidly, and once more she lay
pale as her smock.

"Yet not such blush, as mounts when health would show,
All the heart's hue in that delightful glow;
But 'twas a hectic tint of secret care,
That for a burning moment fever'd there;
And the wild sparkle of her eye seemd caught
From high, and lighten'd with electric thought;
Though its black orb these long low lashes fringe,
Had temper'd with a melancholy tinge."

Her voice was becoming more and more weak, she said, so she must be
prompt.  "You have some trinkets for me, Mr Cringle?" I presented them.
She kissed the crucifix fervently, and then looked mournfully on her own
miniature.  "This was thought like once, Mr Cringle.--Are the newspaper
accounts of his trial correct?" she next asked.  I answered, that in the
main facts they were.  "And do you believe in the commission of all
these alleged atrocities by him?" I remained silent.  "Yes, they are but
too true.  Hush, hush," said she "look there."

I did as she requested.  There, glancing bright in the sunshine, a most
beautiful butterfly fluttered in the air, in the very middle of the open
window.  When we first saw it, it was flitting gaily and happily amongst
the plants and flowers that were blooming in the balcony, but it
gradually became more and more slow on the wing, and at last poised
itself so unusually steadily for an insect of its class, that even had
Maria not spoken, it would have attracted my attention.  Below it, on
the window sill, near the wall, with head erect, and its little basilisk
eyes upturned towards the lovely fly, crouched a camelion lizard; its
beautiful body, when I first looked at it, was a bright sea--green.  It
moved into the sunshine, a little away from the shade of the laurel
bush, which grew on the side it first appeared on, and suddenly the back
became transparent amber, the legs and belly continuing green.  From its
breast under the chin, it every now and then shot out a semicircular
film of a bright scarlet colour, like a leaf of a tulip stretched
vertically, or the pectoral fin of a fish.

This was evidently a decoy, and the poor fly was by degrees drawn down
towards it, either under the impression of its being in reality a flower,
or impelled by some impulse which it could not resist.  It gradually
fluttered nearer and more near, the reptile remaining all the while
steady as a stone, until it made a sudden spring, and in the next moment
the small meally wings were quivering on each side of the camelion's
tiny jaws. While in the act of gorging its prey, a little fork, like a
wire, was projected from the opposite corner of the window; presently a
small round black snout, with a pair of little fiery blasting eyes,
appeared, and a thin black neck glanced in the sun.  The lizard saw it.
I could fancy it trembled.  Its body became of a dark blue, then ashy
pale; the imitation of the flower, the gaudy fin was withdrawn, it
appeared to shrink back as far as it could, but it was nailed or
fascinated to the window sill, for its feet did not move.  The head of
the snake approached, with its long forked tongue shooting out and
shortening, and with a low hissing noise.  By this time about two feet
of its body was visible, lying with its white belly on the wooden beam,
moving forward with a small horizontal wavy motion, the head and six
inches of the neck being a little raised. I shrunk back from the
serpent, but no one else seemed to have any dread of it; indeed, I
afterwards learned, that this kind being good mousers, and otherwise
quite harmless, were, if any thing, encouraged about houses in the
country.  I looked again; its open mouth was now within an inch of the
lizard, which by this time seemed utterly paralysed and motionless; the
next instant its head was drawn into the snake's mouth, and by degrees
the whole body disappeared, as the reptile gorged it, and I could
perceive from the lump which gradually moved down the snake's neck, that
it had been sucked into its stomach.  Involuntarily I raised my hand,
when the whole suddenly disappeared.

I turned, I could scarcely tell why, to look at the dying girl.  A
transient flush had again lit up her pale wasted face.  She was
evidently greatly excited.  "Can you read me that riddle, Mr Cringle?
Does no analogy present itself to you between what you have seen,
between the mysterious power possessed by these subtle reptiles, and
Look--look again."

A large and still more lovely butterfly suddenly rose from beneath where
the snake had vanished, all glittering in the dazzling sunshine, and
after fluttering for a moment, floated steadily up into the air, and
disappeared in the blue sky.  My eye followed it as long as it was
visible, and when it once more declined to where we had seen the snake,
I saw a most splendid dragonfly, about three inches long, like a golden
bodkin, with its gauze--like wings moving so quickly, as it hung
steadily poised in mid air, like a hawk preparing to stoop, that the
body seemed to be surrounded by silver tissue, or a bright halo, while
it glanced in the sunbeam.

"Can you not read it yet, Mr Cringle? can you not read my story in the
fate of the first beautiful fly, and the miserable end of my Federico,
in that of the lizard?  And oh, may the last appearance of the ethereal
thing, which but now rose, and melted into the lovely sky, be a true
type of what I shall be!  But that poor insect, that remains there
suspended between heaven and earth, shall I say hell, what am I to think
of it?"

The dragonfly was still there.  She continued--"En purgatorio, ah Dios,
tu quedas en purgatorio," as if the fly had represented the unhappy
young pirate's soul in limbo.  Oh, let no one smile at the quaintness of
the dying fancy of the poor heart--crushed girl.  The weather began to
lower again, the wind came past us moaningly--the sun was obscured
large drops of rain fell heavily into the room--a sudden dazzling flash
of lightning took place, and the dragonfly was no longer there.  A long
low wild cry was heard. I started, and my flesh creeped.  The cry was
repeated.  "Es el--el mismo, y ningun otro.  Me venga, Federico; me
venga, mi querido!" shrieked poor Maria, with a supernatural energy, and
with such piercing distinctness that it was heard shrill even above the
rolling thunder.

I turned to look at Maria--another flash.  It glanced on the crucifix
which the old priest had elevated at the foot of the bed, full in her
view.  It was nearer, the thunder was louder.  "Is that the rain--drops
which are falling heavily on the floor through the open window?" Oh God!
Oh God! it is her warm heart's--blood, which was bubbling from her mouth
like a crimson fountain.  Her pale fingers were clasped on her bosom in
the attitude of prayer--a gentle quiver of her frame and the poor broken
hearted girl, and her unborn babe, "sleeped the sleep that knows no
waking."


CHAPTER XIV


Scenes in Cuba

Ariel.--Safely in harbour,
Is the king's ship; in the deep nook, where, once,
Thou call'dst me up at midnight to fetch dew,
From the still--vexed Bermoothes--there she's hid.

THE TEMPEST, I ii 227--29.


The spirit had indeed fled--the ethereal essence had departed--and the
poor wasted and blood--stained husk which lay before us, could no longer
be moved by our sorrows, or gratified by our sympathy.  Yet I stood
riveted to the spot, until I was aroused by the deep--toned voice of
Padre Carera, who, lifting up his hands towards heaven, addressed the
Almighty in extempore prayer, beseeching his mercy to our erring sister
who had just departed.  The unusualness of this startled me.--"As the
tree falls, so must it lie," had been the creed of my forefathers, and
was mine; but now for the first time I heard a clergyman wrestling in
mental agony, and interceding with the God who hath said, "Repent before
the night cometh, in which no man can work," for a sinful creature,
whose worn--out frame was now as a clod of the valley.  But I had little
time for consideration, as presently all the negro servants of the
establishment set up a loud howl, as if they had lost their nearest and
dearest.  "Oh, our poor dear young mistress is dead!  She has gone to
the bosom of the Virgin!  She is gone to be happy!"--"Then why the deuce
make such a yelling?" quoth Bang in the other room, when this had been
translated to him.  Clad to leave the chamber of death, I entered the
large hall, where I had left our friend.

"I say, Tom--awful work.  Hear how the rain pours, and murder--such a
flash!  Why, in Jamaica, we don't startle greatly at lightning, but
absolutely I heard it hiss--there, again"--the noise of the thunder
stopped further colloquy, and the wind now burst down the valley with a
loud roar.

Don Ricardo joined us.  "My good friends--we are in a scrape here--what
is to be done?--a melancholy affair altogether."--Bang's curiosity here
fairly got the better of him.

"I say, Don Ricardibus--do--beg pardon, though--do give over this
humbugging outlandish lingo of yours--speak like a Christian, in your
mother tongue, and leave off your Spanish, which now, since I know it is
all a bam, seems to sit as strangely on you as my grandmother's toupe
would on Tom Cringle's Mary."

"Now do pray, Mr Bang," said I, when Don Ricardo broke in "Why, Mr Bang,
I am, as you now know, a Scotchman."

"How do I know any such thing--that is, for a certainty--while you keep
cruising amongst so many lingoes, as Tom there says?"

"The docken, man," said I.--Don Ricardo smiled.

"I am a Scotchman, my dear sir; and the same person who, in his youth,
was neither more nor less than wee Richy Cloche, in the long town of
Kirkaldy, and in his old age Don Ricardo Campana of St Jago de Cuba.
But more of this anon,--at present we are in the house of mourning, and
alas the day! that it should be so."

By this time the storm had increased most fearfully, and as Don Ricardo,
Aaron, and myself, sat in the dark damp corner of the large gloomy hall,
we could scarcely see each other, for the lightning had now ceased, and
the darkness was so thick, that had it not been for the light from the
large funeral wax tapers, which had been instantly lit upon poor Maria's
death, in the room where she lay, that streamed through the open door,
we should have been unable to see our very fingers before us.

"What is that?" said Campana; "heard you nothing, gentlemen?"

"By this the storm grew loud apace,
The water--wraith was shrieking;
And in the scowl of heaven eachface,
Grew dark as they were speaking."

In  the lulls of the rain and the blast, the same long low cry was heard
which had startled me by Maria's bedside, and occasioned the sudden  and
fatal  exertion which had been the cause of the bursting out  afresh  of
the blood vessel.

"Why," said I, "it is little more than three o'clock in the afternoon
yet, dark as it is; let us sally out, Mr Bang, for I verify believe that
the hollo we have heard is my Captain's voice, and, if I conjecture
rightly, he must have arrived at the other side of the river, probably
with the Doctor."

"Why, Tom," quoth Aaron, "it is only three in the afternoon, as you say,
although by the sky I could almost vouch for its being midnight,--but I
don't like that shouting--Did you ever read of a water--kelpie, Don
Richy?"

"Poo, poo, nonsense," said the Don; "Mr Cringle is, I fear, right
enough." At this moment the wind thundered at the door and window
shutters, and howled amongst the neighbouring trees and round the roof,
as if it would have blown the house down upon our devoted heads.  The
cry was again heard, during a momentary pause.

"Zounds!" said Bang, "it is the skipper's voice, as sure as fate--he
must be in danger--let us go and see, Tom."

"Take me with you," said Campana,--the foremost always when any good
deed was to be done----and, in place of clapping on his great--coat to
meet the storm, to our unutterable surprise, he began to disrobe
himself, all to his trowsers and large straw hat.  He then called one of
the servants, "Trae me un lasso." The lasso, a long thong of plaited
hide, was forthwith brought; he coiled it up in his left hand.  "Now,
Pedro," said he to the negro servant who had fetched it, (a tall
strapping fellow,) "you and Caspar follow me.  Gentlemen, are you
ready?" Caspar appeared, properly accoutred, with a long pole in one
hand and a thong similar to Don Ricardo's in the other, he as well as
his comrade being stark naked all to their waistcloths.  "Ah, well done,
my sons," said Don Ricardo, as both the negroes prepared to follow him.
So off we started to the door, although we heard the tormenta raging
without with appalling fury.  Bang undid the latch, and the next moment
he was flat on his back, the large leaf having flown open with
tremendous violence, capsizing him like an infant.

The Padre from the inner chamber came to our assistance, and by our
joint exertions we at length got the door to again and barricaded, after
which we made our exit from the lee--side of the house by a window.
Under other circumstances, it would have been difficult to refrain from
laughing at the appearance we made.  We were all drenched in an instant
after we left the shelter of the house, and there was old Campana, naked
to the waist, with his large sombrero and long pigtail hanging down his
back, like a mandarin of twenty buttons. Next followed his two black
assistants, naked as I have described them, all three with their coils
of rope in their hands, like a hangman and his deputies; then advanced
friend Bang and myself, without our coats or hats, with handkerchiefs
tied round our heads, and our bodies bent down so as to stem the gale as
strongly as we could.

But the planting attorney, a great schemer, a kind of Will Wimble in his
way, had thought fit, of all things in the world, to bring his umbrella,
which the wind, as might have been expected, reversed most
unceremoniously the moment he attempted to hoist it, and tore it from
the staff, so that, on the impulse of the moment, he had to clutch the
flying red silk and thrust his head through the centre, where the stick
had stood, as if he had been some curious flower.  As we turned the
corner of the house, the full force of the storm met us right in the
teeth, when flap flew Don Ricardo's hat past us; but the two blackamoors
had taken the precaution to strap each of theirs down with a strong
grass lanyard.  We continued to work to windward, while every now and
then the hollo came past us on the gale louder and louder, until it
guided us to the fording which we had crossed on our first arrival.  We
stopped there;--the red torrent was rushing tumultuously past us, but we
saw nothing save a few wet and shivering negroes on the opposite side,
who had sheltered themselves under a cliff, and were busily employed in
attempting to light a fire.  The holloing continued.

"Why, what can be wrong?" at length said Don Ricardo, and he shouted to
the people on the opposite side.

He might as well have spared his breath, for, although they saw his
gestures and the motion of his lips, they no more heard him than we did
them, as they very considerately in return made mouths at us, bellowing
no doubt that they could not hear us.

"Don Ricardo--Don Ricardo!" at this crisis sung out Caspar, who had
clambered up the rock, to have a peep about him--"Ave Maria--Alla son
dos pobres, que peresquen pronto, si nosotros no pueden Hydros."

"Whereabouts?" said Campana--"whereabouts? speak, man, speak."

"Down in the valley--about a quarter of a league, I see two men on a
large rock, in the middle of the stream; the wind is in that direction,
it must be them we heard."

"God be gracious to us! true enough--true enough--let us go to them
then, my children." And we again all cantered off after the excellent
Don Ricardo.  But before we could reach the spot, we had to make a
detour, and come down upon it from the precipitous brow of the beetling
cliff above, for there was no beach nor shore to the swollen river,
which was here very deep and surged, rushing under the hollow bank with
comparatively little noise, which was the reason why we heard the cries
so distinctly.

The unfortunates who were in peril, whoever they might be, seemed to
comprehend our motions, for one of them held out a white handkerchief,
which I immediately answered by a similar signal, when the shouting
ceased, until, guided by the negroes, we reached the verge of the cliff,
and looked down from the red crumbling bank on the foaming water, as it
swept past beneath.  It was here about thirty yards broad, divided by a
rocky wedge like islet, on which grew a profusion of dark bushes and one
large tree, whose topmost branches were on a level with us where we
stood.  This tree was divided, about twelve feet from the root, into two
limbs in the fork of which sat, like a big monkey, no less a personage
than Captain Transom himself, wet and dripping, with his clothes
besmeared with mud, and shivering with cold.  At the foot of the tree
sat in rueful mood, a small antique beau of an old man in a coat which
had once been blue silk, wearing breeches, the original colour of which
no man could tell, and without his wig, his clear bald pate shining
amidst the surrounding desolation like an ostrich's egg.  Beside these
worthies stood two trembling way--worn mules with drooping heads, their
long ears hanging down most disconsolately.  The moment we came in
sight, the skipper hailed us.

"Why, I am hoarse with bawling, Don Ricardo, but here am I and el Doctor
Pavo Real, in as sorry a plight as any two gentlemen need be. On
attempting the ford two hours ago, blockheads as we were beg pardon, Don
Pavo"--the doctor bowed, and grinned like a baboon--"we had nearly been
drowned; indeed, we should have been drowned entirely, had we not
brought up on this island of Barataria here.--But how is the young lady?
tell me that," said the excellent--hearted fellow, even in the midst of
his own danger.

"Mind Yourself, my beautiful child," cried Bang.  'How are we to get you
on terra firma?"

"Poo--in the easiest way possible," rejoined he, with true seamanlike
self--possession.  "I see you have ropes--Tom Cringle, heave me the end
of the line which Don Ricardo carries, will you?"

"No, no--I can do that myself," said Don Ricardo, and with a swing he
hove the leathern noose at the skipper, and whipped it over his neck in
a twinkling.  The Scotch Spaniard, I saw, was pluming himself on his
skill, but Transom was up to him, for in an instant he dropped out of
it, while in slipping through he let it fall over a broken limb of the
tree.

"Such an eel--such an eel!" shouted the attendant negroes, both expert
hands with the lasso themselves.

"Now, Don Ricardo, since I am not to be had, make your end of the thong
fast round that large stone there." Campana did so.  "Ah, that will do."
And so saying, the skipper warped himself to the top of the cliff with
great agility.  He was no sooner in safety himself, however, than the
idea of having left the poor doctor in peril flashed on him.

"I must return--I must return!  If the river rises, the body will be
drowned out and out."

And notwithstanding our entreaties, he did return as he came, and
descending the tree, began apparently to argue with the little Medico,
and to endeavour to persuade him to ascend, and make his escape as he
himself had done; but it would not do.  Pavo Real--as brave a little man
as ever was seen--made many salaams and obeisances, but move he would
not.  He shook his head repeatedly, in a very solemn way, as if he had
said, "My very excellent friends, I am much obliged to you, but it is
impossible; my dignity would be compromised by such a proceeding."

Presently Transom appeared to wax very emphatic, and pointed to a
pinnacle of limestone rock, which had stood out like a small steeple
above the surface of the flashing, dark red eddies, when we first
arrived on the spot, but now only stopped the water with a loud gurgle,
the top rising and disappearing as the stream surged past, like, buov
jangling in a tideway.  The small man still shook his head, but the
water now rose so rapidly, that there was scarcely dry standing room for
the two poor devils of mules, while the doctor and the skipper had the
greatest difficulty in finding a footing for themselves.

Time and circumstances began to press, and Transom, after, another
unavailing attempt to persuade the doctor, began apparently to rouse
himself, and muster his energies.  He first drove the mules forcibly
into the stream at the side opposite where we stood, which was the
deepest water, and least broken by rocks and stones, and we had the
pleasure to see them scramble out safe and sound; he then put his hand
to his mouth, and hailed us to throw him a rope, it was done--he caught
it, and then by a significant gesture to Campana, gave him to understand
that now was the time.  The Don, comprehending him, hove his noose with
great precision, right over the little doctor's head, and before he
recovered from his surprise, the captain slipped it under his arms, and
signed to haul taught, while the Medico kicked, and spurred, and backed
like a restive horse.  At one and the same moment, Transom made fast a
guy round his waist, and we hoisted away, while he hauled on the other
line, so that we landed the Lilliputian Esculapius safe on the top of
the bank, with the wind nearly out of his body, however, from his
violent exertions, and the running of the noose.

It was now the work of a moment for the Captain to ascend the tree and
again warp himself ashore, when he set himself to apologize with all his
might and main, pleading strong necessity; and having succeeded in
pacifying the offended dignity of the doctor, we turned towards the
house.

"Look out there," sung out Campana sharply.

Time indeed, thought I, for right ahead of us, as if an invisible
gigantic ploughshare had passed over the woods, a valley or chasm was
suddenly opened down the hill--side with a noise like thunder, and
branches and whole limbs of trees were instantly torn away, and
tossed into the air like straws.

"Down on your noses, my fine fellows," cried the skipper.  We were all
flat in an instant except the Medico, the stubborn little brute, who
stood until the tornado reached him, when in a twinkling he was cast on
his back, with a violence sufficient, as I thought, to have driven his
breath for ever and aye out of his body.  While we lay we heard all
kinds of things hurtle past us through the air, pieces of timber,
branches of trees, coffee--bushes, and even stones.  Presently it lulled
again, and we got on end to look round us.

"How will the old house stand all this, Don Ricardo?" said the drenched
skipper.  He had to shout to be heard.  The Don was too busy to answer,
but once more strode on towards the dwelling, as I expected something
even worse than we had experienced to be still awaiting us.  By the time
we reached it, it was full of negroes, men, women, and children, whose
huts had already been destroyed, poor, drenched, miserable devils, with
scarcely any clothing and to crown our comfort, we found the roof
leaking in many places.  By this time the night began to fall, and our
prospects were far from flattering.  The rain had entirely ceased, nor
was there any lightning, but the storm was most tremendous, blowing in
gusts, and veering round from east to north with the speed of thought.
The force of the gale, however, gradually declined, until the wind
subsided altogether, and every thing became quite still.  The low
murmured conversation of the poor negroes who environed us, was heard
distinctly; the hard breathing of the sleeping children could even be
distinguished.  But I was by no means sure that the hurricane was over,
and Don Ricardo and the rest seemed to think as I did, for there was not
a word interchanged between us for some time.

"Do you hear that?" at length said Aaron Bang, as a low moaning sound
rose wailing into the night air.  It approached and grew louder.

"The voice of the approaching tempest amongst the higher branches of the
trees," said the Captain.

The rushing noise overhead increased, but still all was so calm where we
sat, that you could have heard a pin drop.  Poo, thought I, it has
passed over us after all--no fear now, when one reflects how completely
sheltered we are.  Suddenly, however, the lights in the room where the
body lay were blown out, and the roof groaned and creaked as if it had
been the bulkheads of a ship in a tempestuous sea.

"We shall have to cut and run from this anchorage presently, after all,"
said I; "the house will never hold on till morning."

The words were scarcely out of my mouth, when, as if a thunderbolt had
struck it, one of the windows in the hall was driven in with a roar, as
if the Falls of Niagara had been pouring overhead, and the tempest
having thus forced an entrance, the roof of that part of the house where
we sat was blown up, as if by gunpowder--ay, in the twinkling of an eye;
and there we were with the bare walls, and the angry heaven overhead,
and the rain descending in bucketfuls.  Fortunately, two large joists or
couples, being deeply embedded in the substance of the walls, remained,
when the rafters and ridgepole were torn away, or we must have been
crushed in the ruins.

There was again a deathlike lull, the wind fell to a small melancholy
sough amongst the tree--tops, and once more, where we sat, there was not
a breath stirring.  So complete was the calm now, that after a light had
been struck, and placed on the floor in the middle of the room, showing
the surrounding group of shivering half--naked savages, with fearful
distinctness, the flame shot up straight as an arrow, clear and bright,
although the distant roar of the storm still thundered afar off as it
rushed over the mountain above us.

This unexpected stillness frightened the women even more than the
fierceness of the gale when at the loudest had done.

"We must go forth," said Senora Campana; "the elements are only
gathering themselves for a more dreadful hurricane than what we have
already experienced.  We must go forth to the little chapel in the wood,
or the next burst may, and will, bury us under the walls;" and she moved
towards Maria's room, where, by this time, lights had again been placed.
"We must move the body," we could hear her say; "we must all proceed to
the chapel; in a few minutes the storm will be raging again louder than
ever."

"And my wife is very right," said Don Ricardo; "so, Caspar, call the
other people; have some mats, and quatres, and mattresses carried down
to the chapel, and we shall all remove, for, with half of the roof gone,
it is but tempting the Almighty to remain here longer."

The word was passed, and we were soon under weigh, four negroes leading
the van, carrying the uncoffined body of the poor girl on a sofa; while
two servants, with large splinters of a sort of resinous wood for
flambeaux, walked by the side of it.  Next followed the women of the
family, covered up with all the cloaks and spare garments that could be
collected; then came Don Picador Cangrejo, with Ricardo Campana, the
skipper, Aaron Bang, and myself; the procession being closed by the
household negroes, with more lights, which all burned steadily and
clear.

We descended through a magnificent natural avenue of lofty trees (whose
brown moss--grown trunks and fantastic boughs were strongly lit up by
the blaze of the torches; while the fresh white splinter--marks where
the branches had been tom off by the storm, glanced bright and clear,
and the rain--drops on the dark leaves sparkled like diamonds) towards
the river, along whose brink the brimful red--foaming waters rushed past
us, close by the edge of the path, now ebbing suddenly a foot or so, and
then surging up again beyond their former bounds, as if large stones or
trunks of trees above, were from time to time damming up the troubled
waters, and then giving way.  After walking about four hundred yards, we
came to a small but massive chapel, fronting the river, the back part
resting against a rocky bank, with two superb cypress--trees growing,
one on each side of the door; we entered, Padre Carera leading the way.
The whole area of the interior of the building did not exceed a
parallelogram of twenty feet by twelve.  At the eastern end, fronting
the door, there was a small altar--piece of hard--wood, richly
ornamented with silver, and one or two bare wooden benches standing on
the tiled floor; but the chief security we had that the building would
withstand the storm, consisted in its having no window or aperture
whatsoever, excepting two small ports, one on each side of the altar
piece, and the door, which was a massive frame of hardwood planking.

The body was deposited at the foot of the altar, and the ladies, having
been wrapped up in cloaks and blankets, were safely lodged in quatres,
while we, the gentlemen of the comfortless party, seated ourselves,
disconsolately enough, on the wooden benches.

The door was made fast, after the servants had kindled a blazing wood
fire on the floor; and although the flickering light cast by the wax
tapers in the six large silver candlesticks which were planted beside
the bier, as it blended with the red glare of the fire, and fell strong
on the pale uncovered features of the corpse, and on the anxious faces
of the women, was often startling enough, yet being conscious of a
certain degree of security from the thickness of the walls, we made up
our minds to spend the night where we were, as well as we could.

"I say, Tom Cringle," said Aaron Bang, "all the females are snug there,
you see; we have a blazing fire on the hearth, and here is some comfort
for we men slaves;" whereupon he produced two bottles of brandy.  Don
Ricardo Campana, with whom Bang seemed now to be absolutely in league,
or, in vulgar phrase, as thick as pickpockets, had brought a goblet of
water, and a small silver drinking cup, with him, so we passed the
creature round, and tried all we could to while away the tedious night.
But, as if a sudden thought had struck Aaron, he here tucked the brandy
bottle under his arm, and asking me to carry the vessel with the water,
he advanced, cup in hand, towards the ladies.

"Now, Tom, interpret carefully."

"Ahem--Madam and Senoras, this is a heavy night for all of us, but the
chapel is damp--allow me to comfort you."

"Muchisimos gracias," was the gratifying answer, and Bang accordingly
gave each of our fair friends a heart--warming taste of brandy and
water.  There was now calm for a full hour, and the Captain had stepped
out to reconnoitre; on his return he reported that the swollen stream
had very much subsided.

"Well, we shall get away, I hope, tomorrow morning, after all,"
whispered Bang.

He had scarcely spoken when it began to pelt and rain again, as if a
waterspout had burst overhead, but there was no wind.

"Come, that is the clearing up of it," said Cloche.

At this precise moment the priest was sitting with folded arms, beyond
the body, on a stool or trestle, in the alcove or recess where it lay.
Right overhead was one of the small round apertures in the gable of the
chapel, which, opening on the bank, appeared to the eye a round black
spot in the whitewashed wall.  The bright wax lights shed a strong
lustre on the worthy Clerigo's figure, face, and fine bald head which
shone like silver, while the deeper light of the embers on the floor was
reflected in ruby tints from the large silver crucifix that hung at his
waist.  The rushing of the swollen river prevented me hearing
distinctly, but it occurred to me once or twice, that a strange!
gurgling sound proceeded from the aforesaid round aperture.  The Padre
seemed to hear it also, for every now and then he looked up, and once he
rose and peered anxiously through it; but apparently unable to
distinguish any thing, he sat down again.  However, my attention, had
been excited, and half asleep as I was, I kept glimmering in the
direction of the Clerigo.

The Captain's deep snore had gradually lengthened out, so as to vouch
for his forgetfulness, and Bang, Ricardo, Dr Pavo Real, and the ladies,
had all subsided into the most perfect quietude, when I noticed, and I
quaked and trembled like an aspen leaf as I did so, a long black paw,
thrust through, and down from the dark aperture immediately over Padre
Carera's head, which, whatever it was, it appeared to scratch sharply,
and then giving the caput a smart cuff, vanished.  The Priest started,
put up his hand, and rubbed his head, but seeing nothing, again leant
back, and was about departing to the land of nod, like the others, once
more.  However, in a few minutes, the same paw again protruded, and this
time a peering black snout, with two glancing eyes, was thrust through
the hole after it.  The paw kept swinging about like a pendulum for a
few seconds, and was then suddenly thrust into the Padre's open mouth as
he lay back asleep, and again giving him another smart crack, vanished
as before.

"Hobble, gobble," gurgled the Priest, nearly choked.

"Ave Maria purissima, que bocado--what a mouthful!--What can that be?"

This was more than I knew, I must confess, and altogether I was
consumedly puzzled, but, from a disinclination to alarm the women, I
held my tongue.  Padre Carera this time moved away to the other side
from beneath the hole, but still within two feet of it--in fact, he
could not get in this direction farther for the altar--piece--and being
still half asleep, he lay back once more against the wall to finish his
nap, taking the precaution, however, to clap on his long shovel hat,
shaped like a small canoe, crosswise, with the peaks standing out from
each side of his head, in place of wearing it fore and aft, as usual.
Well, thought I, a strange party certainly; but drowsiness was fast
settling down on me also, when the same black paw was again thrust
through the hole, and I distinctly heard a nuzzling, whining, short
bark. I rubbed my eyes and sat up, but before I was quite awake, the
head and neck of a large Newfoundland dog was shoved into the chapel
through the round aperture, and making a long stretch, with the black
paws thrust down and resting on the wall, supporting the creature, the
animal suddenly snatched the Padre's hat off his head, and giving it an
angry worry--as much as to say, "Confound it--I had hoped to have had
the head in it"--it dropped it on the floor, and with a loud yell,
Sneezer, my own old dear Sneezer, leaped into the midst of us,
floundering amongst the sleeping women, and kicking the firebrands
about, making them hiss again with the water he shook from his shaggy
coat, and frightening all hands like the very devil.

"Sneezer, you villain, how came you here!" I exclaimed, in great
amazement--"How came you here, sir?" The dog knew me at once, and when
benches were reared against him, after the women had huddled into a
corner, and every thing was in sad confusion, he ran to me, and leaped
on my neck, gasping and yelping; but finding that I was angry, and in no
mood for toying, he planted himself on end so suddenly, in the middle of
the floor, close by the fire, that all our hands were stayed, and no one
could find in his heart to strike the poor dumb brute, he sat so quiet
and motionless.  "Sneezer, my boy, what have you to say--where have you
come from?" He looked in the direction of the door, and then walked
deliberately towards it, and tried to open it with his paws.

"Now," said the Captain, "that little scamp, who would insist on riding
with me to St Jago, to see, as he said, if he might not be of use in
fetching the surgeon from the ship in case I could not find Dr Bergara,
has come back, although I desired him to stay on board.  The puppy must
have returned in his cursed troublesome zeal, for in no other way could
your dog be here.  Certainly, however, he did not know that I had fallen
in with Dr Pavo Real;" and the good--natured fellow's heart melted, as
he continued--"Returned--why, he may be drowned--Cringle, take care
little Reefpoint be not drowned."

Sneezer lowered his black snout, and for a moment poked it into the
white ashes of the fire, and then raising it and stretching his neck
upwards to its full length, he gave a short bark, and then a long loud
howl.

"My life upon it, the poor boy is gone," said I.

"But what can we do?" said Don Ricardo; "it is as dark as pitch."

And we again set ourselves to have a small rally at the brandy and
water, as a resolver of our doubts, whether we should sit still till
daybreak, or sally forth now and run the chance of being drowned, with
but small hope of doing any good; and the old priest having left the
other end of the chapel, where the ladies were once more reposing, now
came to join our council of war, and to have his share of the agua
ardiente.

The noise of the rain increased, and there was still a little puff of
wind now and then, so that the Padre, taking an alfombra, or small mat,
used to kneel on, and placing it on the step where the folding doors
opened inwards, took a cloak on his shoulders, and sat himself down with
his back against the leaves, to keep them closed, as the lock or bolt
was broken, and was in the act of swigging off his cupful of comfort,
when a strong gust drove the door open, as if the devil himself had
kicked it, capsized the Padre, blew out the lights once more, and
scattered the brands of the fire all about us.  Transom and I started
up, the women shrieked; but before we could get the door to again, in
rode little Reefpoint on a mule, with the doctor of the Firebrand behind
him, bound, or lashed, as we call it, to him by a strong thong.  The
black servants and the females took them for incarnate fiends, I fancy,
for the yells and shrieks they set up were tremendous.

"Yo, ho!" sung out little Reefy; "don't be frightened, ladies--Lord love
ye, I am half drowned, and the doctor here is altogether so quite
entirely drowned, I assure you.--I say, Medico, an't it true?" And the
little Irish rogue slewed his head round, and gave the exhausted doctor
a most comical look.

"Not quite," quoth the doctor, "but deuced near it.  I say, Captain,
would you have known us? why, we are dyed chocolate colour, you see, in
that river, flowing not with milk and honey, but with something
miraculously like pea soup, water I cannot call it."

"But Heaven help us, why did you try the ford, man?" said Bang.

"You may say that, sir," responded wee Reefy; "but our mule was knocked
up, and it was so dark and tempestuous, that we should have perished by
the road if we had tried back for St Jago; so seeing a light here, the
only indication of a living thing, and the stream looking narrow and
comparatively quiet--confound it, it was all the deeper though--we
shoved across."

"But, bless me, if you had been thrown in the stream, lashed together as
you are, you would have been drowned to a certainty," said the Captain.

"Oh," said little Reefy, "the doctor was not on the mule in crossing
no, no, Captain, I knew better--I had him in tow, sir; but after we
crossed he was so faint and chill, that I had to lash myself to him to
keep him from sliding over the animal's counter, and walk he could not."

"But, Master Reefpoint, why came you back? did I not desire you to
remain on board of the Firebrand, sir?"

The midshipman looked nonplussed.  "Why, Captain, I forgot to take my
clothes with me, and--and--in truth, sir, I thought our surgeon would be
of more use than any outlandish Gallipot that you could carry back."

The good intentions of the lad saved him farther reproof, although I
could not help smiling at his coming back for his clothes, when his
whole wardrobe on starting was confined to the two false collars and a
toothbrush.

"But where is the young lady?" said the doctor.

"Beyond your help, my dear doctor," said the skipper; "she is dead--all
that remains of her you see within that small railing there."

"Ah, indeed!" quoth the Medico, "poor girl--poor girl--deep decline,
wasted, terribly wasted," said he, as he returned from the railing of
the altar--piece, where he had been to look down upon the body; and
then, as if there never had been such a being as poor Maria Olivera in
existence, he continued, "Pray, Mr Bang, what may you have in that
bottle?"

"Brandy, to be sure, doctor," said Bang.

"A thimbleful then, if you please."

"By all means"--and the planting attorney handed the black bottle to the
surgeon, who applied it to his lips, without more circumlocution.

"Lord love us!--poisoned--Oh, gemini!"

"Why, doctor," said Transom, "what has come over you?"

"Poisoned, Captain--only taste."

The bottle contained soy.  It was some time before we could get the poor
man quieted; and when at length he was stretched along a bench, and the
fire stirred up, and new wood added to it, the fresh air of early
morning began to be scented.  At this time we missed Padre Carera, and,
in truth, we all fell fast asleep; but in about an hour or so
afterwards, I was awoke by some one stepping across me.  The same cause
had stirred Transom.  It was Aaron Bang who had been to look out at the
door.

"I say, Cringle, look here--the Padre and the servants are digging a
grave close to the chapel--are they going to bury the poor girl so
suddenly?"

I stepped to the door; the wind had entirely fallen--but it rained very
fast--the small chapel door looked out on the still swollen, but
subsiding river, and beyond that on the mountain, which rose abruptly
from the opposite bank.  On the side of the hill facing us was situated
a negro village, of about thirty huts, where lights were already
twinkling, as if the inmates were preparing to go forth to their work.
Far above them, on the ridge, there was a clear cold streak towards the
east, against which the outline of the mountain, and the large trees
which grew on it, were sharply cut out; but overhead, the firmament was
as yet dark and threatening.  The morning star had just risen, and was
sparkling bright and clear through the branches of a magnificent tree,
that shot out from the highest part of the hill; it seemed to have
attracted the Captain's attention as well as mine.

"Were I romantic now, Mr Cringle, I could expatiate on that view.  How
cold, and clear, and chaste, every thing looks!  The elements have
subsided into a perfect calm, every thing is quiet and still, but there
is no warmth, no comfort in the scene."

"What a soaking rain!" said Aaron Bang; "why, the drops are as small as
pin points, and so thick!--a Scotch mist is a joke to them.  Unusual all
this, Captain.  You know our rain in Jamaica usually descends in
bucketfuls, unless it be regularly set in for a week, and them, but then
only, it becomes what in England we are in the habit of calling a
soaking rain.  One good thing, however,--while it descends so quietly,
the earth will absorb it all, and that furious river will not continue
swollen."

"Probably not," said I.

"Mr Cringle," said the skipper, "do you mark that tree on the ridge of
the mountain, that large tree in such conspicuous relief against the
eastern sky?"

"I do, Captain.  But--heaven help us!--what necromancy is this!  It
seems to sink into the mountain--top--why, I only see the uppermost
branches now.  It has disappeared, and yet the outline of the hill is as
distinct and well defined as ever; I can even see the cattle on the
ridge, although, they are running about in a very incomprehensible way
certainly."

"Hush!" said Don Ricardo, "hush!--the Padre is reading the funeral
service in the chapel, preparatory to the body being brought out."

And so he was.  But a low grumbling noise, gradually increasing was now
distinctly audible.  The monk hurried on with the prescribed form--he
finished it--and we were about moving the body to carry it forth--Bang
and I being in the very act of stooping down to lift the bier, when the
Captain sung out sharp and quick,--"Here, Tom!" the urgency of the
appeal abolishing the Mister--"Here!--zounds, the whole hill--side is in
motion!" And as he spoke I beheld the negro village, that hung on the
opposite bank, gradually fetch way, houses, trees, and all, with a loud,
harsh, grating sound.

"God defend us!" I involuntarily exclaimed.

"Stand clear," shouted the skipper; "the whole hill--side opposite is
under weigh, and we shall be bothered here presently."

He was right--the entire face of the hill over against us was by this
time in motion, sliding over the substratum of rock like a first rate
gliding along the well--greased ways at launching--an earthy avalanche.
Presently the rough, rattling, and crashing sound, from the disrupture
of the soil, and the breaking of the branches, and tearing up by the
roots of the largest trees, gave warning of some tremendous incident.
The lights in the huts still burned, but houses and all continued to
slide down the declivity; and anon a loud startled exclamation was heard
here and there, and then a pause, but the low mysterious hurtling sound
never ceased.

At length a loud continuous yell echoed along the hillside.  The noise
increased--the rushing sound came stronger and stronger the river rose
higher, and roared louder; it overleaped the lintel of the door--the
fire on the floor hissed for a moment, and then expired in smouldering
wreaths of white smoke--the discoloured torrent gurgled into the chapel,
and reached the altar--piece; and while the cries from the hillside were
highest, and bitterest, and most despairing, it suddenly filled the
chapel to the top of the low doorpost; and although the large tapers
which had been lit near the altar--piece were as yet unextinguished,
like meteors sparkling on a troubled sea, all was misery and
consternation.

"Have patience, and be composed, now," shouted Don Ricardo.  "If it
increases, we can escape through the apertures here, behind the altar
piece, and from thence to the high ground beyond.  The heavy rain has
loosened the soil on the opposite bank, and it has slid into the river
course, negro houses and all.  But be composed, my dears nothing
supernatural in all this; and rest assured, although the river has
unquestionably been forced from its channel, that there is no danger, if
you will only maintain your self--possession."

And there we were--an inhabitant of a cold climate cannot go along with
me in the description.  We were all alarmed, but we were not chilled
cold is a great daunter of bravery.  At New Orleans, the black
regiments, in the heart of the forenoon, were really the most efficient
corps of the army; but in the morning, when the hoarfrost was on the
long wire--grass, they were but as a broken reed.  "Him too cold for
brave today," said the sergeant of the grenadier company of the West
India regiment, which was brigaded in the ill--omened advance, when we
attacked New Orleans; but here, having heat, and seeing none of the
women egregiously alarmed, we all took heart of grace, and really there
was no quailing amongst us.

Senora Campana and her two nieces, Senora Cangrejo and her angelic
daughter, had all betaken themselves to a sort of seat, enclosing the
altar in a semicircle, with the pea soup--coloured water up to their
knees.  Not a word--not an exclamation of fear escaped from them,
although the gushing eddies from the open door showed that the soil from
the opposite hill was fast settling down, and usurping the former
channel of the river.

"All very fine this to read of," at last exclaimed Aaron Bang.  "Zounds,
we shall be drowned.  Look out, Transom; Tom Cringle, look out; for my
part, I shall dive through the door, and take my chance."

"No use in that," said Don Ricardo; "the two round openings there at the
west end of the chapel, open on a dry shelf, from which the ground
slopes easily upward to the house; let us put the ladies through them,
and then we males can shift for ourselves as we best may."

At this moment the water rose so high, that the bier on which the corpse
of poor Maria Olivera lay stark and stiff, was floated off the trestles,
and turning on its edge, after glancing for a moment in the light cast
by the wax tapers, it sank into the thick brown water, and was no more
seen.

The old priest murmured a prayer, but the effect on us was electric.
"Sauve qui peut" was now the cry; and Sneezer, quite in his element,
began to cruise all about, threatening the tapers with instant
extinction.

"Ladies, get through the holes," shouted Don Ricardo.  "Captain, get you
out first."

"Can't desert my ship," said the gallant fellow; "the last to quit where
danger is, my dear sir.  It is my charter; but, Mr Cringle, go you, and
hand the ladies out."

"I'll be d--d if I do," said I. "Beg pardon, sir; I simply mean to say,
that I cannot usurp the pas from you."

"Then," quoth Don Ricardo--a more discreet personage than any one of us
"I will go myself;" and forthwith he screwed himself through one of the
round holes in the wall behind the altar--piece.  "Give me out one of
the wax tapers--there is no wind now," said Don Ricardo "and hand out my
wife, Captain Transom."

"Ave Maria!" said the matron, "I shall never get through that hole."

"Try, my dear madam," said Bang, for by this time we were all deucedly
alarmed at our situation.  "Try, madam;" and we lifted her towards the
hole--fairly entered her into it head foremost, and all was smooth, till
a certain part of the excellent woman's earthly tabernacle stuck fast.

We could hear her invoking all the saints in the calendar on the
outside to "make her thin;" but the flesh and muscle were obdurate
through she would not go, until--delicacy being now blown to the winds,
Captain Transom placed his shoulder to the old lady's extremity, and
with the regular "Oh, heave oh!" shot her through the aperture into her
husband's arms.  The young ladies we ejected much more easily, although
Francesca Cangrejo did stick a little too.  The priest was next passed,
then Don Picador; and so we went on, until in rotation we had all made
our exit, and were perched shivering on the high bank.  God defend us!
we had not been a minute there when the rushing of the stream increased
the rain once more fell in torrents several large trees came down with
a fearful impetus in the roaring torrent, and struck the corner of the
chapel.  It shook--we could see the small cross on the eastern gable
tremble.  Another stump surged against it--it gave way--and in a minute
afterwards there was not a vestige remaining of the whole fabric.

"What a funeral for thee, Maria!" said Don Ricardo.

Not a vestige of the body was ever found.

There was nothing now for it.  We all stopped, and turned, and looked,
there was not a stone of the building to be seen--all was red
precipitous bank, or dark flowing river--so we turned our steps towards
the house.  The sun by this time had risen.  We found the northern range
of rooms still entire, so we made the most of it; and, by dint of the
Captain's and my nautical skill, before dinner--time, there was rigged a
canvass jury--roof over the southern part of the fabric, and we were
once--more seated in comparative comfort at our meal.  But it was all
melancholy work enough. However, at last we retired to our beds; and
next morning, when I awoke, there was the small stream once more
trickling over the face of the rock, with  the slight spray wafting into
my bedroom, a little discoloured certainly, but as quietly as if no
storm had taken place.

We were kept at Don Picador's for three days, as, from the shooting of
the soil from the opposite hill, the river had been dammed up, and its
channel altered, so that there was no venturing across.  Three Negroes
were unfortunately drowned, when the bank shot, as Bang called it.  But
the wonder passed away; and by nine o'clock on the fourth morning, when
we mounted our mules to proceed, there was little apparently on the fair
face of nature to mark that such fearful scenes had been.  However, when
we did get under weigh, we found that the hurricane had not passed over
us without leaving fearful evidences of its violence.

We had breakfasted--the women had wept--Don Ricardo had blown his nose--
Aaron Bang had blundered and fidgeted about and the bestias were at the
door.  We embraced the ladies.

"My son," said Senora Cangrejo, "we shall most likely never meet again.
You have your country to go to--you have a mother.  Oh, may she never
suffer the pangs which have wrung my heart But I know--I know that she
never will." I bowed.  "We may never indeed, in all likelihood we shall
never meet again!" continued she, in a rich, deep--toned, mellow voice;
"but if your way of life shall ever lead you to Cordova, you will be
sure of having many visitors, and many a door will open to you, if you
will but give out that you have shown kindness to Maria Olivera, or to
any one connected with her." She wept--and bent over me, pressing both
her hands on the crown of my head.  "May that great God, who careth not
for rank or station, for nation or for country, bless you, my son--bless
you!"

All this was sorry work.  She kissed me on the forehead, and turned
away.  Her daughter was standing close to her, "like Niobe, all tears."
"Farewell, Mr Cringle--may you be happy!" I kissed her hand--she turned
to the Captain.  He looked inexpressible things, and taking her hand,
held it to his breast; and then, making a slight genuflection, pressed
it to his lips.  He appeared to be amazingly energetic, and she seemed
to struggle to be released.  He recovered himself, however--made a
solemn bow----the ladies vanished.  We shook hands with old Don Picador,
mounted our mules, and bid a last adieu to the Valley of the Hurricane.

We ambled along for some time in silence.  At length the skipper dropped
astern, until he got alongside of me.  "I say, Tom"--I was well aware
that he never called me Tom unless he was fou, or his heart was full,
honest man--"Tom, what think you of Francesca Cangrejo?"

Oh  ho!  sits  the wind in that quarter? thought I. "Why, I don't  know,
Captain--I  have  seen her to disadvantage--so much  misery  fine  woman
though--rather large to my taste--but"

"Confound your buts," quoth the Captain.  "But, never mind push on, push
on."--I  may tell the gentle reader in his ear, that the worthy  fellow,
at  the moment when I send this chapter to the press, has his flag,  and
that Francesca Cangrejo is no less a personage than his wife.

However,  let us get along.  "Doctor Pavo Real," said Don Ricardo,  .now
since  you have been good enough to spare us a day, let us get the heart
of  your  secret  out  of  you.  Why, you must  have  been  pretty  well
frightened on the island there.'

"Never  so much frightened in my life, Don Ricardo; that English captain
is a most tempestuous man--but all has ended well; and after having seen
you to the crossing, I will bid you good--by."

"Poo--nonsense."  "Come along--here is the English Medico, your  brother
Esculapius;  so,  come along, you can return in the morning."  "But  the
sick folk in Santiago"

"Will  be none the sicker for your absence, Doctor Pavo Real," responded
Don Ricardo.

The  little  Doctor  laughed,  and away  we  all  cantered--Don  Ricardo
leading, followed by his wife and nieces, on three stout mules, sitting,
not  on side--saddles, but on a kind of chair, with a foot--board on the
larboard  side  to support the feet--then followed the two  Calens,  and
little  Reefpoint, while the Captain and I brought up the rear.  We  had
not proceeded five hundred yards, when we were brought to a stand--still
by  a  mighty tree, which had been thrown down by the wind fairly across
the road.  On the right hand there was a perpendicular rock rising up to
a  height  of  five hundred feet; and on the left an equally precipitous
descent,  without  either ledge or parapet to prevent one  from  falling
over.   What  was to be done?  We could not by any exertion of  strength
remove the tree; and if we sent back for assistance, it would have  been
a  work of time.  SO we dismounted, got the ladies to alight, and  Aaron
Bang, Transom, and myself, like true knights--errant, undertook to  ride
the mulos over the stump.

Aaron  Bang  led gallantly, and made a deuced good jump of  it,  Transom
followed, and made not quite so clever an exhibition--I then rattled  at
it, and down came mule and rider.  However, we were accounted for on the
right side.

"But what shall become of us?" shouted the English doctor.

"And as for me, I shall return," said the Spanish Medico.

"Lord  love you, no," said little Reefpoint; "here, lash me to my beast,
and  no  fear." The doctor made him fast, as desired, round  the  mule's
neck  with a stout thong, and then drove him at the barricade, and  over
they  came,  man  and beast, although, to tell the truth,  little  Reefy
alighted  well out on the neck with a hand grasping each ear.   However,
he  was  a  gallant  little  fellow, and in nowise  discouraged,  so  he
undertook to bring over the other quadrupeds; and in little more than  a
quarter of an hour we were all under weigh on the opposite side, in full
sail towards Don Ricardo's property.  But as we proceeded up the valley,
the  destruction  caused  by the storm became more  and  more  apparent.
Trees  were strewn about in, all directions, having been tom up  by  the
roots--road  there was literally none; and by the time  we  reached  the
coffee  estate,  after a ride, or scramble, more properly  speaking,  of
three  hours, we were all pretty much tired.  In some places the  road
at  the  best  was  but a rocky shelf of Limestone not exceeding  twelve
inches  in width, where, if you had slipped, down you would have gone  a
thousand  feet.  At this time it was white and clean, as if it had  been
newly  chiselled, all the soil and sand having been washed away  by  the
recent heavy rains.

The  situation was beautiful; the house stood on a platform scraped  out
of  the hillside, with a beautiful view of the whole country down to  St
Jago.  The accommodation was good; more comforts, more English comforts,
in the mansion than I had yet seen in Cuba; and as it was built of solid
slabs of limestone, and roofed with strong hardwood timbers and rafters,
and  tiled, it had sustained comparatively little injury, as it had  the
advantage of being at the same time sheltered by the overhanging  cliff.
It  stood  in  the  middle of a large platform of hard sun--dried  clay,
plastered  over, and as white as chalk, which extended about forty  feet
from the eaves of the house, in every direction, on which the coffee was
cured.  This platform was surrounded on all sides by the greenest  grass
I  had  ever seen, and overshadowed, not the house alone, but the  whole
level space, by one vast wild fig--tree.

"I say, Tom, do you see that Scotchman hugging the Creole, eh?"

"Scotchman!" said I, looking towards Don Ricardo, who certainly did  not
appear  to  be  particularly  amorous; on  the  contrary,  we  had  just
alighted, and the worthy man was enacting groom.

"Yes,"  continued Bang, "the Scotchman hugging the Creole; look at  that
tree--do you see the trunk of it?"

I  did  look  at  it.  It was a magnificent cedar, with a tall  straight
stem, covered over with a curious sort of fretwork, wove by the branches
of  some  strong  parasitical plant, which had warped itself  round  and
round  it,  by numberless snakelike convolutions, as if it  had  been  a
vegetable  Laocoon.  The tree itself shot up branchless to the  uncommon
height  of  fifty  feet; the average girth of the hunk  being  four--and
twenty  feet,  or  eight--feet in diameter.  The leaf of  the  cedar  is
small,  not  unlike the ash; but when I looked up, I  noticed  that  the
feelers  of  this ligneous serpent had twisted round the larger  boughs,
and blended their broad leaves with those of the tree, so that it looked
like two trees grafted into one; but, as Aaron Bang said, in a very  few
years the cedar would entirely disappear, its growth being impeded,  its
pith extracted, and its core rotted, by the baleful embraces of the wild
fig,  of "this Scotchman hugging the Creole." After we had fairly shaken
into our places, there was every promise of a very pleasant visit.   Our
host had a tolerable cellar, and although there was not much of style in
his  establishment, still there was a fair allowance of  comfort,  every
thing considered.  The evening after we arrived was most beautiful.  The
house,  situated  on  its  white plateau of  barbicues,  as  the  coffee
platforms  are  called, where large piles of the berries  in  their  red
cherry like husks had been blackening in the sun the whole forenoon, and
on  which  a  gang  of negroes was now employed covering  them  up  with
tarpawlins  for  the  night, stood in the centre of an  amphitheatre  of
mountains, the front box, as it were, the stage part opening on a bird's
eye--view  of the distant town and harbour, with the everlasting  ocean
beyond  it, the currents and flaws of wind making its surface look  like
ice, as we were too distant to discern the, heaving of the swell, or the
motion of the billows.  The fast falling shades of evening were deepened
by the sombrous shadow of the immense tree overhead, and all down in the
deep  valley  was now becoming dark and undistinguishable,  through  the
blue  vapours that were gradually floating up towards us.  To the  left,
on  the shoulder of the Horseshoe Hill, the sunbeams still lingered, and
the  gigantic shadows of the trees on the right hand prong were strongly
cast  across the valley on a red precipitous bank near the  top  of  it.
The  sun  was descending beyond the wood, flashing through the branches,
as  if  they  had been on fire.  He disappeared.  It was a  most  lovely
still evening--the air--but hear the skipper.

"It is the hour when from the boughs,
The nightingale's high note is heard;
It is the hour when lovers vows,
Seem sweet in every whisper'd word;
And gentle winds and waters near,
Make music to the lonely ear.
Each flower the dews have lightly wet,
And in the sky the stars are met,
And on the wave is deeper blue,
And on the leaf is browner hue,
And in the heaven that clear obscure,
So softly dark, and darkly pure,
Whichfollows the decline of day,
When twilight melts beneath the moon away."

"Well  recited,  skipper," shouted Bang.  "Given  as  the  noble  poet's
verses   should   be  given.  I  did  not  know  the  extent   of   your
accomplishments;  grown poetical ever since you saw Francesca  Cangrejo,
eh?"

The darkness hid the gallant captain's blushes, if blush he did.

"I  say, Don Ricardo, who are those?"--half--a--dozen well--clad negroes
had  approached  the house by this time--"Ask them, Mr Bang;  take  your
friend Mr Cringle for an interpreter."

"Well, I will.  Tom, who are they?  Ask them--do."

I put the question, "Do you belong to the property?"

The  foremost,  a  handsome Negro answered me, "No, we  don't,  sir;  at
least, not till tomorrow."

"Not till tomorrow?"

"No, sir; somos caballeros hoy" (we are gentlemen to--day.)

"Gentlemen today; and, pray, what shall you be tomorrow?"

"Esclavos  otra  ves," (slaves again, sir,) rejoined  the  poor  fellow,
nowise daunted.

"And  you, my darling," said I to a nice well--dressed girl, who  seemed
to be the sister of the spokesman, ".what are you today, may I ask?"

She laughed--"Esclava, a slave to--day, but to--morrow I shall be free."

"Very strange."

"Not  at all, senor; there are six of us in a family, and one of  us  is
free  each  day,  all to father there," pointing to an old  grey--headed
negro,  who stood by, leaning on his staff--"he is free two days in  the
week; and as I am going to have a child,"--a cool admission,--"I want to
buy  another day for myself too--but Don Ricardo will tell you all about
it."

The Don by this time chimed in, talking kindly to the poor creatures;
but we had to retire, as dinner was now announced, to which we sat down.

Don Ricardo had been altogether Spanish in Santiago, because he lived
there amongst Spaniards, and every thing was Spanish about him; so with
the tact of his countrymen he had gradually been merged into the society
in which he moved, and having married a very high caste Spanish lady, he
at length became regularly amalgamated with the community.  But here, in
his mountain retreat, sole master, his slaves in attendance on him, he
was once more an Englishman, in externals, as he always was at heart,
and Richie Cloche, from the Lang Toon of Kirkaldy, shone forth in all
his glory as the kind hearted landlord.  His head household servant was
an English, or rather a Jamaica negro; his equipment, so far as the
dinner set out was concerned, was pure English; he would not even speak
any thing but English himself.

The entertainment was exceedingly good,--the only thing that puzzled us
uninitiated subjects, was a fricassee of Macaca worms, that is, the worm
which breeds in the rotten trunk of the cotton--tree, a beautiful little
insect, as big as a miller's thumb, with a white trunk and a black head
in one word, a gigantic caterpillar.

Bang fed thereon--he had been accustomed to it in Jamaica in some Creole
families where he visited, he said--but it was beyond my compass.
However, all this while we were having a great deal of fun, when Senora
Campana addressed her husband--"My dear, you are now in your English
mood, so I suppose we must go." We had dined at six, and it might now be
about eight.  Don Ricardo, with all the complacency in the world, bowed,
as much as to say, you are right, my dear, you may go, when his youngest
niece addressed him.

"Tio--my uncle," said she, in a low silver--toned voice, "Juana and I
have brought our guitars"--

"Not another word to be said," quoth Transom--"the guitars by all
means."

The girls in an instant, without any preparatory blushing, or other
botheration, rose, slipped their heads and right arms through the black
ribbons that supported their instruments, and stepped into the middle of
the room.

"The Moorish Maid of Granada," said Senora Campana.  They nodded.

"You shall take Fernando, the sailor's part," said Senora Candalaria,
the youngest sister, to Juana, "for your voice is deeper than mine, and
I shall be Anna."

"Agreed," said Juana, with a lovely smile, and an arch twinkle of her
eye towards me, and then launched forth in full tide, accompanying her
sweet and mellow voice on that too much neglected instrument, the
guitar.  It was a wild, irregular sort of ditty, with one or two
startling arabesque bursts in it.  As near as may be, the following
conveys the meaning, but not the poetry.

The Moorish Maid of Granada

FERNANDO

The setting moon hangs over the hill;
On the dark pure breast of the mountain lake
Still trembles her greenish silver wake,
And the blue mist floats over the rill.
And the cold streaks of dawning appear,
Giving token that sunrise is near;
And the fast clearing east is flushing,
And the watery clouds are blushing;
And the day--star is sparkling on high,
Like the fire of my Anna's dark eye.
The ruby--red clouds in the east
Float like islands upon the sea,
When the winds are asleep on its breast;
Ah, would that such calm were for me!

And see, the first streamer--like ray
From the unrisen god of day,
Is piercing the ruby--red clouds,
Shooting up like golden shrouds:
And like silver gauze falls the shower,
Leaving diamonds on bank, bush, and bower,
Amidst many unopened flower.
Why walks the dark maid of Granada?

ANNA

At evening when labour is done,
And cool'd in the sea is the sun;
And the dew sparkles clear on the rose,
And the flowers are beginning to close,
Which at nightfall again in the calm.

Their incense to God breathe in balm;
And the bat flickers up in the sky,
And the beetle hums moaningly by;
And to rest in the brake speeds the deer,
While the nightingale sings loud and clear.

Scorched by the heat of the sun's fierce light,
The sweetest flowers are bending most
Upon their slender stems;
More faint are they than if tempest tost,
Till they drink of the sparkling gems
That fall from the eye of night.

Hark! from lattices guitars are tinkling,
And though in heaven the stars are twinkling,
No tell--tale moon looks over the mountain,
To peer at her pale cold face in the fountain;
And serenader's mellow voice,
Wailing of war, or warbling of love,
Of love, while the melting maid of his choice,
Leans out from her bower above.

All is soft and yielding towards night,
When blending darkness shrouds all from the sight;
But chaste, chaste, is this cold, pure light,
Sang the Moorish maid of Granada.

After the song, we all applauded, and the ladies having made their
conges, retired.  The Captain and I looked towards Aaron Bang and Don
Ricardo; they were tooth and nail at something which we could not
understand.  So we wisely held our tongues.

"Very strange all this," quoth Bang.

"Not at all," said Ricardo.  "As I tell you, every slave here can have
himself or herself appraised, at any time they may choose, with liberty
to purchase their freedom day by day."

"But that would be compulsory manunmission," quoth Bang.

"And if it be," said Ricardo, "what then?  The scheme works well here
why should it not do so there--I mean with you, who have so many
advantages over us?"

This is an unentertaining subject to most people, but having no bias
myself, I have considered it but justice to insert in my log the
following letter, which Bang, honest fellow, addressed to me, some years
after the time I speak of.


MY DEAR CRINGLE,

"Since I last saw you in London, it is nearly, but not quite, three
years ago. I considered at the time we parted, that if I lived at the
rate of L3000 a--year, I was not spending one--half of my average
income, and on the faith of this I did plead guilty to my house in Park
Lane, and a carriage for my wife,----and, in short, I spent my L3000 a
year.  Where am I now?  In the old shop at Mammee Gully--my two eldest
daughters, little things, in the very middle of their education, hastily
ordered out, shipped as it were, like two bales of goods to Jamaica--my
eldest nephew, whom I had adopted, obliged to exchange from the--Light
Dragoons, and to enter a foot regiment, receiving the difference, which
but cleared him from his mess accounts.  But the world says I was
extravagant.  Like Timon, however--No, d--n Timon.  I spent money when I
thought I had it, and therein I did no more than the Duke of Bedford, or
Lord Grosvenor or many another worthy peer; and now when I no longer
have it, why, I cut my coat by my cloth, have made up my mind to
perpetual banishment here, and I owe no man a farthing."

But all this is wandering from the subject.  We are now asked in direct
terms to free our slaves.  I will not even glance at the injustice of
this demand, the horrible infraction of rights that it would lead to;
all this I will leave untouched; but, my dear fellow, were men in your
service or the army to do us justice, each in his small sphere in
England, how much good might you not do us?  Officers of rank are, of
all others, the most influential witnesses we could adduce, if they,
like you, have had opportunities of judging for themselves.  But I am
rambling from my object.  You may remember our escapade into Cuba, a
thousand years ago, when you were a lieutenant of the Firebrand.  Well,
you may also remember Don Ricardo's doctrine regarding the gradual
emancipation of the negroes, and how we saw his plan in full operation
at least I did, for you knew little of these matters.  Well, last year I
made a note of what then passed, and sent it to an eminent West India
merchant in London, who had it published in the Courier, but it did not
seem to please either one party or the other; a signal proof, one would
have thought, that there was some good in it.  At a later period, I
requested the same gentleman to have it published in Blackwood, where it
would at least have had a fair trial on its own merits, but it was
refused insertion.  My very worthy friend, who acted for old Kit at that
time as secretary of state for colonial affairs, did not like it, I
presume; it trenched a little, it would seem, on the integrity of his
great question; it approached to something like compulsory manumission,
about which he does rave.  Why will he not think on this subject like a
Christian man?  The country--I say so--will never sanction the retaining
in bondage of any slave, who is willing to pay his master his fair
appraised value.

Our friend----injures us, and himself too, a leetle by his ultra
notions.  However, hear what I propose, and what, as I have told you
formerly, was published in the Courier by no less a man than Lord----.

Scheme for the gradual Abolition of Slavery.

The following scheme of redemption for the slaves in our colonies is
akin to a practice that prevails in some of the Spanish settlements.

We have now bishops, (a most excellent measure,) and we may presume that
the inferior clergy will be much more efficient than heretofore.  It is
therefore proposed,--That every slave, on attaining the age of twenty
one years, should be, by act of Parliament, competent to apply to his
parish clergyman, and signify his desire to be appraised.  The
clergyman's business would then be to select two respectable appraisers
from amongst his parishioners, who should value the slave, calling in an
umpire if they disagreed.

As men even of good principles will often be more or less swayed by the
peculiar interests of the body to which they belong, the rector should
be instructed, if he saw any flagrant swerving from an honest
appraisement, to notify the same to his bishop, who, by application to
the governor, if need were, could thereby rectify it.  When the slave
was thus valued, the valuation should be registered by the rector, in a
book to be kept for that purpose, an attested copy of which should be
annually lodged amongst the archives of the colony.

We shall assume a case, where a slave is valued for LI20, Jamaica
currency.  He soon, by working by--hours, selling the produce of his
provision grounds, etc. Acquires L20; and how easily and frequently
this is done, every one knows, who is at all acquainted with West India
affairs.

He then shall have a right to pay to his owner this L20 as the price of
his Monday for ever, and his owner shall be bound to receive it.  A
similar sum would purchase him his freedom on Tuesday; and other four
instalments, to use a West India phrase, would buy him free altogether.
You will notice, I consider that he is already free on the Sunday.  Now,
where is the insurmountable difficulty here?  The planter may be put to
inconvenience, certainly, great inconvenience, but he has compensation,
and the slave has his freedom--if he deserves it; and as his
emancipation in nine cases out of ten would be a work of time, he would,
as he approached absolute freedom, become more civilized, that is, more
fit to be free; and as he became more civilized, new wants would spring
up, so that when he was finally free, he would not be content to work a
day or two in the week for subsistence merely.  He would work the whole
six to buy many little comforts, which, as a slave suddenly emancipated,
he never would have thought of.

As the slave becomes free, I would have his owner's allowance of
provisions and clothing decrease gradually.

It may be objected--suppose slaves partly free, to be taken in
execution, and sold for debt. I answer, let them be so.  Why cannot
three days of a man's labour be sold by the deputy marshal as well as
six?

Again--Suppose the gang is mortgaged, or liable to judgments against the
owner of it. I still answer, let it be so--only, in this case let the
slave pay his instalments into court, in place of paying them to his
owners, and let him apply to his rector for information in such a case.

By the register I would have kept, every one could at once see what
property an owner had in his gang--that is, how many were actually
slaves, and how many were in progress of becoming free.  Thus well
disposed and industrious slaves would soon become freemen.  But the idle
and worthless would still continue slaves, and why the devil shouldn't
they?

                       (Signed) A. B----.

There does seem to be a rough, yet vigorous sound sense in all this.
But I take leave of the subject, which I do not profess to understand;
only I am willing to bear witness in favour of my old friends, so far as
I can, conscientiously.

We returned next day to Santiago, and had then to undergo the bitterness
of parting.  With me it was a slight affair, but the skipper! However, I
will not dwell on it.  We reached the town towards evening.  The women
were ready to weep, I saw; but we all turned in, and next morning at
breakfast we were moved, I will admit--some more, some less.  Little
Reefy, poor fellow, was crying like a child; indeed he was little more,
being barely fifteen.

"Oh!  Mr Cringle, I wish I had never seen Miss Candalaria de los
Dolores; indeed I do."

This was Don Ricardo's youngest niece.

"Ah, Reefy, Reefy," said I, "you must make haste, and be made post, and
then"

"What does he call her?" said Aaron.

"Senora Tomassa Candalaria de los Dolores Gonzales y Vallejo," blubbered
out little Reefy.

"What a complicated piece of machinery she must be!" gravely rejoined
Bang.

The meal was protracted to a very unusual length, but time and tide wait
for no man.  We rose.  Aaron Bang advanced to make his bow to our kind
hostess; he held out his hand, but she, to Aaron's great surprise
apparently, pushed it on one side and regularly closing with our friend,
hugged him in right earnest. I have before mentioned that she was a very
small woman; so, as the devil would have it, the golden pin in her hair
was thrust into Aaron's eye, which made him jump back, wherein he lost
his balance, and away he went, dragging Madama Campana down on the top
of him.  However, none of us could--laugh now; we parted, jumped into
our boat, and proceeded straight to the anchorage, where three British
merchantmen were by this time riding all ready for sea.  We got on
board.  "Mr Yerk," said the Captain, "fire a gun, and hoist blue Peter
at the fore.  Loose the foretopsail." The masters came on board for
their instructions; we passed but a melancholy evening of it, and next
morning I took my last look of Santiago de Cuba.


CHAPTER XV


The Cruise of the Wave. The Action with the Slaver.

'O'er the glad waters of the dark blue sea,
Our thoughts as boundless, and our souls as free,
Far as the breeze can bear the billow's foam,
Survey our empire, and behold our home.
These are our realms, no limits to their sway.
Our flag the sceptre all who meet obey.'

BYRON, THE CORSAIR, I. 1--6.


At  three o'clock next morning, about an hour and a half before daydawn,
I  was  roused from my cot by the gruff voice of the boatswain on deck
"All hands up anchor."

The  next  moment the gunroom steward entered with a lantern,  which  he
placed on the table--"Gentlemen, all hands up anchor, if you please."

"Botheration!" grumbled one.

"Oh dear!" yawned another.

"How  merrily  we live that sailors be!" sung another in a most  doleful
strain,  and  in all the bitterness of heart consequent on being  roused
out of a warm nest so unceremoniously.  But no help for it; so up we all
got, and opening the door of my berth, I got out, and sat me down on the
bench that ran along the starboard side of the table.

For  the benefit of the uninitiated, let me describe a gunroom on  board
of  a  sloop of war.  Everybody knows that the Captain's cabin  occupies
the  after  part  of  the ship; next to it, on the  same  deck,  is  the
gunroom.   In a corvette, such as the Firebrand, it is a room, as,  near
as  may  be,  twenty  feet long by twelve wide, and lighted  by  a  long
scuttle, or skylight, in the deck above.  On each side of this room runs
a  row of small chambers, seven feet long by six feet wide, boarded  off
from  the  main  saloon, or, in nautical phrase, separated  from  it  by
bulkheads, each with a door and small window opening into the same, and,
generally speaking, with a small scuttle in the side of the ship towards
the  sea.   These are the officers' sleeping apartments, in  which  they
have  each  a  chest  of  drawers and basin--stand;  while  overhead  is
suspended  a cot, or hammock, kept asunder by a wooden frame,  six  feet
long by about two broad, slung from cleats nailed to the beams above, by
two  lanyards fastened to rings, one at the head, and the other  at  the
foot;  from which radiate a number of smaller cords, which are  fastened
to the canvass of the cot; while a small strip of canvass runs from head
to  foot  on  each side, so as to prevent the sleeper from rolling  out.
The  dimensions  of  the  gunroom  are,  as  will  be  seen,  very  much
circumscribed  by the side berths; and when you take into account,  that
the  centre is occupied by a long table, running the whole length of the
room,  flanked by a wooden bench, with a high back to it, on each  side,
and  a  large  clumsy chair at the head, and another at  the  foot,  not
forgetting  the  sideboard at the head of the table,  (full  of  knives,
forks,  spoons,  tumblers,  glasses &c.  &c.  &c.  stuck  into  mahogany
sockets,)  all of which are made fast to the deck by strong  cleats  and
staples, and bands of spunyarn, so as to prevent them fetching  way,  or
moving, when the vessel pitches or rolls, you will understand that there
is  no  great  scope to expatiate upon, free of the table, benches,  and
bulkheads of the cabins.  While I sat monopolizing the full light of the
lantern, and accoutring myself as decently as the hurry would admit  of,
I  noticed  the officers, in their nightgowns and night--caps,  as  they
extricated   themselves  from  their  coops;  and   picturesque--looking
subjects enough there were amongst them, in all conscience.  At  length,
that  is in about ten minutes from the time we were called, we were  all
at stations--a gun was fired, and we weighed, and then stood out to sea,
running  along about four knots, with the land--wind right aft.   Having
made  an  offing  of three miles or so, we outran the  terral,  and  got
becalmed in the belt of smooth water between it and the sea--breeze.  It
was  striking to see the three merchant--ships gradually draw  out  from
the land, until we were all clustered together in a bunch, with a half a
gale  of wind curling the blue waves within musket--shot, while all  was
long  swell and smooth water with us.  At length the breeze reached  us,
and  we  made  sail with our convoy to the southward and  eastward,  the
lumbering  merchantmen crowding every inch of canvass,  while  we  could
hardly  keep  astern, under close--reefed topsails, foresail,  jib,  and
spanker.

"Pipe to breakfast," said the Captain to Mr Yerk.

"A sail abeam of us to windward!"

"What  is she?" sung out the skipper to the man at the masthead who  had
hailed.

"A  small schooner, sir; she has fired a gun, and hoisted an ensign  and
pennant."

"How is she steering?"

"She has edged away for us, sir."

"Very well.--Mr Yerk, make the signal for the convoy to stand on."  Then
to the boatswain--

"Mr Catwell, have the men gone to breakfast?"

"No, sir, but they are just going."

"Then pipe belay with breakfast for a minute, will you?  All hands  make
sail!"

"Crack on, Mr Yerk, and let us overhaul this small swaggerer."

In  a  trice  we  had  all sail set, and were staggering  along  on  the
larboard tack, close upon a wind.  We hauled out from the merchant ships
like  smoke, and presently the schooner was seen from the deck.--"Go  to
breakfast  now." The crew disappeared, all to the officers, man  at  the
helm, quartermaster at the conn, and signalman.

The first lieutenant had the book open on the drum of the capstan before
him.  "Make our number," said the Captain.  It was done.  "What does she
answer?"

The  signalman  answered from the fore--rigging, where  he  had  perched
himself  with his glass--"She makes the signal to telegraph, sir--3,  9,
2, at the fore, sir"--and so on; which translated was simply this--"The
Wave, with despatches from the admiral."

"Oh, ho," said Transom; "what is she sent for?  Whenever the people have
got their breakfast, tack, and stand towards her, Mr Yerk."

The  little  vessel approached.--"Shorten sail, Mr Yerk, and  heave  the
ship to," said the Captain to the first lieutenant.

"Ay, ay, sir."

"All hands, Mr Catwell."

Presently the boatswain's whistle rung sharp and clear, while his  gruff
voice,  to  which  his mates bore any thing but mellow  burdens,  echoed
through the ship--"All hands shorten sail--fore and mainsails haul  up
haul down to jib--in topgallant sails--now back the main--topsail."

By  heaving--to, we brought the Wave on our weather bow.   She  was  now
within a cable's length of the corvette; the captain was standing on the
second  foremost, gun, on the larboard side.  "Mafame," to his  steward,
"hand  me  up  my trumpet." He hailed the little vessel "Ho,  the  Wave,
ahoy!"

Presently  the  responding "hillo" came down the wind  to  us  from  the
officer in command of her, like an echo--"Run under our stern and heave
to, to leeward."

"Ay, ay, sir."

As  the  Wave  came  to  the wind, she lowered down  her  boat,  and  Mr
Jigmaree, the boatswain of the dockyard in Jamaica, came on board,  and,
touching his hat, presented his despatches to the Captain.  Presently he
and  the  skipper retired into the cabin, and all hands were  inspecting
the  Wave  in  her  new  character of one  of  his  Britannic  Majesty's
cruisers.   When  I  had last seen her she was a most  beautiful  little
craft,  both in hull and rigging, as ever delighted the eye of a sailor;
but  the  dockyard riggers and carpenters had fairly bedeviled  her,  at
least  so  far as appearances went.  First, they had replaced the  light
rail  on her gunwale, by heavy solid bulwarks four feet high, surmounted
by  hammock  nettings,  at least another foot, so that  the  symmetrical
little vessel, that formerly floated on the foam light as a seagull, now
looked  like a clumsy dish--shaped Dutch dogger. Her long slender  wands
of masts, which used to swig about, as if there were neither shrouds nor
stays  to  support them, were now as taut and stiff as church  steeples,
with  four heavy shrouds of a side, and stays and back--stays,  and  the
Devil knows what all.

"Now,"  quoth Tailtackle, "if them heave'emtaughts at the yard have  not
taken the speed out of the little beauty, I am a Dutchman." Timotheus, I
may  state in the bygoing, was not a Dutchman; he was fundamentally  any
thing but a Dutchman; but his opinion was sound, and soon verified to my
cost.  Jigmaree now approached.

"The Captain wants you in the cabin, sir," said he.
I  descended,  and found the skipper seated at a table  with  his  clerk
beside  him, and several open letters lying before him.  "Sit  down,  Mr
Cringle."  I  took a chair.  "There--read that," and he  threw  an  open
letter across the table to me, which ran as follows:

SIR,

"The  Vice--Admiral, commanding on the Jamaica station,  desires  me  to
say,  that  the bearer, the boatswain of the dockyard, Mr Luke Jigmaree,
has  instructions to cruise for, and if possible to fall  in  with  you,
before  you  weather Cape Maize, and falling in with you, to deliver  up
charge  of  the vessel to you, as well as of the five negroes,  and  the
pilot,  Peter Mangrove, who are on board of her.  The Wave  having  been
armed  and fitted with every thing considered necessary, you are to  man
her with thirty--five of your crew, including officers, and to place her
under  the  command of Lieutenant Thomas Cringle, who is to be furnished
with  a copy of this letter authenticated by your signature, and to whom
you will give written instructions, that he is first of all to cruise in
the  great  Cuba channel, until the 14th proximo, for the prevention  of
piracy,  and the suppression of the slave--trade carried on between  the
island  of  Cuba and the coast of Africa, and to detain and  carry  into
Havanna, or Nassau, New Providence, all vessels having slaves on  board,
which  he  may  have  reason to believe have  been  shipped  beyond  the
prescribed  limits on the African coast as specified in the margin;  and
after   the  14th  he  is  to  proceed  direct  to  New  Providence   if
unsuccessful, there to land Mr Jigmaree, and the dockyard  negroes,  and
await  your return from the northward, after having seen the merchantmen
clear of the Caicos passage.  When you have rejoined the Wave at Nassau,
you  are to proceed with her as your tender to Crooked Island, and there
to await instructions from the Vice--Admiral, which shall be transmitted
by  the  packet  to  sail  on  the 9th proxinio,  to  the  care  of  the
postmaster. I have the honour to be, sir, your obedient servant."
--------, Sec.


To the Hon.  Captain Transom, etc.


To  say sooth, I was by no means amorous of this independent command, as
an  idea  had,  at  the time I speak of, gone abroad in  the  navy,  the
lieutenants,  commanding  small  vessels,  seldom  rose  higher,  unless
through  extraordinary interest, and I took the liberty  of  stating  my
repugnance to my captain.

He  smiled,  and threw over another letter to me; it was a  private  one
from the Admiral's Secretary, and was as follows:(Confidential.)

My DEAR TRANSOM,

"The Vice Admiral has got a hint from Sir----, to kick that wild splice,
young  Cringle, about a bit.  It seems he is a nephew of Old Blueblazes,
and  as he has taken a fancy to the lad, he has promised his mother that
he  will do his utmost to give him opportunities of being knocked on the
head,  for  all of which the old lady has professed herself  wonderfully
indebted.   As  the  puppy  has  peculiar  notions,  hint,  directly  or
indirectly, that he is not to be permanently bolted down to  the  little
and that if half a dozen skippers (you, my darling, among the rest) were
to  evaporate during the approaching hot months, he may have some  small
chance of t'other swab. Write me, and mind the claret and curacoa.   Put
no  address  on  either; and on coming to anchor,  send  notice  to  old
Peterkin in the lodge at the Master Attendant's, and he will relieve you
and  the  pies  de  gallo,  some calm evening, of  all  farther  trouble
regarding  them.  Don't forget the turtle from Crooked Island,  and  the
cigars."

"Always, my dear Transom,"

"Yours sincerely,"

"Oh, I forgot.  The Admiral begs you will spare him some steady old
hands to act as gunner, boatswain, &c.--elderly men, if you please, who
will shorten sail before the squall strikes him.  If you float him away
with a crew of boys, the little scamp will get bothered, or capsized, in
a jiffy.  All this for your worship's government.  How do you live with
your passenger--prime follow, an't he?  My love to him.  Lady----is
dying to see him again."

"WELL, MR CRINGLE, what say you?"

"Of course, I must obey, sir;--highly flattered by Mr Secretary's good
opinion, any how."

The Captain laughed heartily.

"It is nearly calm, I see.  We must set about manning this seventy four
for you, without delay.  So, come along, Captain Cringle."

When we got on deck,--"Hail the Wave to close, Mr Yerk," said Transom.
"Lower away the boat, and pipe away the yaulers, boatswain's mate."

Presently the Captain and I were on the Wave's deck, where I was much
surprised to find no less personages than Pepperpot Wagtail, and Paul
Gelid, Esquires.  Mr Gelid, a conch, or native of the Bahamas, was the
same yawning, drawling, long--legged Creole as ever.  He had been ill
with fever, and had asked a passage to Nassau, where his brother was
established.  At bottom, however, he was an excellent fellow, warm
hearted, honourable, and upright.  As for little Wagtail--oh, he was a
delight!--a small round man, with all the Jamaica Creole irritability of
temper, but also all the Jamaica warmth of heart about him
straightforward, and scrupulously conscientious in his dealings, but
devoted to good cheer in every shape.  He had also been ailing, and had
adventured on the cruise in order to recruit. I scarcely know how to
describe his figure better than by comparing his corpus to an egg, with
his little feet stuck through the bottom of the shell; but he was
amazingly active withal.

Both the Captain and myself were rejoiced to see our old friends; and it
was immediately fixed that they should go on board the corvette, and
sling their cots alongside of Mr Bang, so long as the courses--of the
two vessels lay together.  This being carried into execution, we set
about our arrangements.  Our precious blockheads at the dockyard had
fitted a thirty--two pound carronade on the pivot, and stuck two long
sixes, one on each side of the little vessel. I hate carronades. I had,
before now, seen thirty--two pound shot thrown by them jump off a ship's
side with a rebound like a football, when a shot from an eighteen--
pounder long gun went crash, at the same range, through both sides of
the ship, whipping off a leg and arm, or aiblins a head or two, in its
transit.

"My dear sir," said I, "don't shove me adrift with that old pot there
do lend me one of your long brass eighteen--pounders."

"Why, Master Cringle, what is your antipathy to carronades?"

"I have no absolute antipathy to them, sir--they are all very well in
their way.  For instance, I wish you would fit me with two twelvepound
carronades instead of those two popgun long sixes.  These, with thirty
muskets, and thirty--five men or so, would make me very complete."

"A modest request," said Captain Transom.

"Now, Tom Cringle, you have overshot your mark, my fine fellow," thought
I; butjit was all right, and that forenoon the cutter was hoisted out
with the guns in her, and the others dismounted and sent back in
exchange; and in fine, after three days' hard work, I took the command
of H.B.M. schooner, Wave, with Timothy Tailtackle as gunner, the senior
midshipman as master, one of the carpenter's crew as carpenter, and a
boatswain's--mate as boatswain, a surgeon's mate as surgeon, the
captain's clerk as purser, and thirty foremast--men, besides the
blackies, as the crew.  But the sailing of the little beauty had been
regularly spoiled.  We could still in light winds weather on' the
corvette, it is true, but then she was a slow top, unless it blew half a
gale of wind; and as for going any thing free, why a sand barge would
have beaten us.--We kept company with the Firebrand until we weathered
Cape Maize.  It was near five o'clock in the afternoon, the corvette was
about half a mile on our lee--bow, when, while walking the deck, after
an early dinner, Tailtackle came up to me.

"The Commodore has hove--to, sir."

"Very like," said I; "to allow the merchant--ships to close, I presume."

"A gun," said little Reefpoint.  "Ah--what signal now?"--It was
the signal to close.

"Put the helm up and run down to him," said I. It was done--and
presently the comfortable feeling of bowling along before the breeze,
succeeded the sharp yerking digging motion of the little vessel, tearing
and pitching through a head sea, close upon a wind.  The water was
buzzing under our bows, and we were once more close under the stern of
the corvette.  There was a boat alongside ready manned.  The Captain
hailed, "I sent your orders on board, Mr Cringle, to bear up on your
separate cruise." At the same moment, the Firebrand's ensign and pennant
were hoisted--we did the same--a gun from the Commodore--ditto from the
tidy little Wave--and lo!  Thomas Cringle, esquire, launched for the
first time on his own bottom.

By this time the boat was alongside, with Messieurs Aaron Bang,
Pepperpot Wagtail, and Paul Gelid--the former with his cot, and half a
dozen cases of wine, and some pigs, and some poultry, all under the
charge of his black servant.

"Hillo," said I--"Mr Wagtail is at home here, you know, Mr Bang, and so
is Mr Gelid; but to what lucky chance am I indebted for your society, my
dear sir?"

"Thank your stars, Tom--Captain Cringle, I beg pardon--and be grateful;
I am sick of rumbling tumbling in company with these heavy tools of
merchantmen, so I entreated Transom to let me go and take a turn with
you, promising to join the Firebrand again at Nassau."

"Why, I am delighted,"--and so I really was.  "But, my dear sir--I may
lead you a dance, and, peradventure into trouble--a small vessel may
catch a Tartar, you know.

"D--n the expense," rejoined my jovial ally; "why, the hot little
epicurean Wagtail, and Gelid, cold and frozen as he is, have both taken
a fancy to me--and no wonder, knowing my pleasant qualities as they do
ahem; so, for their sakes, I volunteer on this piece of knight--errantry
as much as'--

"Poo--you be starved, Aaron dear," rapped out little Wagtail; "you came
here, because you thought you should have more fun, and escape the
formality of the big ship, and eke the Captain's sour claret."

"Ah," said Gelid, "my fine fellow," with his usual Creole drawl, "you
did not wait for my opinion.  Ah--oh--why, Captain Cringle, a thousand
pardons.  Friend Bang, there, swears that he can't do without you; and
all he says about me is neither more nor less than humbug--ah."

"My lovely yellowsnake," quoth Aaron, "and my amiable dumpling,
gentlemen both, now, do hold your tongues.--Why, Tom, here we are, never
you mind how, after half a quarrel with the skipper--will you take us,
or will you send us back, like rejected addresses?"

"Send you back, my boys!  No, no, too happy to get you." Another gun
from the corvette.  "Firebrands, you must shove off.  My compliments,
Wiggins, to the Captain, and there's a trifle for you to drink my
health, when you get into port." The boat shoved off--the corvette
filled her maintopsail.  "Put the helm down--ease off the mainsheet
stand by to run up the squaresail.  How is her head, Mr Tailtackle?"

Timothy gave a most extraordinary grin at my bestowing the Mister on him
for the first time.

"North--west, sir."

"Keep her so"--and having bore up, we rapidly widened our distance from
the Commodore and the fleet.

All men know, or should know, that on board of a man--of--war, there is
never any "yo heave oh'ing." That is confined to merchant vessels.  But
when the crew are having a strong pull of any rope, it is allowable for
the man next the belaying pin, to sing out, in order t@6 give unity to
the drag, "one--two--three," the strain of the other men increasing with
the figure.  The tack of the mainsail had got jammed somehow, and on my
desiring it to be hauled up, the men, whose province it was, were unable
to start it.

"Something foul aloft," said I.

Tailtackle came up.  "What are you fiddling at, men?  Give me here--one
two--three."

Crack went the strands of the rope under the paws of the Titan, whereby
the head of the outermost sailor pitched right into Gelid's stomach,
knocked him over and capsized him head foremost into the wind sail
which was let down through the skylight into the little well cabin of
the schooner.  It so happened that there was a bucket full of Spanish
brown paint standing on the table in the cabin, right below the hoop of
the canvass funnel, and into it plopped the august pate of Paul Gelid,
esquire.  Bang had, in the meantime, caught him by the heels, and with
the assistance of Pearl, the handsome negro formerly noticed, who, from
his steadiness, had been spared to me as a quartermaster, the conch was
once more hoisted on deck, with a scalp of red paint, reaching down over
his eyes.

"I say," quoth Bang, "Gelid, my darling, not quite so smooth as the real
Macassar, eh?  Shall I try my hand--can shave beautifully--eh?"

"Ah," drawled Gelid, "don't require it--lucky my head was shaved in that
last fever, Aaron dear.  Ah--let me think--you tall man--you sailor--
fellow--ah--do me the favour to scrape me with your knife--ah--and pray
call my servant."

Timothy, to whom he had addressed himself, set to, and scraped the red
paint off his poll; and having called his servant, Chew Chew, handed him
over to the negro, who, giving his arm to him, helped him below, and
with the assistance of Cologne water, contrived to scrub him decently
clean.

As the evening fell, the breeze freshened; and during the night it blew
strong, so that from the time we bore up, and parted company with the
Firebrand, until day--dawn next morning, we had run I30 miles or thereby
to the northward and westward, and were then on the edge of the Great
Bahama Bank.  The breeze now failed us, and we lay roasting in the sun
until mid--day, the current sweeping us to the northward, and still
farther on to the bank, until the water shoaled to three fathoms.  At
this time the sun was blazing fiercely right overhead; and from the
shallowness of the water, there was not the smallest swell, or
undulation of the surface.  The sea, as far as the eye could reach, was
a sparkling light green, from the snow--white sand at the bottom, as if
a level desert had been suddenly submerged under a few feet of crystal
clear water, which formed a cheery spectacle, when compared with the
customary leaden, or dark blue--colour of the rolling fathomless ocean.
It was now dead calm.--"Fishing lines there--Idlers, fishing lines,"
said I; and in a minute there were forty of them down over the side.

In Europe, fish in their shapes partake of the sedate character of the
people who inhabit the coasts of the seas or rivers in which they swim
at least I think so.  The salmon, the trout, the cod, and all the other
tribes of the finny people, are reputable in their shapes, and
altogether respectable--looking creatures.  But, within the tropics,
Dame Nature plays strange vagaries; and here, on the great Bahama Bank,
every new customer, as he floundered in on deck--no joke to him, poor
fellow--elicited shouts of laughter from the crew.  They were in no
respect shaped like fish of our cold climates; some were all head
others all tail--some, so far as shape went, had their heads where, with
submission, I conceived their tails should have been; and then the
colours, the intense brilliancy of the scales of these monstrous
looking animals!  We hooked up a lot of bonitos, 10 Lbs apiece, at the
least.  But Wagtail took small account of them.

"Here," said Bang, at this moment, "by all that is wonderful, look
here!" And he drew up a fish about a foot long, with a crop like a
pigeon of the tumbler kind, which began to make a loud snorting noise.

"Ah," drawled Gelid, "good fish, with claret sauce."

"Daresay," rejoined Aaron; "but do your Bahama fish speak, Paul, eh?
Balaam's ass was a joke to this fellow."

I have already said that the water was not quite three fathoms deep, and
it was so clear that I could see down to the very sand, and there were
the fish cruising about in great numbers.

"Haul in, Wagtail--you have hooked him," and up came a beautiful black
grouper, about four pounds weight.

"Ah, there is the regular jiggery--jiggery," sung out little Reefpoint,
at the same moment, as he in turn began to pull up his line.  "Stand by
to land him," and a red snapper, for all the world like a gigantic gold
fish, was hauled on board; and so we carried on, black snappers, red
snappers, and rock fish, and a vast variety, for all of which, however,
Wagtail had names pat, until at length I caught a most lovely dolphin--a
beauty to look at--but dry, terribly dry to eat. I cast it on the deck,
and the chameleon tints of the dying fish, about which so many lies have
been said and sung, were just beginning to fade, and wax pale, and ashy,
and deathlike, when I felt another strong jiggery jiggery at my line,
which little Reefpoint had, in the meantime, baited afresh.  "Zounds!  I
have caught a whale--a shark at the very least" and I pulled him in,
hand over hand.

"A most noble Jew fish," said I.

"A Jew fish!" responded Wagtail.

"A Jew fish!" said Aaron Bang.

"A Jew fish!" said Paul Gelid.

"My dear Cringle," continued Wagtail, "when do you dine?"

"At three, as usual."

"Then, Mr Reefpoint, will you have the great kindness to cast off your
sink, and hook that splendid fellow by the tail--only through the
gristle--don't prick him in the flesh--and let him meander about till
half--past two?"

Reefy was half inclined to be angry at the idea of his Majesty's officer
being converted into a cook's mate.

"Why," said I, "we shall put him in a tub of water, here on deck, Mr
Wagtail, if you please."

"God bless me, no!" quoth the gastronome.  "Why, he is strong as an
eagle, and will smash himself to mummy in half an hour in a tub.  No--no
see, he weighs twelve pounds at the very lightest.  Lord!  Mr Cringle,
I am surprised at you."

The fish was let overboard again, according to his desire, and hauled in
at the very moment he indicated by his watch, when, having seen him cut
up and cleaned, with his own eyes--I believe I may say with his own
hands--he betook himself to his small crib to dress.

At dinner our Creole friend was very entertaining.  Bang drew him out,
and had him to talk on all his favourite topics in a most amusing
manner.  All at once Gelid lay back on his chair.

"My God," said he, "I have broken my tooth with that confounded hard
biscuit--terrible--really: ah!"--and he screwed up his face, as if he
had been eating sourcrout, or had heard of the death of a dear friend.

"Poo," quoth Aaron, "any comb maker will furnish you forth as good as
new; those grinders you brag of are not your own, Gelid, you know that."

"Indeed, Aaron, my dear, I know nothing of the kind; but this I know,
that I have broken a most lovely white front tooth, ah!"

"Oh, you be hanged," said Aaron; "why, you have been bechopped any time
these ten years, I know."

The time wore on, and it might have been half past seven when we went on
deck.

It was a very dark night--Tailtackle had the watch.  "Any thing in
sight, Mr Tailtackle?"

"Why, no, sir; but I have just asked your steward for your night glass,
as, once or twice--but it is so thick--Pray, sir, how far are we off the
Hole in the Wall?"

"Why, sixty miles at the least."

The Hole in the Wall is a very remarkable rock in the Crooked Island
Passage, greatly resembling, as the name betokens, a wall breached by
the sea, or by battering cannon, which rises abruptly out of the water,
to a height of forty feet.

"Then," quoth Tailtackle sharply, "there must be a sail close aboard of
us, to windward there."

"Where?" said I. "Quick, send for my night--glass."

"I have it here in my hand, sir."

"Let me see"--and I peered through it until my eyes ached again.  I
could see nothing, and resumed my walk on the quarterdeck.  Tailtackle,
in the meantime, continued to look through the telescope, and as I
turned from aft to walk forward, a few minutes after this--"Why, sir,"
said he, "it clears a bit, and I see the object that has
puzzled me again."

"Eh? give me the glass"--in a second I caught it.  "By Jupiter, you say
true, Tailtackle! beat to quarters--quick--clear away the long gun
forward there!"

All was bustle for a minute. I kept my eye on the object, but I could
not make out more, than that it was a strange sail; I could neither
judge of her size nor her rig, from the distance, and the extreme
darkness of the night.  At length I handed the glass to Tailtackle
again.  We were at this time standing in towards the Cuba shore, with a
fine breeze, and going along seven knots, as near as could be.

"Give the glass to Mr Jigmaree, Mr Tailtackle, and come forward here,
and see all snug."

The long gun was slewed round--both carronades were run out, all three
being loaded, double shotted, and carefully primed--the whole crew, with
our black supernumeraries, being at quarters.

"I see her quite distinct now, sir," sung out Timotheus.

"Well, what looks she like?"

"A large brig, sir, by the wind on the same tack--you can see her now
without the glass--there--with the naked eye."

I looked, and certainly fancied I saw some towering object rising high
and dark to windward, like some mighty spectre walking the deep, but I
could discern nothing more.

"She is a large vessel, sure enough, sir," said Timothy once more "now
she is hauling up her courses, sir--she takes in topgallant sails why,
she is bearing up across our bows, sir--mind she don't rake us."

"The deuce!" said I. I now saw the chase very distinctly bear up.  "Put
the helm up--keep her away a bit--steady at that will do--fire a shot
across her bows, Mr Tailtackle--and, Mr Reefpoint, show the private
signal." The gun was fired, and the lights shown, but our spectral
friend was all darkness and silence.  "Mr Scarfemwell," said I to the
carpenter, "stand by the long gun.  Tailtackle, I don't like that chap
open the magazine." By this time the strange sail was on our quarter, we
shortened sail, while he, finding that his manoeuvre of crossing our
bows had been foiled by our bearing up also, got the foretack on board
again, and set his topgallant sails, all very cleverly.  He was not far
out of pistol--shot.  Tailtackle, in his shirt and trowsers, and felt
shoes, now stuck his head up the main hatchway.

"I would recommend your getting the hatches on, sir--that fellow is not
honest, sir, take my word for it."

"Never mind, Mr Tailtackle, never mind.  Forward, there; Mr Jigmaree,
slap a round shot into him, since he won't speak, or heave to--right
between his masts, do you hear--are you ready?"

"All ready, sir."
"Fire." The gun was fired, and simultaneously we heard a crash on board
the strange sail, followed by a piercing yell, similar to what the
negroes raise over a dead comrade, and then a long melancholy howl.

"A slaver, and the shot has told, sir," said Mr Handlead, the master.

"Then we shall have some fun for it," thought I. I had scarcely spoken,
when the brig once more shortened sail; and the instant that the
foresail rose, he let fly his bow gun at us--then another, another, and
another.

"Nine guns of a side, as I am a sinner," quoth jigmaree; and three of
the shot struck us, mortally wounded one poor fellow, and damaged poor
little Reefy by a splinter in the side.

"Stand by, men--take good aim--fire"--and we again let drive the long
gun and carronade; but our friend was too quick for us, for by this time
he had once more hauled his wind, and made sail as close to it as he
could stagger.  We crowded every thing in chase, but he had the heels of
us, and in an hour he was once more nearly out of sight in the dark
night, right to windward.

"Keep, at him, Mr Jigmaree;" and as I feared he was running us in under
the land, I dived to consult the chart.  There, in the cabin, I found
Wagtail, Gelid, and Bang, sitting smoking on each side of the small
table, with some brandy and water before them.

"Ah," quoth Gelid, "ah! fighting a little?  Not pleasant in the evening,
certainly."

"Confound you," said Aaron, "why will you bother at this awkward
moment?"

Meanwhile Wagtail was a good deal discomposed.

"My dear fellow, hand me over that deviled biscuit."

Bang handed him over the dish, slipping into it some fragments of ship
biscuit, as hard as flint.  All this time I was busy poring over the
chart.  Wagtail took up a piece and popt it into his mouth.

"Zounds, Bang--my dear Aaron, what dentist are you in league with?
Gelid first breaks his pet fang, and now you"--

"Poo, poo," quoth his friend, "don't bother now--hillo--what the deuce
I say, Wagtail--Gelid, my lad, look there"--as one of the seamen, with
another following him, brought down on his back the poor fellow who had
been wounded, and laid his bloody load on the table.

To those who are unacquainted with these matters, it may be right to
say, that the captain's cabin, in a small vessel like the Wave, is often
in an emergency used as a cockpit--and so it was in the present
instance.

"Beg pardon, Captain and gentlemen," said the surgeon, "but I must, I
fear, perform an ugly operation on this poor fellow. I fancy you had
better go on deck, gentlemen."

Now I had an opportunity to see of what sterling metal my friends were
at bottom made.  Mr Bang in a twinkling had his coat off.

"Doctor, I can be of use, I know it--no skill, but steady nerves,"
although he had reckoned a leetle without his host here,--"And I can
swathe a bandage too, although no surgeon," said Wagtail.

Gelid said nothing, but he was in the end the best surgeon's mate
amongst them.  The poor fellow, Wiggins, one of the captain's gigs, and
a most excellent man, in quarterdeck parlance, was now laid on the table
a fine handsome young fellow, faint and pale, very pale, but courageous
as a lion, even in his extremity.  It appeared that a round shot had
shattered his leg above the knee.  A tourniquet had been applied on his
thigh, and there was not much bleeding.

"Captain," said the poor fellow, while Bang supported him in his arms,
"I shall do yet, sir; indeed I have no great pain."

All this time the surgeon was cutting off his trowsers, and then, to be
sure, a terrible spectacle presented itself.  The foot and leg, blue and
shrunk, were connected with the thigh by a band of muscle about two
inches wide, and an inch thick; that fined away to a bunch of white
tendons or sinews at the knee, which again swelled out as they melted
into the muscles of the calf of the leg; but as for the knee bone, it
was smashed to pieces, leaving white spikes protruding from the
shattered limb above, as well as from the shank beneath.  The doctor
gave the poor fellow a large dose of laudanum in a glass of brandy, and
then proceeded to amputate the limb, high up on the thigh.  Bang stood
the knife part of it very steadily, but the instant the saw rasped
against the shattered bone he shuddered.

"I am going, Cringle--can't stand that--sick as a dog"--and he was so
faint that I had to relieve him in supporting the poor fellow.  Wagtail
had also to go on deck, but Paul Gelid remained firm as a rock.  The
limb was cut off, the arteries taken up very cleverly, and the surgeon
was in the act of slacking the tourniquet a little, when the thread that
fastened the largest, or femoral artery, suddenly gave way and a gush
like the jet from a fire--engine took place.  The poor fellow had just
time to cry out, "Take that cold hand off my heart!" when his chest
collapsed, his jaw fell, and in an instant his pulse stopped.


"Dead as Julius Caesar, Captain," said Gelid, with his usual
deliberation.  Dead enough, thought I; and I was leaving the cabin to
resume my post on deck, when I stumbled against something at the ladder
foot.

"My, what is that?" grumbled I.

"It is me, sir," said a small faint voice.

"You!--who are you?"

"Reefpoint, sir."

"Bless me, boy, what are you doing here?  Not hurt, I hope?"

"A little, sir--a graze from a splinter, sir--the same shot that struck
poor Wiggins knocked it off, sir."

"Why did you not go to the doctor, then, Mr Reefpoint?"

"I waited till he was done with Wiggins, sir; but now, since it is all
over with him, I will go and be dressed."

His voice grew fainter and fainter, until I could scarcely hear him. I
got him in my arms, and helped him into the cabin, where, on stripping
the poor little fellow, it was found that he was much hurt on the right
side, just above the hip.  Bang's kind heart, for by this time a glass
of water had cured him of his faintness, shone conspicuous on this
occasion.

"Why, Reefy--little Reefy--you are not hurt, my man--Surely you are not
wounded--such a little fellow,--I should have as soon thought of firing
at a musquitto."

"Indeed, sir, but I am; see here."--Bang looked at the hurt, as he
supported the wounded midshipman in his arms.

"God help me," said the excellent fellow, "you seem to me fitter for
your mother's nursery, my poor dear boy, than to be knocked about in
this coarse way here."

Reefy, at this moment, fell over into his arms, in a dead faint.

"You must take my berth, with the Captain's permission," said Aaron,
while he and Wagtail undressed him with the greatest care, and placed
him in the narrow crib.

"Thank you, my dear sir," moaned little Reefpoint; "were my mother here,
sir she would thank you too."

Stern duty now called me on deck, and I heard no more.  The night was
still very dark, and I could see nothing of the chase, but I made all
the sail I could in the direction which I calculated she would steer,
trusting that, before morning, we might get another glimpse of her.  In
a little while Bang came on deck.

"I say, Tom, now since little Reefy is asleep--what think you big craft
that--nearly caught a Tartar--not very sorry he has escaped, eh?"

"Why, my dear sir, I trust he has not escaped; I hope, when the day
breaks, now since we have less wind, that we may have a tussle with him
yet."

"No, you don't wish it, do you, really and truly?"

"Indeed, I do, sir; and the only thing which bothers me is the peril
that you and your friends must necessarily encounter."

"Poo, poo, don't mind us, Tom, don't mind us; but an't he too big for
you, Tom?"

He said this in such a comical way, that, for the life of me, I could
not help laughing.

"Why, we shall see; but attack him I must, and shall, if I can get at
him.  However, we shall wait till morning; so I recommend your turning
in, now since they have cleared away the cockpit out of the cabin; so
good--night, my dear sir--I must stay here, I fear."

"Good--night, Tom; God bless you.  I shall go and comfort Wagtail and
Paul."

I  was  at this time standing well aft on the larboard side of the deck,
close abaft of the tiller--rope, so that, with no earthly disposition to
be  an  eavesdropper, I could neither help seeing nor hearing  what  was
going  on in the cabin, as the small open skylight was close to  my  All
vestiges  of the cockpit had been cleared away, and the table  was  laid
for  supper.  Wagtail and Gelid were sitting on the side I stood on,  so
that  I  could  not  see them, although I heard every  word  they  said.
Presently  Bang entered, and sat down opposite his allies.   He  crossed
his arms, and leant down over the table, looking at them steadily.

"My dear Aaron," I could hear little Wagtail say, "speak, man, don't
frighten a body so."

"Ah, Bang," drawled out Paul, "jests are good, being well--timed; what
can you mean by that face of yours now, since the fighting is all over?"

My curiosity fairly overcame my good manners, and I moved round more
amidships, so as to command a view of both parties, as they sat opposite
each other at the narrow table.

Bang still held his peace for another minute; at length, in a very
solemn tone, he said, "Gentlemen, do you ever say your prayers?" I don't
know if I mentioned it before, but Aaron had a most musical deep mellow
voice, and now it absolutely thrilled to my very soul.

Wagtail and Paul looked at him, and then at each other, with a most
absurd expression--between fear and jest--between crying and laughing
but gave him no answer.

"Are you, my lads, such blockheads as to be ashamed to acknowledge that
you say your prayers?"

"Ah," aid Gelid, "why, ah no--not--that is"

"Oh, you Catholics are all so bigoted,--I suppose we should cross
ourselves, eh?" said Wagtail hastily.

"I am a Catholic, Master Wagtail," rejoined Bang--"better that than
nothing.  Before sunrise, we may both have proved the truth of our
creeds, if you have one; but if you mean it as a taunt, Wagtail, it does
discredit to your judgment to select such a moment, to say nothing of
your heart.  However, you cannot make me angry with you, Pepperpot, you
little Creole wasp, do as you will." A slight smile here curled Aaron's
lip for an instant, although he immediately resumed the solemn tone in
which he had previously spoken.--"But I had hoped that two such old
friends, as you both have been to me, would not altogether have made up
their minds in cold blood, if advertised of their danger, to run the
chance of dying like dogs in a ditch, without one preparatory thought
towards that tremendous Being, before whom we may all stand before
morning."

"Murder!" quoth Wagtail, fairly frightened; "are you really serious,
Aaron? I did not--would not, for the world, hurt your feelings in
earnest, my dear; why do you desire so earnestly to know whether or not
I ever say my prayers?"

"Oh, don't bother, man," rejoined Bang, resuming his usual friendly
tone; "you had better say boldly that you do not, without any
roundaboutation."

"But why, my dear Bang, why do you ask the question?" persisted Wagtail,
in a deuced quandary.

"Simply,"--and here our friend's voice once more fell to the low deep
serious tone in which he had opened the conference,--"simply because, in
my humble estimation, if you don't say your prayers tonight, it is three
to one you shall never pray again."

"The deuce!" said Pepperpot, twisting himself in all directions, as if
his inexpressibles had been nailed to his seat, and he was trying to
escape from them.  "What, in the devil's name, mean you, man?"

"I mean neither more nor less than what I say. I speak English, don't I?
I say, that that pestilent young fellow Cringle told me half an hour
ago, that he was determined, as he words it, to stick to this Guineaman,
who is three times his size, has eighteen guns, while Master Tommy has
only three; and whose crew, I will venture to say, triples our number;
and the snipe, from what I know of him, is the very man to keep his word
so what say you, my darling, eh?"

"Ah, very inconvenient, ah,--I shall stay below," said Paul.

"So shall I," quoth Pepperpot; "won't stick my nose on deck, Aaron
dear, no, not for the whole world."

"Why," said Bang, in the same steady low tone, "you shall do as you
please, ah,"--and here he very successfully imitated our amigo Gelid's
drawl--"and as best suits you, ah; but I have consulted the gunner, an
old ally of mine, who, to be plain with you--ah--says that the danger
from splinter wounds below, is much greater than from their musketry on
deck--ah--the risk from the round shot being pretty equal--ah--in either
situation." At this announcement you could have jumped down either
Wagtail's or Gelid's throat,--Wagtail's for choice--without touching
their teeth.  "Farther, the aforesaid Timothy, and be hanged to him,
deponeth, that the only place in a small vessel where we could have had
a moderate chance of safety was the Run,--so called, I presume, from
people running to it for safety; but where the deuce this sanctuary is
situated I know not, nor does it signify greatly, for it is now
converted into a spare powder magazine, and of course sealed to us.  So
here we are, my lads, in as neat a taking as ever three unfortunate
gentlemen were in, in this weary world.  However, now since I have
comforted you, let us go to bed--time enough to think on all this in the
morning, and I am consumedly tired."

I heard no more, and resumed my solitary walk on deck, peering every now
and then through the night--glass, until my eyes ached again.  The
tedious night at length wore away, and the grey dawn found me sound
asleep, leaning out at the gangway.  They had scarcely begun to wash
down the decks, when we discerned our friend of the preceding night,
about four miles to windward, close hauled on the same tack, apparently
running in for the Cuba shore, as fast as canvass could carry him.  If
this was his object, we had proved too quick for him, as by casting off
stays, and slacking shrouds, and, in every way we could think of,
loosening the rigid trim of the little vessel, we had in a great measure
recovered her sailing; so when he found he was cut off from the land, he
resolutely bore up, took in his top--gallant sails, hauled up his
courses, fired a gun, and hoisted his large Spanish ensign, all in
regular man--of--war fashion.  By this time it was broad daylight, and
Wagtail, Gelid, and Bang, were all three on deck, performing their
morning ablutions.  As for myself, I was well forward, near the long
gun.  Pegtop, Mr Bang's black valet, came up to me.

"Please, Massa Captain, can you spare me any muskets?"

"Any muskets?" said I; "why, half a dozen if you choose."

"De wery number my massa told me to hax for.  Tank you, Massa Captain."
And forthwith he and the other two black servants in attendance on
Wagtail and Gelid, each seized his two muskets out of the arm--chest,
with the corresponding ammunition, and, like so many sable Robinson
Crusoes, were stumping aft, when I again accosted the aforesaid Pegtop.

"I say, my man, now since you have got the muskets, does your master
really intend to fight?" The negro stopped short, and faced right round,
his countenance expressing very great surprise and wonderment.  "Massa
Bang fight?  Massa Aaron Bang fight?" and he looked up in my face with
the most seriocomic expression that could be imagined.  "Ah, massa,"
continued the poor fellow,--"you is joking--surely you is joking--my
Massa Aaron Bang fight?  Oh, massa, surely you can't know he--surely you
never see him shoot snipe, and wild--duck--oh dear, why him kill wild
duck on de wing--ah, me often see him knock down teal wid single ball,
one hundred--ah, one hundred and fifty yards--and man surely more big
mark den teal?"

"Granted," I said; "but a teal has not a loaded musket in its claws, a
Spanish buccaneer may have a small difference, Master Pegtop, that?"

"None at all, master," chimed in Pegtop, "very energetically myshef,
Gabriel Pegtop, Christian man as me is, am one of de Falmouth black
shot. Ah, I have been in de woods wid Massa Aaron, one time particular,
when dem wery debils, Sambo Moses, Corromantee Tom, and Eboe Peter,
took to de bush, at Crabyaw estate--after breakfast--ten black shot
me was one, go out along wid our good massa, Massa Aaron.  Oh Lord, we
walk troo de cool wood, and over de hot cleared ground, six hour, when
every body say,--No use dis, Massa Bang--all we tired too much--must
stop here--kindle fire--cook wittal. Ah, top dem who hab white liver,
said Massa Aaron; you, Pegtop, take you fusee and cutlass, and follow
me, my shild--Massa Aaron alway call me him shild, and troo enough, as
parson Calaloo say, him family wery much like Joseph coat--many colour
among dem, massa--though none quite so deep as mine eider"--and here the
negro grinned at his own jest.  "Well, I was follow him, or rader was go
before him, opening up de pass wid me cutlass, troo de wery tangle
underwood.  We walk four hour--see no one, all still and quiet--no breeze
shake de tree--oh, I sweat too much--dem hot, massa, sun shine right down,
when we could catch glimpse of him--yet no trace of de runaways. At
length, on turning corner, perched on small platform of rock,
overshadowed by plumes of bamboos, like ostrich feather lady wear at de
ball, who shall we see but dem wery dividual d----rascail I was mention,
standing all tree, each wid one carabine pointed at us, at him shoulder,
and cutlass at him side?  Pegtop, my boy, said Massa Aaron, we is in
for it--follow me, but don't fire. So him pick off Sambo Moses--oh!
cool as one cucumber.  Now, say he, man to man,--and wid dat him tro
him gun on de ground, and drawing him cutlass, we push up--in one moment
him and Corromantee Tom close.  Tom put up him hand to fend him head
whip--ah--massa cutlass shred de hand at de wrist, like one carrot
down Tom go--atop of him jump Massa Aaron. I master de leetle one, Eboe
Peter, and we carry dem both prisoners into Falmouth.--Massa Aaron
fight?  Ah, massa, no hax dat question again."

"Well, but will Mr Gelid fight?" said I.

"I tink him will too--great friend of Massa Bang--good duck--shot too
oh yes, fink Massa Paul will fight."

"Why," said I, "your friends are all heroes, Pegtop--will Mr Wagtail
fight also?" He stole close up to me, and exchanged his smart Creole
gibberish for a quiet sedate accent, as he whispered.

"Not so sure of he--nice little fat man, but too fond of him belly.
When I wait behind Massa Aaron chair, Pegtop sometime hear funny ting.
One gentleman say--Ah, dat month we hear Lord Wellington take Saint
Sebastian--when dat is, what time we hear dat news, Massa Wagtail? him
say.--Eh, say Massa Wagtail--oh, we hear of dem news, dat wery day de
first of de ringtail pigeon come to market. Den again, Dat big fight
dem had at soch anoder place, when we hear of dat, Massa Wagtail?--say
somebody else. Oh, oh, de wery day we hab dat beautiful grouper wid
claret sauce at Massa Whiffie's. Oh, make me laugh to hear white
gentleman mark great fight in him memory by what him eat de day de news
come; so, Massa Captain Cringle, me no quite sure weder Massa Wagtail
will fight or no."

So saying, Pegtop, Chew Chew, and Yampea, each shouldered two muskets
apiece, and betook themselves to the after part of the schooner, where
they forthwith set themselves to scour, and oil, and clean the same, in
a most skilful manner.  I expected the breeze would have freshened as
the day broke, but I was disappointed; it fell, towards six o'clock,
nearly calm.  Come, thought I, we may as well go to breakfast; and my
guests and I forthwith sat down to our morning meal.  Soon after, the
wind died away altogether--and "out sweeps" was the word; but I soon saw
we had no chance with the chase at this game, and as to attacking him
with the boats, it was entirely out of the question; neither could I, in
the prospect of a battle, afford to murder the people, by pulling all
day under a roasting sun, against one who could man his sweeps with
relays of slaves, without one of his crew putting a finger to them; so I
reluctantly laid them in, and there I stood looking at him the whole
forenoon, as he gradually drew ahead of us.  At length I piped to
dinner, and the men having finished theirs, were again on deck; but the
calm still continued; and seeing no chance of it freshening, about four
in the afternoon we sat down to ours in the cabin.  There was little
said; my friends, although brave and resolute men, were naturally happy
to see the brig creeping away from us, as fighting could only bring them
danger; and my own feelings were of that mixed quality, that while I
determined to do all I could to bring him to action, it would not have
broken my heart had he escaped.  We had scarcely finished dinner,
however, when the rushing of the water past the run of the little
vessel, and the steadiness with which she skimmed along, shewed that the
light air had freshened.

Presently Tailtackle came down.  "The breeze has set down, sir; the
strange sail has got it strong to windward, and brings it along with him
cheerily."

"Beat to quarters, then, Tailtackle; all hands stand by to shorten sail.
How is she standing?"

"Right down for us, sir."

I went on deck, and there was the Guineaman about two miles to windward,
evidently cleared for action, with her decks crowded with men, bowling
along steadily under her single--reefed topsails.

I saw all clear.  Wagtail and Gelid had followed me on deck, and were
now busy with their black servants inspecting the muskets.  But Bang
still remained in the cabin. I went down.  He was gobbling his last
plantain, and forking up along with it most respectable slices of
cheese, when I entered.

I had seen before I left the deck that an action was now unavoidable,
and judging from the disparity of force, I had my own doubts as to the
issue.  I need scarcely say that I was greatly excited.  It was my first
command: My future standing in the service depended on my conduct now,
and, God help me, I was all this while a mere lad, not more than twenty
one years old.  A strange indescribable feeling had come over me, and
an irresistible desire to disburden my mind to the excellent man before
me. I sat down.

"Hey day," quoth Bang, as he laid down his coffee cup; "why, Tom, what
ails you?  You look deuced pale, my boy."


"Up  all  night, sir, and bothered all day," said I; "wearied enough,  I
can tell you."

I  felt a strong tremor pervade my whole frame at this moment; and I was
impelled to speak by some unknown impulse, which I could not account for
nor analyze.

"Mr  Bang,  you  are  the only friend whom I could  count  on  in  these
countries;  you  know  all  about me and mine,  and,  I  believe,  would
willingly do a kind action to my father's son."

"What are you at, Tom, my dear boy? come to the point, man."

"I  will.  I  am distressed beyond measure at having led  you  and  your
excellent friends, Wagtail and Gelid, into this danger; but I could  not
help  it,  and I have satisfied my conscience on that point; so  I  have
only  to entreat that you will stay below, and not unnecessarily  expose
yourselves.   And  if I should fall--may I take this  liberty,  my  dear
sir," and I involuntarily took his hand,--"if I should fall, and I doubt
if  I shall ever see the sun set again, as we are fearfully overmatched"
Bang struck in.

"Why,  if  our friend be too big--why not be off then?  Pull foot,  man,
eh?--Havannah under your lee?"

"A thousand reasons against it, my dear sir. I am a young man and a
young officer, my character is to make in the service--No, no, it is
impossible--an older and more tried hand might have bore up, but I must
fight it out.  If any stray shot carries me off, my dear sir, will you
take"--Mary, I would have said, but I could not pronounce her name for
the soul of me--"will you take charge of her miniature, and say I died
as I have"--a choking lump rose in my throat, and I could not proceed for
a second; "and will you send my writing desk to my poor mother, there
are letters in"--the lump grew bigger, the hot tears streamed from my
eyes in torrents.  I trembled like an aspen leaf, and grasping my
excellent friend's hand more firmly, I sunk down on my knees in a
passion of tears, and wept like a woman, and fervently prayed to that
great God, in whose almighty hand I stood, that I might that day do my
duty as an English seaman.  Bang knelt by me.  Presently the passion was
quelled. I rose, and so did he.

"Before you, my dear sir, I am not ashamed to have" "Don't mention  it
my  good boy--don't mention it; neither of us, as the old general  said,
will fight a bit the worse."

I looked at him.  "Do you then mean to fight?" said I.

"To  be sure I do--why not?  I have no wife,"--he did not say he had  no
children--"Fight?  To be sure I do."

"Another gun, sir," said Tailtackle, through the open skylight.  Now all
was  bustle, and we hastened on deck.  Our antagonist was a large  brig,
three  hundred tons at the least, a long low vessel, painted black,  out
and  in,  and her sides round as an apple, with immensely square  yards.
She  was  apparently full of men.  The sun was getting low, and she  was
coming  down fast on us, on the verge of the dark blue water of the  sea
breeze.   I could make out ten ports and nine guns of a side. I inwardly
prayed  they might not be long ones, but I was not a little startled  to
see  through  the  glass  that there were crowds  of  naked  negroes  at
quarters,  and  on the forecastle and poop.  That she was  a  contraband
Guineaman,  I had already made up my mind to believe; and that  she  had
some  fifty  hands  of a crew, I also considered likely;  but  that  her
captain  should  have resorted to such a perilous measure,  perilous  to
themselves  as  well as to us, as arming the captive slaves,  was  quite
unexpected,  and not a little alarming, as it evinced his  determination
to make the most desperate resistance.

Tailtackle was standing beside me at this time, with his jacket off, his
cutlass girded on his thigh, and the belt drawn very tight.  All the
rest of the crew were armed in a similar fashion; the small--arm--men
with muskets in their hands, and the rest at quarters at the guns; while
the pikes were cast loose from the spars round which they had been
stopped, with tubs of wadding, and boxes of grape, all ready ranged, and
every thing clear for action.

"Mr Tailtackle" said I, "you are gunner here, and should be in the
magazine.  Cast off that cutlass; it is not your province to lead the
boarders." The poor fellow blushed, having, in the excitement of the
moment, forgotten that he was any thing more than captain of the
Firebrand's maintop.

"Mr Timotheus," said Bang, "have you one of these bodkins to spare?"

Timothy laughed.  "Certainly, sir; but you don't mean to head the
boarders, sir--do you?"

"Who knows, now since I have learned to walk on this dancing cork of a
craft?" rejoined Aaron, with a grim smile, while he pulled off his coat,
braced on his cutlass, and tied a large red cotton shawl round his head.
He then took off his neckerchief and fastened it round his waist, as
tight as he could draw.

"Strange that all men in peril--on the uneasiness, like," said he,
"should always gird themselves as tightly as they can."

The slaver was now within musket--shot, when he put his helm to port,
with the view of passing under our stem.  To prevent being raked, we had
to luff up sharp in the wind, and fire a broadside. I noticed the white
splinters glance from his black wales; and once more the same sharp yell
rung in our ears, followed by the long melancholy howl, already
described.

"We have pinned some of the poor blacks again," said Tailtackle, who
still lingered on the deck; small space for remark, for the slaver again
fired his broadside at us, with the same cool precision as before.

"Down with the helm, and let her come round," said I; "that will do
master, run across his stern--Out sweeps forward, and keep her there
get the other carronade over to leeward--that is it--now, blaze away
while he is becalmed--fire, small--arm--men, and take good aim."

We were now right across his stern, with his spanker boom within ten
yards of us; and although he worked his two stem chasers with great
determination, and poured whole showers of musketry from his rigging,
and poop, and cabin--windows, yet, from the cleverness with which our
sweeps were pulled, and the accuracy with which we were kept in our
position, right athwart his stern, our fire, both from the cannon and
musketry, the former loaded with round and grape, was telling, I could
see, with fearful effect.

Crash--"There, my lads, down goes his main--topmast--pepper him well,
while they are blinded and confused among the wreck.  Fire away--there
goes the peak, shot away cleverly, close by the throat.  Don't cease
firing, although his flag be down--it was none of his doing.  There, my
lads, there he has it again; you have shot away the weather fore
topsail sheet, and he cannot get from under you."

Two men at this moment lay out on his larboard foreyard--arm, apparently
with the intention of splicing the sheet, and getting the clew of the
fore--topsail once more down to the yard; if they had succeeded in this,
the vessel would again have fetched way, and drawn out from under our
fire.  Mr Bang and Paul Gelid had all this time been firing with
murderous precision, from where they had ensconced themselves under the
shelter of the larboard bulwark, close to the taffrail, with their three
black servants in the cabin, loading the six muskets, and little
Wagtail, who was no great shot, sitting on the deck, handing them up and
down.

"Now, Mr Bang," cried I, "for the love of Heaven"--and may Heaven
forgive me for the ill--placed exclamation--"mark these two men--down
with them?"

Bang turned towards me with all the coolness in the world "What, those
chaps on the end of the long stick?"

"Yes--yes," (I here spoke of the larboard foreyard--arm,) "yes, down
with them."

He lifted his piece as steadily as if he had really been duck shooting.

"I say, Gelid, my lad, take you the innermost."

"Ah!" quoth Paul.  They fired--and down dropped both men, and squattered
for a moment in the water, like wounded waterfowl, and then sank for
ever, leaving two small puddles of blood on the surface.

"Now, master," shouted I, "put the helm up and lay him alongside--there
stand by with the grapplings--one round the backstay the other through
the chainplate there--so,--you have it." As we ranged under his counter
"Mainchains are your chance, men--boarders, follow me." And in the
enthusiasm of the moment I jumped into the slaver's main channel,
followed by twenty--eight men.  We were in the act of getting over the
netting when the enemy rallied, and fired a volley of small arms, which
sent four out of the twenty--eight to their account, and wounded three
more.  We gained the quarterdeck, where the Spanish captain, and about
forty of his crew, shewed a determined front, cutlass and pistol in hand
we charged them--they stood their ground.  Tailtackle (who, the moment
he heard the boarders called, had jumped out of the magazine, and
followed me) at a blow clove the Spanish captain to the chine; the
lieutenant, or second in command, was my bird, and I had disabled him by
a sabre--cut on the sword--arm, when he drew his pistol, and shot me
through the left shoulder. I felt no pain, but a sharp pinch, and then a
cold sensation, as if water had been poured down my neck.

Jigmaree was close by me with a boarding--pike, and our fellows were
fighting with all the gallantry inherent in British sailors.  For a
moment the battle was poised in equal scales.  At length our antagonists
gave way, when about fifteen of the slaves, naked barbarians, who had
been ranged with muskets in their hands on the forecastle, suddenly
jumped down into the waist with a yell, and came to the rescue of the
Spanish part of the crew.

I thought we were lost.  Our people, all but Tailtackle, poor Handlead,
and Jigmaree, held back.  The Spaniards rallied, and fought with renewed
courage, and it was now, not for glory, but for dear life, as all
retreat was cut off by the parting of the grapplings and warps, that had
lashed the schooner alongside of the slaver, for the Wave had by this
time forged a--head, and lay across the brig's bows, in place of being
on her quarter, with her foremast jammed against the slaver's bowsprit,
whose spritsail--yard crossed our deck between the masts.  We could not
therefore retreat to our own vessel if we had wished it, as the
Spaniards had possession of the waist and forecastle; all at once,
however, a discharge of round and grape crashed through the bridleport
of the brig, and swept off three of the black auxiliaries before
mentioned, and wounded as many more, and the next moment an unexpected
ally appeared on the field.  When we boarded, the Wave had been left
with only Peter Mangrove; the five dockyard negroes; Pearl, one of the
Captain's gigs, the handsome black already introduced on the scene; poor
little Reefpoint, who, as already stated, was badly hurt; Aaron Bang,
Paul Gelid, and Wagtail.  But this Pearl without price, at the very
moment of time when I thought the game was up, jumped on deck through
the bowport, cutlass in hand, followed by the five black carpenters and
Peter Mangrove, after whom appeared no less a personage than Aaron Bang
himself and the three blackamoor valets, armed with boarding--pikes.
Bang flourished his cutlass for an instant.

"Now, Pearl, my darling, shout to them in Coromantee--shout;" and
forthwith the black quartermaster sung out, "Coromantee Sheik Cocoloo,
kockemony populorum fiz;" which, as I afterwards learned, being
interpreted, is, "Behold the Sultan Cocoloo, the great ostrich, with a
feather in his tail like a palm branch; fight for him, you sons of
female dogs." In an instant the black Spanish auxiliaries sided with
Pearl, and Bang, and the negroes, and joined in charging the white
Spaniards, who were speedily driven down the main hatchway, leaving one
half of their number dead, or badly wounded, on the blood slippery deck.
But they still made a desperate defence, by firing up the hatchway. I
hailed them to surrender.

"Zounds," cried Jigmaree, "there's the clink of hammers they are
knocking off the fetters of the slaves."

"If you let the blacks loose," I sung out in Spanish, "by the Heaven
above us, I will blow you up, although I should go with you!  Hold your
hands, Spaniards!  Mind what you do, madmen!"

"On with the hatches, men," shouted Tailtackle.

They had been thrown overboard, or put out of the way, they could
nowhere be seen.  The firing from below continued.

"Cast loose that carronade there; clap in a canister of grape, so now run
it forward, and fire down the hatchway." It was done, and taking effect
amongst the pent--up slaves, such a yell arose--oh God! oh God!--I never
can forget it.  Still the maniacs continued firing up the hatchway.

"Load and fire again." My people were now furious, and fought more like
incarnate fiends broke loose from hell than human beings.

"Run the gun up to the hatchway once more." They ran the carronade so
furiously forward, that the coaming, or ledge, was split off, and down
went the gun, carriage and all, with a crash into the hold.  Presently
smoke appeared rising up the fore--hatchway.

"They have set fire to the brig; overboard!--regain the schooner, or we
shall all be blown into the air like peels of onions!" sung out little
Jigmaree.

But where was the Wave?  She had broke away, and was now a cable's
length ahead, apparently fast leaving us, with Paul Gelid and Wagtail,
and poor little Reefpoint, who, badly wounded as he was, had left his
hammock, and come on deck in the emergency, making signs of their
inability to cut away the halyards; and the tiller being shot away, the
schooner had become utterly unmanageable.

"UP,--and let fall the foresail, men--down with the fore tack cheerily
now--get way on the brig, and overhaul the Wave promptly, or we are
lost," cried I. It was done with all the coolness of desperate men. I
took the helm, and presently we were once more alongside of our own
vessel.  Time we were so, for about one hundred and fifty of the slaves,
whose shackles had been knocked off, now scrambled up the fore hatchway,
and we had only time to jump overboard, when they made a rush aft; and
no doubt, exhausted as we were, they would have massacred us on the
spot, frantic and furious as they evidently were from the murderous fire
of grape that had been directed down the hatchway.

But the fire was quicker than they.  The smouldering smoke that was
rising like a pillar of cloud from the fore hatchway, was now streaked
with tongues of red flame, which, licking the masts and spars, ran up
and caught the sails and rigging.  In an instant, the fire spread to
every part of the gear aloft, while the other element, the sea, was also
striving for the mastery in the destruction of the doomed vessel; for
our shot, or the fall of the carronade into the hold, had started some
of the bottom planks, and she was fast settling down by the head.  We
could hear the water rushing in like a mill stream.  The fire increased
her guns went off as they became heated--she gave a sudden heel--and
while five hundred human beings, pent up in her noisome hold, split the
heavens with their piercing death--yells, down she went with a heavy
lurch, head foremost, right in the wake of the setting sun, whose level
rays made the thick dun wreaths that burst from her as she disappeared,
glow with the hue of the amethyst; and while the whirling clouds, gilded
by his dying radiance, curled up into the blue sky, in rolling masses,
growing thinner and thinner, until they vanished away, even like the
wreck whereout they arose,--and the circling eddies, created by her
sinking, no longer sparkled and flashed in the red light--and the
stilled waters where she had gone down, as if oil had been cast on them,
were spread out like polished silver, shining like a mirror, while all
around was dark blue ripple,--a puff of fat black smoke, denser than any
we had yet seen, suddenly emerged with a loud gurgling noise, from out
the deep bosom of the calmed sea, and rose like a balloon, rolling
slowly upwards, until it reached a little way above our mastheads, where
it melted and spread out into a dark pall, that overhung the scene of
death, as if the incense of such a horrible and polluted sacrifice could
not ascend into the pure heaven, but had been again crushed back upon
our devoted heads, as a palpable manifestation of the wrath of Him who
hath said--"Thou shalt not kill."

For a few moments all was silent as the grave, and I felt as if the air
had become too thick for breathing, while I looked up like another Cain.

Presently, about one hundred and fifty of the slaves, men, women, and
children, who had been drawn down by the vortex, rose amidst numberless
pieces of smoking wreck, to the surface of the sea; the strongest
yelling like fiends in their despair, while the weaker, the women, and
the helpless gasping little ones, were choking, and gurgling, and
sinking all around.  Yea, the small thin expiring cry of the innocent
sucking infant tom from its sinking mother's breast, as she held it for
a brief moment above the waters, which had already for ever closed over
herself, was there. But we could not perceive one single individual of
her white crew; like desperate men, they had all gone down with the
brig.  We picked up about one half of the miserable Africans, and--my
pen trembles as I write it--fell necessity compelled us to fire on the
remainder, as it was utterly impossible for us to take them on board.
Oh that I could erase such a scene for ever from my memory!  One
incident I cannot help relating.  We had saved a woman, a handsome clear
skinned girl, of about sixteen years of age.  She was very faint when
we got her in, and was lying with her head over a port--sill, when a
strong athletic young negro swam to the part of the schooner where she
was.  She held down her hand to him; he was in the act of grasping it,
when he was shot through the heart from above.  She instantly jumped
overboard, and, clasping him in her arms, they sank, and disappeared
together.  "Oh, woman, whatever may be the colour of your skin, your
heart is of one only!" said Aaron.

Soon all was quiet; a wounded black here and there was shrieking in his
great agony, and struggling for a moment before he sank into his watery
grave for ever; a few pieces of wreck were floating and sparkling on the
surface of the deep in the blood red sunbeams, which streamed in a flood
of glorious light on the bloody deck, shattered hull, and torn rigging
of the Wave, and on the dead bodies and mangled limbs of those who had
fallen; while some heavy scattering drops of rain fell sparkling from a
passing cloud, as if Nature had wept in pity over the dismal scene; or
as if they had been blessed tears, shed by an angel, in his heavenward
course, as he hovered for a moment, and looked down in pity on the
fantastic tricks played by the worm of a day--by weak man, in his little
moment of power and ferocity. I said something--ill and hastily.  Aaron
was close beside me, sitting on a carronade slide, while the surgeon was
dressing a pike wound in his neck.  He looked up solemnly in my face,
and then pointed to the blessed luminary, that was now sinking in the
sea, and blazing up into the resplendent heavens--"Cringle, for shame
for shame--your impatience is blasphemous.  Remember this morning and
thank Him"--here he looked up and crossed himself--"thank Him who, while
he has called poor Mr Handlead, and so many brave fellows to their last
awful reckoning, has mercifully brought us to the end of this fearful
day;--oh, thank Him, Tom, that you have seen the sun set once more!"


CHAPTER XVI


The Second Cruise of the Wave

"I longed to see the Isles that gem, Old Ocean's purple diadem,
I sought by turns, and saw them all."

BYRON, THE BRIDE OF ABYDOS, II. 355--57.


The  puncture  in Mr Bang's neck from the boarding--pike  was  not  very
deep,  still it was an ugly lacerated wound; and if The had not  to  use
his  own  phrase, been somewhat bullnecked, there is no saying what  the
consequences might have been.

"Tom, my boy," said he, after the doctor was done with him, "I am nicely
coopered  now--nearly as good as new--a little stiffish or so  lucky  to
have  such a comfortable coating of muscle, otherwise the carotid  would
have  been in danger.  So come here, and take your turn, and I will hold
the candle."

It  was dead calm, and as I had desired the cabin to be again used as  a
cockpit, it was at this time full of poor fellows, waiting to have their
wounds  dressed, whenever the surgeon could go below.  The  lantern  was
brought, and sitting down on a wadding tub, I stripped.  The ball, which
I  knew had lodged in the fleshy part of my left shoulder, had first  of
all  struck  me right over the collar--bone, from which it had  glanced,
and  then  buried itself in the muscle of the arm, just below the  skin,
where  it stood out, as if it had been a sloe both in shape and  colour.
The  collar--bone  was  much shattered, and my chest  was  a  good  deal
shaken, and greatly bruised; but I had perceived nothing of all this  at
the  time I was shot; the sole perceptible sensation was the feeling  of
cold  water  running  down, and the pinch in the  shoulder,  as  already
described.  I  was much surprised (every man who has been seriously  hit
being  entitled to expatiate) with the extreme smallness of the puncture
in  the  skin  through which the ball had entered; you  could  not  have
forced a pea through it, and there was scarcely any flow of blood.

"A very simple affair this, sir," said the surgeon, as he made a minute
incision right over the ball, the instrument cutting into the cold dull
lead with a cheep, and then pressing his fingers, one on each side of
it, it jumped out nearly into Aaron's mouth.

"A pretty sugar--plum, Tom--if that collar--bone of yours had not been
all the harder, you would have been embalmed in a gazette, to use your
own favourite expression.  But, my good boy, your bruise on the chest is
serious; you must go to bed, and take care of yourself."

Alas! there was no bed for me to go to.  The cabin was occupied by the
wounded, where the surgeon was still at work.  Out of our small crew,
nine had been killed, and eleven wounded, counting passengers--twenty
out of forty--two--a fearful proportion.

The night had now fallen.

"Pearl, send some of the people aft, and get a spare square--sail from
the sailmaker, and"

"Will the awning not do, sir?"

"To be sure it will," said I--it did not occur to me.  "Get the awning
triced up to the stancheons, and tell my steward to get the beds on deck
a few flags to shut us in will make the thing complete."

It was done; and while the sharp cries of the wounded, who were
immediately under the knife of the doctor, and the low moans of those
whose wounds had been dressed, or were waiting their turn, reached our
ears distinctly through the small skylight, our beds were arranged on
deck, under the shelter of the awning, a curtain of flags veiling our
quarters from the gaze of the crew.  Paul Gelid and Pepperpot occupied
the starboard side of the little vessel; Aaron Bang and myself the
larboard.  By this time it was close on eight o'clock in the evening.  I
had merely looked in on our friends, ensconced as they were in their
temporary hurricane house; for I had more work than I could accomplish
on deck in repairing damages.  Most of our standing, and great part of
our running rigging, had been shot away, which the tired crew were
busied in splicing and knotting the! best way they could.  Our mainmast
was very badly wounded close to the deck.  It was fished as
scientifically as our circumstances admitted.  The foremast had
fortunately escaped--it was untouched; but there were no fewer than
thirteen round shot through our hull, five of them between wind and
water.

When every thing had been done which ingenuity could devise, or the most
determined perseverance execute, I returned to our canvass--shed aft,
and found Mr Wagtail sitting on the deck, arranging, with the help of my
steward, the supper equipment to the best of his ability.  Our meal, as
may easily be imagined, was frugal in le extreme--salt beef, biscuit,
some roasted yams, and cold grog--some of Aaron's excellent rum.  But I
mark it down, that I question if any one of the four who partook of it,
ever made so hearty a supper before or since.  We worked away at the
junk until we had polished the bone, clean as an elephant's tusk, and
the roasted yams disappeared in bushelfuls; while the old rum sank in
the bottle, like mercury in the barometer indicating an approaching
gale.

"I say, Tom," quoth Aaron, "how do you feel, my boy?"

"Why, not quite so buoyant as I could wish.  To me it has been a day of
fearful responsibility."

"And well it may," said he.  "As for myself, I go to rest with the
tremendous consciousness that even I, who am not a professional butcher,
have this blessed day shed more than one fellow--creature's blood--a
trembling consideration--and all for what, Tom?  You met a big ship in
the dark, and desired her to stop.  She said she would not--You said,
'You shall.'--She rejoined, 'I'll be d--d if I do.' And thereupon you
set about compelling her; and certainly you have interrupted her course
to some purpose, at the trivial cost of the lives of only five or six
hundred human beings, whose hearts were beating cheerily in their bosoms
within these last six hours, but whose bodies are now food for fishes."

I was stung.

"At your hands, my dear sir, I did not expect this, and"

"Hush," said he, "I don't blame you--it is all right; but why will not
the Government at home arrange by treaty that this nefarious trade
should be entirely put down?  Surely all our victories by sea and land
might warrant our stipulating for so much, in place of huggermuggering
with doubtful ill--defined treaties, specifying that you Johnny Crapeau,
and you Jack Spaniard, shall steal men, and deal in human flesh, in such
and such a degree of latitude only, while, if you pick up one single
slave a league to the northward or southward of the prescribed line of
coast, then we shall blow you out of the water wherever we meet you.
Why should poor devils, who live in one degree of latitude, be allowed
to be kidnapped, whilst we make it felony to steal their immediate
neighbours?" Aaron waxed warm as he proceeded. "Why will not Englishmen
lend a hand to put down the slave--trade amongst our opponents in sugar
growing, before they so recklessly endeavour to crush slavery in our own
worn--out colonies, utterly disregardless of our rights and lives?
Mind, Tom, I don't defend slavery, I sincerely wish we could do without
it, but am I to be the only one to pay the piper in compassing its
extinction?  If, however, it really be that Upas--tree, under whose
baleful shade every kindly feeling in the human bosom, whether of master
or servant, withers and dies, I ask, who planted it?  If it possess the
magical, and incredible, and most pestilential quality, that the English
gentleman, who shall be virtuous and beneficent, and just in all his
ways, before he leaves home, and after he returns home, shall, during
his temporary sojourn within its influence become a very Nero for
cruelty, and have his warm heart of flesh smuggled out of his bosom, by
some hocus pocus, utterly unintelligible to any unprejudiced rational
being, or indurated into the flint of the nether millstone, or frozen
into a lump of ice"

"Lord!" ejaculated Wagtail, "only fancy a snowball in a man's stomach,
and in Jamaica too!"

"Hold your tongue, Waggy, my love," continued Aaron; "if all this were
so, I would again ask, who planted it?--say not that we did it--I am a
planter, but I did not plant slavery. I found it growing and
flourishing, and fostered by the Government, and made my home amongst
the branches like a respectable corbie craw, or a pelican in a wild--
duck's nest, with all my pretty little tender black branchers hopping
about me, along with numberless other unfortunates, and now find that
the tree is being uprooted by the very hands that planted and nourished
it, and seduced me to live in it, and all"

I laughed aloud--"Come, come, my dear sir, you are a perfect Lord
Castlereagh in the congruity of your figures.  How the deuce can any
living thing exist among the poisonous branches of the Upas--tree--or a
wild--duck build"

"Get along with your criticism, Tom--and don't laugh, hang it, don't
laugh--but who told you that a corbie cannot?"

"Why there are no corbies in Java."

"Pah--botheration--there are pelicans then; but you know it is not an
Upas--tree, you know it is all a chimera, and, like the air--drawn
dagger of Macbeth, 'that there is no such thing.' Now, that is a good
burst, Gelid, my lad, a'nt it?" said Bang, as he drew a long breath, and
again launched forth.

"Our Government shall quarrel about sixpence here or sixpence there of
discriminative duty in a foreign port, while they have clapped a knife
to our throats, and a flaming fagot to our houses, by absurd edicts and
fanatical intermeddling with our own colonies, where the slave--trade
has notoriously, and to their own conviction, entirely ceased; while, I
say it again, they will not put out their little finger to prevent, nay,
they calmly look on, and permit a traffic utterly repugnant to all the
best feelings of our nature, and baneful to an incalculable degree to
our own West Indian possessions; provided, forsooth, the slaves be
stolen within certain limits, which, as no one can prove, naturally
leads to this infernal contraband, the suppression of which--Lord, what
a thing to think of!--has nearly deprived the world of the invaluable
services of me, Aaron Bang, Esquire, Member of Council of the Island of
Jamaica, and Custos Rotulorum Populorum Jig of the Parish of----"

"Lord," said Wagtail, "why, the yam is not half done."

"But the rum is--ah!" drawled Gelid.

"D--n the yam and the rum too," rapped out Bang.  "Why, you belly--gods,
you have interrupted such a torrent of eloquence!"

I began to guess that our friends were waxing peppery.  "Why, gentlemen,
I don't know how you feel, but I am regularly done up--it is quite calm,
and I hope we shall all sleep, so good--night."

We nestled in, and the sun had risen before I was called next morning.
I hope "I rose a sadder and a wiser man. Upon that morrow's morn."

"On  deck,  there," said I, while dressing.  Mr Peter Swop, one  of  the
Firebrand's  master--mates, and now, in consequence of  poor  Handlead's
death,  acting--master  of the Wave, popped  in  his  head  through  the
opening in the flags.  "How is the weather, Mr Swop?"

"Calm all night, sir; not a breath stirring, sir."

"Are  the  sails  shifted?"  said I, "and  the  starboard  main--shrouds
replaced?"

"They  are not yet, sir; the sails are on deck, and the rigging  is  now
stretching, and will be all ready to get over the masthead by breakfast
time, sir."

"How is her head?"

"Why,"  rejoined Swop, "it has been boxing all round the  compass,  sir,
for  these  last twelve hours; at present it is north--east."  "Have  we
drifted much since last night, Mr Swop?"

"No, sir--much where we were, sir," rejoined the master.  "There are
several pieces of wreck, and three dead bodies floating close to, sir."

By this time I was dressed, and had gone from under the awning on deck.
The first thing I did was to glance my eye over the nettings, and there
perceived on our quarter, three dead bodies, as Mr Swop had said,
floating----one a white Spaniard, and the others the corpses of two
unfortunate Africans, who had perished miserably when the brig went
down.  The white man's remains, swollen as they were, from the heat of
the climate, and sudden putrefaction consequent thereon, floated quietly
within pistol--shot, motionless and still; but the bodies of the two
negroes were nearly hidden by the clustering sea--birds which had
perched on them.  There were at least two dozen shipped on each carcass,
busy with their beaks and claws, while, on the other hand, the water in
the immediate neighbourhood seemed quite alive, from the rushing and
walloping of numberless fishes, who were tearing the prey piecemeal.
The view was any thing but pleasant, and I naturally turned my eyes
forward to see what was going on in the bows of the schooner.  I was
startled from the number of black faces which I saw.

"Why, Mr Tailtackle, how many of these poor creatures have we on board?"

"There are fifty--nine, sir, under hatches in the fore--hold," said
Timothy, "and thirty--five on deck; but I hope we shan't have them long,
sir.  It looks like a breeze to windward.  We shall have it before long,
sir."

At this moment Mr Bang came on deck.

"Lord, Tom, I thought it was a flea--bite, last night, but, mercy, I am
as stiff and sore as a gentleman need be.  How do you feel? I see you
have one of your fins in a sling--eh?"

"I am a little stiff, certainly; however, that will go off; but come
forward here, my dear sir; come here, and look at this shot--hole--saw
you ever anything like that?"

This was the smashing of one of our pumps from a round shot, the
splinters from which were stuck into the bottom of the launch, which
overhung it, forming really a figure very like the letter A.

"Don't take it to myself, Tom--no, not at all."

At this moment the black savages on the forecastle discovered our
friend, and shouts of "Sheik Cocoloo" rent the skies.  Mr Bang, for a
moment, appeared startled, so far as I could judge, he had forgotten
that part of his exploit, and did not know what to make of it, until at
last the actual meaning seemed to flash on him, when, with a shout of
laughter, he bolted in through the opening of the flags to his former
quarters below the awning.  I descended to the cabin, breakfast having
been announced, and sat down to our meal, confronted by Paul Gelid and
Pepperpot Wagtail.  Presently we heard Aaron sing out, the small skuttle
being right overhead, "Pegtop, come here, Pegtop, I say, help me on with
my neckcloth--so--that will do; now I shall go on deck.  Why, Pearl, my
boy, what do you want?" and before Pearl could get a word in, Aaron
continued, "I say, Pearl, go to the other end of the ship, and tell your
Coromantee friends that it is all a humbug that I am not the Sultan
Cocoloo; farther more, that I have not a feather in my tail like a palm
branch, of the truth of which I offer to give them ocular proof."

Pearl made his salaam.  "Oh, sir, I fear that we must not say too much
on that subject; we have not irons for one half of them savage negirs;"
the fellow was as black as a coal himself; "and were they to be
undeceived, why, reduced as our crew is, they might at any time rise on,
and massacre the whole watch."

"The devil!" we could hear friend Aaron say; "oh, then, go forward, and
assure them that I am a bigger ostrich than ever, and I shall astonish
them presently, take my word for it.  Pegtop, come here, you scoundrel,"
he continued; "I say, Pegtop, get me out my uniform coat,"--our friend
was a captain of Jamaica militia--"so--and my sword--that will do--and
here, pull off my trowsers it will be more classical to perambulate in
my shirt, in case it really be necessary to persuade them that the palm
branch was all a figure of speech.  Now, my hat--there--walk before me,
and fan me with the top of that herring barrel."

This was a lid of one of the wadding--tubs, which, to come up to
Jigmaree's notions of neatness, had been fitted with covers, and forth
stumped Bang, preceded by Pegtop doing the honours.  But the instant he
appeared from beneath the flags, the same wild shout arose from the
captive slaves forward, and such of them as were not fettered,
immediately began to bundle and tumble round our friend, rubbing their
flat noses and woolly heads all over him, and taking hold of the hem of
his garment, whereby his personal decency was so seriously periled,
that, after an unavailing attempt to shake them off, he fairly bolted,
and ran for shelter, once more, under the awning, amidst the suppressed
mirth of the whole crew, Aaron himself laughing louder than any of them
all the while.  "I say, Tom, and fellow sufferers," quoth he, after he
had run to earth under the awning, and looking down the scuttle into the
cabin where we were at breakfast, "how am I to get into the cabin? if I
go out on the quarterdeck but one arm's length, in order to reach the
companion, these barbarians will be at me again.  Ah, I see"

Whereupon, without more ado, he stuck his legs down through the small
hatch right over the breakfast table, with the intention of descending,
and the first thing he accomplished, was to pop his foot into a large
dish of scalding hominy, or hasty--pudding, made of Indian corn meal,
with which Wagtail was in the habit of commencing his stowage at
breakfast.  But this proving too hot for comfort, he instantly drew it
out, and in his attempt to reascend, he stuck his bespattered toe into
Paul Gelid's mouth.  "Oh! oh!" exclaimed Paul, while little Wagtail lay
back laughing like to die; but the next instant Bang gave another
struggle, or wallop, like a pelloch in shoal--water, whereby Pepperpot
borrowed a good kick on the side of the head, and down came the Great
Ostrich, Aaron Bang, but without any feather in his tail, as I can
avouch, slap upon the table, smashing cups and saucers, and hominy, and
devil knows what all, to pieces, as he floundered on the board.  This
was so absurd, that we were all obliged to give uncontrolled course to
our mirth for a minute or two, when, making the best of the wreck, we
contrived to breakfast in tolerable comfort.

Soon after the meal was finished, a light air enabled us once more to
lie our course, and we gradually crept to the northward, until twelve
o'clock in the forenoon, after which time it fell calm again.  I went
down to the cabin; Bang had been overhauling my small library, when a
shelf gave way (the whole affair having been injured by a round shot in
the action, which had tom right through the cabin), so down came several
scrolls, rolled up, and covered with brown paper.

"What are all these?" I could hear our friend say. "They are my logs,"
said I.

"Your what?"

"My private journals."

"Oh, I see," said Aaron.  "I will have a turn at them, with your
permission.  But what is this so carefully bound with red tape, and
sealed, and marked--let me see, 'Thomas Cringle, his log--book.'"

He looked at me.--"Why, my dear sir, to say the truth, that is my first
attempt; full of trash, believe me;--what else could you expect, from so
mere a lad as I was when I wrote it?"

"The child is father to the man," Tom, my boy; so may I peruse it; may
I read it for the edification of my learned allies,--Pepperpot
Wagtail, and Paul Gelid, esquires?"

"Certainly," I replied, "no objection in the world, but you will laugh
at me, I know; still, do as you please, only, had you not better have
your wound dressed first?"

"My wound!  Poo, poo! just enough to swear by--a flea--bite never mind
it; so here goes"--and he read aloud what is detailed in the "Launching
of the Log," making his remarks with so much naivete, that I daresay the
reader will be glad to hear a few of them.  His anxiety, for instance,
when he read of the young aide--de--camp being shot and dragged by the
stirrup, to know "what became of the empty horse," was very
entertaining; and when he had read the description of Davoust's face and
person, where I describe his nose, as neither fine nor dumpy--a fair
enough proboscis as noses go, he laid down the Log with the most
laughable seriousness.

"Now," quoth he, "very inexplicit all this, Tom.  Why, I am most curious
in noses. I judge of character altogether from the nose.  I never lose
sight of a man's snout, albeit I never saw the tip of my own.  You may
rely on it, that it is all a mistake to consider the regular Roman nose,
with a curve like a shoemaker's paring knife, or the straight Grecian,
with a thin transparent ridge, that you can see through, or the Deutsch
meerschaum, or the Saxon pump--handle, or the Scotch mull, or any other
nose, that can be taken hold of, as the standard gnomon.  No, no; I
never saw a man with a large nose who was not a blockhead--eh!  Gelid,
my love?  The pimple for me--the regular pimple but allons."--And where,
having introduced the German refugees to Captain Deadeye, I go on to say
that I thereupon dived into the midshipmen's berth for a morsel of
comfort, and was soon "far into the secrets of a pork pie,"--he lay
back, and exclaimed with a long drawling emphasis--"A pork pie!"

"A pork pie!" said Paul Gelid.

"Why, do you know," said Mr Wagtail--"I--why, I never in all my life saw
a pork pie."

"My dear Pepperpot," chimed in Gelid, "we both forget.  Don't you
remember the day we dined with the Admiral at the pen, in July last?"

"No," said Wagtail, "I totally forget it." Bang, I saw was all this
while chuckling to himself--"I absolutely forget it altogether."

"Bless me," said Gelid, "don't you remember the beautiful calipeever we
had that day?"

"Really I do not," said Pepperpot, "I have had so many good feeds
there."

"Why," continued Gelid, "Lord love you, Wagtail, not remember that
calipeever, so crisp in the broiling?"

"No," said Wagtail, "really I do not."

"Lord, man, it had a pudding in its belly."

"Oh, now I remember," said Wagtail.

Bang laughed outright, and I could not help making a hole in my manners
also, even prepared as I was for my jest by my sable crony Pegtop.--To
proceed.

Aaron looked at me with one of his quizzical grins; "Cringle, my
darling, do you keep these Logs still?"

"I do, my dear sir, invariably."

"What," struck in little Wagtail, "the deuce!--for instance shall I, and
Paul, and Aaron there, all be embalmed or preserved" ("Say pickled,"
quoth the latter) "in these said Logs of yours?" This was too absurd,
and I could not answer my allies for laughing.  As for Gelid, he had
been swaying himself backwards and forwards, half asleep, on the hind
legs of his chair all this while, puffing away at a cigar.

"Ah!" said he half asleep, and but partly overhearing what was going on;
"ah, Tom, my dear, you don't say that we shall all be handed down to our
poster"--a long yawn--"to our poster" another yawn--when Bang, watching
his opportunity as he sat opposite, gently touched one of the fore--legs
of the balanced chair with his toe, while he finished Gelid's sentence
by interjecting, "iors," as the conch fell back and floundered over on
his stem; his tormentor drawling out in wicked mimicry.

"Yes, dear Gelid, so sure as you have been landed down on your
posteriors now--ah--you shall be handed down to your posterity
hereafter, by that pestilent little scamp Cringle.  Ah, Tom, I know you.
Paul, Paul, it will be paulo postfuturum with you, my lad."

Here we were interrupted by my steward's entering with his tallow face.
"Dinner on the table, sir." We adjourned accordingly.

After dinner we carried on very much as usual, although the events of
the previous day had their natural effect; there was little mirth, and
no loud laughter.  Once more we all turned in, the calm still
continuing, and next morning after breakfast, friend Aaron took to the
Log again.


But the most amusing exhibition took place when he came to the
description of the row in the dark stair at the agent's house, where the
negroes fight for the scraps, and capsize Treenail, myself, and the
brown lady, down the steps.

"Why, I say, Tom," again quoth Aaron, "I never knew before, that you
were in Jamaica at the period you here write of."

"Why, my dear sir, I scarcely can say that I was there, my visit was
so hurried."

"Hurried!" rejoined he, "hurried--by no means; were you not in the
island for four or five hours?  Ah, long enough to have authorized your
writing an anti--slavery pamphlet of one hundred and fifty pages."

I smiled.

"Oh, you may laugh, my boy, but it is true--what a subject for an anti--
slavery lecture--listen and be instructed." Here our friend shook
himself as a bruiser does to ascertain that all is right before he
throws up his guard, and for the first five minutes he only jerked his
right shoulder this way and his left shoulder t'other way, while his
fins walloped down against his sides like empty sleeves; at length, as
he warmed, he stretched forth his arms like Saint Paul in the Cartoon
and although he now and then could not help sticking his tongue in his
cheek, still the exhibition was so true and so exquisitely comical, that
I never shall forget it.--"The whole white inhabitants of Kingston are
luxurious monsters, living in more than Eastern splendour; and their
universal practice, during their magnificent repasts, is to entertain
themselves, by compelling their black servants to belabour each other
across the pate with silver ladles, and to stick drumsticks of turkeys
down each other's throats.  Merciful heaven! only picture the miserable
slaves, each with the spaul of a turkey sticking in his gob; dwell upon
that, my dearly beloved hearers, dwell upon that--and then let those who
have the atrocious hardihood to do so, speak of the kindliness of the
planters hearts.  Kindliness! kindliness, to cram the leg of a turkey
down a man's throat, while his yoke--fellow in bondage is fracturing his
tender woolly skull--for all negroes, as is well known, have craniums,
much thinner, and more fragile than an egg--shell--with so tremendous a
weapon as a silver ladle?  Ay, a silver ladle!!!  Some people make light
of a silver ladle as an instrument of punishment--it is spoken of as a
very slight affair, and that the blows inflicted by it are mere child's
play.  If any of you, my beloved hearers, labour under this delusion,
and will allow me, for your edification, to hammer you about the chops
with one of the aforesaid silver soup--ladles of those yellow tyrants,
for one little half hour, I pledge myself the delusion shall be
dispelled once and for ever.  Well then, after this fearful scene has
continued for, I dare not say how long--the black butler--ay, the black
butler, a slave himself--oh, my friends, even the black butlers are
slaves the very men who minister the wine in health which maketh their
hearts glad, and the castor oil in sickness, which maketh them any thing
but of a cheerful countenance--this very black butler is desired, on
peril of having a drumstick stuck into his own gizzard also, and his
skull fractured by the aforesaid iron ladles--red hot, it may be--ay,
and who shall say they are not full of molten lead? yes, molten lead--
does not our reverend brother Lachrimac Roarem say that the ladles might
have been full of molten lead, and what evidence have we on the other
side, that they were not full of molten lead?  Why, none at all, none--
nothing but the oaths of all the naval and military officers who have
ever served in these pestilent settlements; and of all the planters and
merchants in the West Indies, the interested planters--those planters
who suborn all the navy and army to a man--those planters whose molasses
is but another name for human blood. (Here a large puff and blow, and a
swabification of the white handkerchief, while the congregation blow a
flourish of trumpets.) My friends--(another puff)--my friends--we all
know, my friends, that bullocks blood is largely used in the sugar
refineries in England, but, alas! there is no bullocks  blood used in
the refineries in the West Indies.  This I will prove to you on the oath
of six dissenting clergymen.  No. What then is the inference?  Oh, is it
not palpable?  Do you not every day, as jurors, hang men on
circumstantial evidence?  Are not many of yourselves hanged and
transported every year, on the simple fact being proved, of your being
found stooping down in pity over some poor fellow with a broken head,
with your hands in his breeches pockets in order to help him up? And can
you fail to draw the proper inference in the present case?  Oh, no! no!
my friends, it is the blood of the negroes that is used in these
refining pandemoniums of the poor negroes, who are worth one hundred
pounds apiece to their masters, and on whose health and capacity for
work these same planters absolutely and entirely depend."

Here our friend gathered all his energies, and began to roar like a
perfect bull of Bashan, and to swing his arms about like the sails of a
windmill, and to stamp and jump, and lollop about with his body as he
went on.

"Well, this butler, this poor black butler--this poor black slave butler
this poor black Christian slave butler--for he may have been a
Christian, and most likely was a Christian, and indeed must have been a
Christian--is enforced, after all the cruelties already related, on pain
of being choked with the leg of a turkey himself, and having molten lead
poured down his own throat, to do what?--who would not weep?--to--to--to
chuck each of his fellow--servants, poor miserable creatures! each with
a bone in his throat, and molten lead in his belly, and a fractured
skull--to chuck them, neck and croup, one after another, down a dark
staircase, a pitch--dark staircase, amidst a chaos of plates and dishes,
and the hardest and most expensive china, and the finest cut crystal--
that the wounds inflicted may be the keener and silver spoons, and
knives and forks.  Yea, my Christian brethren, carving knives and
pitchforks right down on the top of their brown mistresses, who are
thereby invariably bruised like the clown in the pantomime--at least as
I am told he is, for I never go to such profane Places--oh, no!--bruised
as flat as pancakes, and generally murdered outright on the spot.  Last
of all the landlord gets up, and kicks the miserable butler himself down
after his mates, into the very heart of the living mass; and this not
once and away, but every day in the week, Sundays not excepted.  Oh, my
dear, dear hearers, can you can you, with your fleshy hearts thumping
and bumping against your small ribs, forget the black butler, and the
mulatto concubines, and the pitchforks, and the iron ladles full of
molten lead?  My feelings overpower me, I must conclude.  Go in peace,
and ponder these things in your hearts, and pay your sixpences at the
doors.--Exeunt omnes, piping their eyes, and blowing their noses."

Our shouts of laughter interrupted our friend, who never moved a muscle.

Again, where old Crowfoot asks his steward--"How does the privateer
lay?"

"There again now," said Aaron, with an irritable grin,--"why, Tom, your
style is most pestilent--you lay here and you lay there--are you sure
that you are not a hen, Tom?"

One more touch at Massa Aaron, and I have done.  After coming to the
description of the horrible carnage that the fire from the Transport
caused on the privateer's deck before she sheered off, I remarked "I
never recall that early and dismal scene to my recollection,--the awful
havoc created on the schooner's deck by our fire, the struggling, and
crawling, and wriggling of the dark mass of wounded men, as they
endeavoured, fruitlessly, to shelter themselves from our guns, even
behind the dead bodies of their slain shipmates--without conjuring up a
very fearful and harrowing image."

"Were you ever at Biggleswade, my dear sir?"

"To be sure I have," said Mr Bang.

"Then did you ever see an eel--pot, with the water drawn off, when the
snake--like fish were twining, and twisting, and crawling, like
Brobdignag maggots, in living knots, a horrible and disgusting mass of
living abomination, amidst the filthy slime at the bottom?"

"Ach--have done, Tom--hang your similes.  Can't you cut your coat by me,
man?  Only observe the delicacy of mine."

"The corby craw for instance," said I, laughing.

"Ever at Biggleswade!" struck in Paul Gelid.  "Ever at Biggleswade!
Lord love you, Cringle, we have all been at Biggleswade.  Don't you
know," (how he conceived I should have known, I am sure I never could
tell,) "don't you know that Wagtail and I once made a voyage to England,
ay, in the hurricane months, too--ah--for the express purpose of eating
eels there,--and Lord, Tom, my dear fellow," (here he sunk his voice
into a most dolorous key,) "let me tell you that we were caught in a
hurricane, in the Gulf, and very nearly lost, when, instead of eating
eels, sharks would have eaten usah--and at length driven into Havannah--
ah.  And when we did get home"--(here I thought my excellent friend
would have cried outright)--"Lord, sir! we found that the fall was not
the season to eat eels in after all--ah--that is, in perfection.  But we
found out from Whiffle, whom we met in town, and who had learned it from
the guard of the North mail, that one of the last season's pots was
still on hand at Biggleswade; so down we trundled in the mail that very
evening."

"And don't you remember the awful cold I caught that night, being
obliged to go outside?" quoth Waggy.

"Ah, and so you did, my dear fellow," continued his ally.

"But gracious--on alighting, we found that the agent of a confounded
gormandizing Lord Mayor had that very evening boned the entire contents
of the only remaining pot, for a cursed livery dinnerah. Eels, indeed!
we got none but those of the new catch, full of mud, and tasting of mud
and red worms.  Wagtail was really very ill in consequence--ah."

Pepperpot had all this while listened with mute attention, as if the
narrative had been most moving, and I question not he thought so; but
Bang--oh, the rogue!--looked also very grave and sympathizing, but there
was a laughing devil in his eye, that showed he was inwardly enjoying
the beautiful rise of his friends.

We were here interrupted by a hail from the look--out man at the
masthead,----'Land right a--head.'

"What does it look like?" said I.

"It makes in low hummocks, sir.  Now I see houses on the highest one."

"Hurrah, Nassau, New Providence, ho!"

Shortly after we made the land about Nassau, the breeze died away, and
it fell nearly calm.

"I say, Thomas," quoth Aaron, "for this night at least we must still be
your guests, and lumber you on board of your seventy--four.  No chance,
so far as I see, of getting into port to--night; at least if we do, it
will be too late to go on shore."

He said truly, and we therefore made up our mind to sit down once more
to our rough and round dinner, in the small, hot, choky cabin of the
Wave.  As it happened, we were all in high glee.  I flattered myself
that my conduct in the late affair would hoist me up a step or two on
the roster for promotion, and my excellent friends were delighted at the
idea of getting on shore.

After the cloth had been drawn, Mr Bang opened his fire.

"Tom, my boy, I respect your service, but I have no great ambition to
belong to it. I am sure no bribe that I am aware of could ever tempt me
to make 'my home upon the deep,' and I really am not sure that it is a
very gentlemanly calling after all.--Nay, don't look glum; what I meant
was, the egregious weariness of spirit you must all undergo from
consorting with the same men day after day, hearing the same jokes
repeated for the hundredth time, and, whichever way you turn, seeing the
same faces morning, noon, and night, and listening to the same voices.
Oh! I should die in a year's time were I to become a sailor."

"But," rejoined I, "you have your land bores in the same way that we
have our sea bores; and we have this advantage over you, that if the
devil should stand at the door, we can always escape from them sooner or
later, and can buoy up our souls with the certainty that we can so
escape from them at the end of the cruise at the farthest; whereas if
you happen to have taken root amidst a colony of bores on shore, why you
never can escape, unless you sacrifice all your temporalities for that
purpose; ergo, my dear sir, our life has its advantages, and yours has
it disadvantages."

"Too true--too true," rejoined Mr Bang.  "In fact, judging from my own
small experience, Borism is fast attaining a head it never reached
before.  Speechifying is the crying and prominent vice of the age.  Why
will the ganders not recollect that eloquence is the gift of heaven,
Thomas?  A man may improve it unquestionably, but the Promethean fire,
the electrical spark, must be from on high.  No mental perseverance or
education could ever have made a Demosthenes, or a Cicero, in the ages
long past; nor an Edmund Burke"

"Nor an Aaron Bang in times present," said I.

"Hide my roseate blushes, Thomas," quoth Aaron, as he continued--"Would
that men would speak according to their gifts, study Shakspeare and Don
Quixote, and learn of me; and that the real blockhead would content
himself with speaking when he is spoken to, drinking when he is drucken
to, and ganging to the kirk when the bell rings.  You never can go into
a party nowadays, that you don't meet with some shallow, prosing,
pestilent ass of a fellow, who thinks that empty sound is conversation;
and not unfrequently there is a spice of malignity in the blockhead's
composition; but a creature of this calibre you can wither, for it is
not worth crushing, by withholding the sunshine of your countenance from
it, or by leaving it to drivel on, until the utter contempt of the whole
company claps to change the figure--a wet night--cap as an extinguisher
on it, and its small stinking flame flickers and goes out of itself.
Then there is your sentimental water--fly, who blaws in the lugs of the
women, and clips the King's English, and your high--flying dominie body,
who whumles them outright. I speak in a figure.  But all these are as
dust in the balance to the wearisome man of ponderous acquirements, the
solemn blockhead who usurps the pas, and if he happen to be rich,
fancies himself entitled to prose and palaver away, as if he were Sir
Oracle, or as if the pence in his purse could ever fructify the cauld
parritch in his pate into pregnant brain.  There is a plateful of P's
for you at any rate, Tom.  Beautiful exemplification of the art
alliterative--an't it?"

'Oh that Heaven the gift would gie us,
To see ourselves as others see us!'

My   dear  boy,  speechifying  has  extinguished  conversation.   Public
meetings,  God  knows, are rife enough, and why will the  numskulls  not
confine  their  infernal dullness to them? why  not  be  satisfied  with
splitting the ears of the groundlings there? why will they not  consider
that convivial conversation should be lively as the sparkle of musketry,
brilliant,  sharp, and sprightly, and not like the thundering  of  heavy
cannon,  or  heavier bombs.--But no--you shall ask one of  the  Drawleys
across the table to take wine.  'Ah,' says he--and how he makes out  the
concatenation, God only knows--'this puts me in mind, Mr Thingumbob,  of
what  happened when I was chairman of the county club, on  such  a  day.
Alarming times these were, and deucedly nervous I was when I got  up  to
return  thanks.  My friends, said I, this unexpected and most unlooked--
for  honour--this'--Here blowing all your breeding to  the  winds,  you
fire a question across his bows into the fat pleasant fellow, who speaks
for  society  beyond him, and expect to find that the  dull  sailor  has
hauled  his  wind, or dropped astern--(do you twig how nautical  I  have
become  in  my  lingo under Tailtackle's tuition, Tom?)--but,  alas!  no
sooner  has  the  sparkle  of our fat friend's  wit  lit  up  the  whole
worshipful  society,  than at the first lull, down comes  Drawley  again
upon you, like a heavy--sterned Dutch dogger, right before the wind--'As
I  was saying--this unexpected and most unlooked--for honour'--and there
you  are pinned to the stake, and compelled to stand the fire of all his
blunt  bird--boltst for half an hour on end.  At length his mud has  all
dribbled  from him, and you hug yourself--'Ah,--come, here is a  talking
man  opening his fire, so we shall have some conversation at last.'  But
alas and alack a day!  Prosey the second chimes in, and works away,  and
hems  and  haws,  and  hawks up some old scraps of schoolboy  Latin  and
Greek,  which  are  all Hebrew to you, honest man, until  at  length  he
finishes  off by some solemn twaddle about fossil turnips and  vitrified
brickbats;  and thus concludes Fozy No. 2. Oh, shade of Edie  Ochiltree!
that we should stand in the taunt of such umnerciful spendthrifts of our
time  on earth!  Besides, the devil of it is, that whatever may be  said
of the flippant palaverers, the heavy bores are generally most excellent
and  amiable men, so that one can't abuse the sumphs with any thing like
a quiet conscience."

"Come," said I, "my dear sir, you are growing satirical."

"Quarter less three," sung out the leadsman in the chains.

We were now running in past the end of Hog Island to the port of Nassau,
where the lights were sparkling brightly.  We anchored, but it was too
late to go on shore that evening, so, after a parting glass of swizzle,
we all turned in for the night.

To be near the wharf, for the convenience of refitting, I had run the
schooner close in, being aware of the complete security of the harbour,
so that in the night I could feel the little vessel gently take the
ground.  This awoke me and several of the crew, for accustomed as
sailors are to the smooth bounding motion of a buoyant vessel, rising
and falling on the heaving bosom of the ocean, the least touch on the
solid ground, or against any hard floating substance, thrills to their
hearts with electrical quickness.  Through the thin bulkhead I could
hear the officers speaking to each other.

"We are touching the ground," said one.

"And if we be, there is no sea here--all smooth--land--locked entirely,"
quoth another.

So all hands of us, except the watch on deck, snoozed away once more
into the land of deep forgetfulness.  We had all for some days
previously been over--worked, and over--fatigued; indeed, ever since the
action had caused the duty of the little vessel to devolve on one half
of her original crew, those who had escaped had been subjected to great
privations, and were nearly worn out.

It might have been four bells in the middle watch, when I was awakened
by the discontinuance of Mr Swop's heavy step over head; but judging
that the poor fellow might have toppled over into a slight temporary
snooze, I thought little of it, persuaded as I was that the vessel was
lying in the most perfect safety.  In this belief I was falling over
once more, when I heard a short startled grunt from one of the men in
the steerage,--then a sudden sharp exclamation from another--a louder
ejaculation of surprise from a third--and presently Mr Wagtail, who was
sleeping on a matrass spread on the locker below me, gave a spluttering
cough.  A heavy splash followed, and, simultaneously, several of the men
forward shouted out "Ship MI of water--water up to our hammocks;" while
Waggy, who had rolled off his narrow couch, sang out at the top of his
pipe, "I am drowned, Bang.  Tom Cringle, my dear--Gelid, I am drowned--
we are all drowned--the ship is at the bottom of the sea, and we shall
have eels enough here, if we had none at Biggleswade.  Oh! murder!
murder!"

"Sound the well," I could hear Tailtackle, who had run on deck, sing
out.

"No use in that," I called out, as I splashed out of my warm cot, up to
my knees in water.

"Bring a light, Mr Tailtackle; a bottom plank must have started, or a
but, or a hidden--end.  The schooner is full of water beyond doubt, and
as the tide is still making, stand by to hoist out the boats, and get
the wounded into them.  But don't be alarmed, men; the schooner is on
the ground, and it is near high--water.  So be cool and quiet.  Don't
bother now--don't"

By the time I had finished my extempore speech I was on deck, where I
soon found that, in very truth, there was no use in sounding the well,
or manning the pumps either, as some wounded plank had been crushed out
bodily by the pressure of the vessel when she took the ground; and there
she lay--the tidy little Wave--regularly bilged, with the tide flowing
into her.

Every one of the crew was now on the alert.  Bedding and bags and some
provisions were placed in the boats of the schooner; and several craft
from the shore, hearing the alarm, were now alongside; so danger there
was none, except that of catching cold, and I therefore bethought me of
looking in on my guests in the cabin.  I descended and waded into our
late dormitory with a candle in my hand and the water nearly up to my
waist. I there found my steward, also with a light, splashing about in
the water, catching a stray hat here, and fishing up a spare coat there,
and anchoring a chair, with a piece of spunyarn, to the pillar of the
small side--berth on the starboard side, while our friend Massa Aaron
was coolly lying in his cot on the larboard, the bottom of which was by
this time within an inch of the surface of the water, and bestirring
himself in an attempt to get his trowsers on, which by some lucky chance
he had stowed away under his pillow overnight, and there he was sticking
up first one peg and then another, until by sidling and shifting in his
narrow lair, he contrived to rig himself in his nether garments.  "But,
steward, my good man," he was saying when I entered, "where is my coat,
eh?" The man groped for a moment down in the water, which his nose
dipped into, with his shirt--sleeves tucked up to his arm--pits, and
then held up some dark object, that, to me at least, looked like a piece
of black cloth hooked out of a dyer's vat.  Alas! this was Massa Aaron's
coat; and while the hats were bobbing at each other in the other corner
like seventy--fours, with a squadron of shoes in their wakes, and
Wagtail was sitting in the side--berth with his wet night--gown drawn
about him, his muscular development in high relief through the clinging
drapery, and bemoaning his fate in the most pathetic manner--that can be
conceived, our ally Aaron exclaimed, "I say, Tom, how do you like the
cut of my Sunday coat, eh?" while our friend Paul Gelid, who it seems
had slept through the whole row, was at length startled out of his
sleep, and sticking one of his long shanks over the side of his cot in
act to descend, immersed it in the cold salt brine.

"Lord!  Wagtail," he exclaimed, "my dear fellow, the cabin is full of
water--we are sinking--ah!  Deucedly annoying to be drowned in this
hole, amidst dirty water, like a tubful of ill--washed potatoes--ah."

"Tom--Tom Cringle," shouted Mr Bang at this juncture, while he looked
over the edge of his cot on the stramash below, "saw ever any man the
like of that?  Why, see there--there, just under your candle, Tom--a
bird's nest floating about with a mavis in it, as I am a gentleman."

"D--n your bird's nest and mavis too, whatever that may be," roared
little Mr Pepperpot.

"By Jupiter, it is my wig, with a live rat in it."

"Confound your wig!--ah," quoth Paul, as the steward fished up what I
took at first for a pair of brimfull water--stoups.  "Zounds! look at my
boots."

"And confound both the wig and boots, say I," sung out Mr Bang.  "Look
at my Sunday coat.  Why, who set the ship onfire, Tom?"

Here his eye caught mine, and a few words sufficed to explain how we
were situated, and then the only bother was how to get ashore, and where
we were to sojourn, so as to have our clothes dried, as nothing could
now be done until daylight.  I therefore got our friends safely into a
Nassau boat alongside, with their wet trunks and portmanteaus in charge
of their black servants, and left them to fish their way to their
lodging--house as they best could.  By this, the wounded and the sound
part of the crew had been placed on board of two merchant brigs, that
lay close to us; and the masters of them proving accommodating men, I
got them alongside, as the tide flowed, one on the starboard, the other
on the larboard side, right over the Wave; and next forenoon, when they
took the ground, we rigged two spare topmasts from one vessel to another,
and making the main and fore rigging of the schooner fast to them, as the
tide once more made, we weighed her, and floated her alongside of the
sheer--hulk, against which we were enabled to heave her out, so as to get
at the leak, and then by rigging bilge--pumps, we contrived to free her
and keep her dry.  The damaged plank was soon removed; and, being in a
fair way to surmount all my difficulties, about half--past five in the
evening I equipped myself in dry clothes, and proceeded on shore to call
on our friends at their new domicile.  When I entered. I was shown into
the dining hall by my ally, Pegtop.

"Massa will be here presently, sir."

"Oh--tell him he need not hurry himself:--But how are Mr Bang and his
friends?"

"Oh, dem all wery so so, only Massa Wagtail hab take soch a terrible
cold, dat him tink he is going to dead; him wery sorry for himshef, for
true massa."

"But where are the gentlemen, Pegtop?"

"All, every one on dem, is in him bed.  Wet clothes have been drying all
day."

"And when do they mean to dine?"

Here Pegtop doubled himself up, and laughed like to split himself.

"Dem is all dining in bed, Massa.  Shall I show you to dem?"

"I shall be obliged; but don't let me intrude.  Give my compliments, and
say I have looked in simply to enquire after their health."

Here Mr Wagtail shouted from the inner apartment.

"Hillo!  Tom, my boy!  Tom Cringle!--here, my lad, here!"

I was shown into the room from whence the voice proceeded, which
happened to be Massa Aaron's bedroom: and there were my three friends
stretched on sofas, in their night--clothes, with a blanket, sheet, and
counterpane over each, forming three sides of a square round a long
table, on which a most capital dinner was smoking, with wines of several
kinds, and a perfect galaxy of wax candles, and their sable valets, in
nice clean attire, and smart livery coats, waiting on them.

"Ah, Tom," quoth Massa Paul, "delighted to see you,--come, you seem to
have dry clothes on, so take the head of the table."

I did so; and broke ground forthwith with great zeal.

"Tom, a glass of wine, my dear," said Aaron.  "Don't you admire us
classical, after the manner of the ancients, eh?  Wagtail's head--dress,
and Paul's night--cap--oh, the comforts of a woollen one!  Ah, Tom, Tom,
the Greeks had no Kilmamock--none."

We all carried on cheerily, and Bang began to sparkle.

"Well, now since you have weighed the schooner and found not much
wanting I feel my spirits rising again.--A glass of champagne, Tom,
your health, boy.--The dip the old hooker has got must have surprises
the rats and cockroaches.  Do you know, Tom, I really have an idea of
writing a history of the cruise; only I am deterred from the melancholy
consciousness that every blockhead nowadays fancies he can write."

"Why, my dear sir, are you not coquetting for a compliment?  Don't we
all know, that many of the crack articles in Ebony's Mag" "Bah,"
clapping his hand on my mouth; "hold your tongue; all wrong in that"

"Well, if it be not you then, I scarcely know to whom to attribute them.
Until lately, I only knew you as the warm hearted West Indian
gentleman; but now I am certain I am to"

"Tom, hold your tongue, my beautiful little man.  For, although I must
plead guilty to having mixed a little in literary society in my younger
days--Alas! my heart, those days are gane."

"Ah,  Mr  Swop," continued Mr Bang, as the master was ushered  into  the
room.  "Plate and glasses for Mr Swop."

The  sailor  bowed,  perched himself on the  very  edge  of  his  chair,
scarcely  within  long  arm's  length of the  table,  and  sitting  bolt
upright,  as if he had swallowed a spare studdingsail--boom,  drank  our
healths, and smoothed down his hair on his brow.

"Captain, I come to report the schooner ready to"

"Poo,"  rattled  out  Mr  Bang; "time for your  tale  by  and  by;--help
yourself  to  some  of  that  capital beef, Peter,--So--Yes,  my  love,"
continued  our friend, resuming his yarn.  "I once coped even with  John
Wilson  himself.  Yea, in the fullness of my powers, I feared  not  even
the Professor."

"Indeed!" said I.

"True,  as  I am a gentleman.  Why, I once, in a public trial of  skill,
beat him, even him, by eighteen measured inches, from toe to heel."

I stared.

"I was the slighter man of the two, certainly.  Still, in a flying leap,
I always had the best of it, until he astonished the world with the Isle
of  Palms. From that day forth, my springiness and elasticity  left  me.
Fallen  was my muscles brawny vaunt. I quailed.  My genius stood rebuked
before  him.   Nevertheless, at hop--step--and--jump  I  was  his  match
still.   When  out  came the City of the Plague! From  that  the  Great
Ostrich  could not hold the candle to the Flying Philosopher.  And  now,
heaven  help  me!   I  can  scarcely cover  nineteen  feet,  with  every
advantage  of ground for the run.  It is true, the Professor was  always
in condition, and never required training; now, unless I had time for my
hard food, I was seldom in wind."

Mr  Peter  Swop,  emboldened  and brightened  by  the  wine  he  had  so
industriously  swilled,  and  willing  to  contribute   his   quota   of
conversation, having previously jumbled in his noddle what Mr  Bang  had
said  about an ostrich, and hard food, asked, across the table  "Do  you
believe ostriches eat iron, Mr Bang?"

Mr   Bang  slowly  put  down  his  glass,  and  looking  with  the  most
imperturbable  seriousness  the  innocent  master  right  in  the  face,
exclaimed:

"Ostriches eat iron!--Do I believe ostriches eat iron, did you  say,  Mr
Swop?   Will  you have the great kindness to tell me if  this  glass  of
madeira be poison, Mr Swop?  Why, when Captain Cringle there was in  the
Bight  of  Benin, from which 'One comes out where a hundred go  in,'  on
board of the--what--d'ye--call--her? I forget her name--they had a  tame
ostrich, which was the wonder of the whole squadron.  At the first  go
off  it  had plenty of food, but at length they had to put it  on  short
allowance of a Winchester bushel of tenpenny nails and a pump--bolt  a
day;  but their supplies failing, they had even to reduce this quantity,
whereby  the poor bird, after unavailing endeavours to get at  the  iron
ballast, was driven to pick out the iron bolts of the ship in the  clear
moonlight  nights,  when no one was thinking of it; so  that  the  craft
would  soon have been a perfect wreck.  And as the commodore  would  not
hear  of  the creature being killed, Tom there undertook to keep  it  on
copper bolts and sheathing until they reached Cape Coast.  But it  would
not  do;  the  copper soured on its stomach, and it  died.   Believe  an
ostrich eats iron, quotha!  But to return to the training for the jump
I  used  to  stick to beef--steaks and a thimbleful of Burton  ale;  and
again I tried the dried knuckle parts of legs of five--year--old black
faced  muttons;  but,  latterly, I trained best,  so  far  as  wind  was
concerned, on birsled pease and whisky"

"On what?" shouted I, in great astonishment.  "On what?"

"Yes, my boys; parched pease and whisky.  Charge properly with birsled
pease, and if you take a caulkers just as you begin your run, there is
the linstock to the gun for you, and away you fly through the air on the
self--propelling principle of the Congreve Rocket.  Well might that
amiable, and venerable, and most learned Theban, Cockibus Bungo, who
always held the stakes on these great occasions, exclaim, in his
astonishment, to Cheesey, the janitor of many days--as 'Like fire from
flint I glanced away,' disdaining the laws of gravitation--by Mercury, I
swear,--yea, by his winged heel, I shall have at the Professor yet, if I
live, and whisky and birsled pease fail me not."

Here  Paul and I laughed outright; but Mr Wagtail appeared out of sorts,
somehow; and Swop looked first at one, and then at another, with a  look
of  the  most  ludicrous uncertainty as to whether Mr Bang was  quizzing
him, or telling a verity.

"Why, Wagtail," said Gelid, "what ails you, my boy?"

I  looked  towards  our little amiable fat friend.  His  face  was  much
flushed,  although I learned that he had been unusually abstemious,  and
he  appeared  heated and restless, and had evidently  feverish  symptoms
about him.

"Who's  there?"  said Wagtail, looking towards the door  with  a  raised
look.

It was Tailtackle, with two of the boys carrying a litter, followed by
Peter Mangrove, as if he had been chief mourner at a funeral.  Out of
the litter a black paw, with fishes or splints whipped round it by a
band of spunyam, protruded, and kept swaying about like a pendulum.

"What have you got there, Mr Tailtackle?"

The gunner turned round.

"Oh, it is a vagary of Peter Mangrove's, sir.  Not contented with
getting the doctor to set Sneezer's starboard foreleg, he insists on
bringing him away from amongst the people at the capstan--house."

"True, Massa--Massa Tailtackle say true; de poor dumb dog never shall
cure him leg none at all, mong de men dere; dey all love him so mosh,
and make of him so mosh, and stuff him wid salt wittal so mosh, till him
blood inflammation like a hell; and den him so good temper, and so
gratify wid dere attention, dat I believe him will eat till him
kickeriboo of sorefut, [surfeit, I presumed;] and, beside, I know de dog
healt will instantly mend if him see you.  Oh, Massa Aaron, [our friend
was smiling,] it not like you to make fun of poor black fellow, when him
is take de part of soch old friend as poor Sneezer.  De Captain dere
cannot laugh, dat is if him will only tink on dat fearful cove at Puerto
Escondido, and what Sneezer did for bote of we dere."

"Well, well, Mangrove, my man," said Mr Bang, "I will ask leave of my
friends here to have the dog bestowed in a corner of the piazza, so let
the boys lay him down there, and here is a glass of grog for you--so.
Now go back again,"--as the poor fellow had drank our health's.

Here Sneezer, who had been still as a mouse all this while, put his
black snout out of the hammock, and began to cheep and whine in his
gladness at seeing his master, and the large tears ran down his coal
black muzzle as he licked my hand, while every now and then he gave a
short fondling bark, as if he had said, "Ah, master, I thought you had
forgotten me altogether, ever since the action where I got my leg broke
by a grape--shot, but I find I am mistaken."

"Now, Tailtackle, what say you?"

"We may ease off the tackles to--morrow afternoon," said the gunner,
"and right the schooner, sir; we have put in a dozen cashew knees, as
tough as leather, and bolted the planks tight and fast.  You saw these
heavy quarters did us no good, sir; I hope you will beautify her again,
now since the Spaniard's shot has pretty well demolished them already.
I hope you won't replace them, sir. I hope Captain Transom may see her
as she should be, as she was when your honour had your first pleasure
cruise in her." Here--but I may have dreamed it I thought the quid in
the honest fellow's cheek stuck out in higher relief than usual for a
short space.

"We shall see, we shall see," said I.

"I say, Don Timotheus," quoth Bang, "you don't mean to be off without
drinking our healths?" as he tipped him a tumbler of brandy grog of very
dangerous strength.

The warrant officer drank it, and vanished, and presently Mr Gelid's
brother, who had just returned from one of the out islands, made his
appearance, and after the greeting between them was over, the stranger
advanced, and with much grace invited us en masse to his house.  But by
this time Mr Wagtail was so ill, that we could not move that night, our
chief concern now being to see him properly bestowed; and very soon I
was convinced that his disease was a violent bilious fever.

The old brown landlady, like all her caste, was a most excellent nurse;
and after the most approved and skilful surgeon of the town had seen
him, and prescribed what was thought right, we all turned in.  Next
morning, before any of us were up, a whole plateful of cards were handed
to us, and during the forenoon these were followed by as many
invitations to dinner.  We had difficulty in making our election, but
that day I remember we dined at the beautiful Mrs C----'s, and in the
evening adjourned to a ball--a very gay affair; and I do freely avow,
that I never saw so many pretty women in a community of the same size
before.  Oh! it was a little paradise, and not without its Eve.  But
such an Eve! I scarcely think the old Serpent himself could have found
it in his heart to have beguiled her.

"I say, Tom, my dear boy," said Mr Bang, "do you see that darling?  Oh,
who can picture to himself, without a tear, that such a creature of
light, such an ethereal--looking thing, whose step 'would ne'er wear out
the everlasting flint,' that floating gossamer on the thin air, shall
one day become an anxious--looking, sharp--featured, pale--faced, loud
tongued, thin--bosomed, broad bottomed wife!"

The next day, or rather in the same night, his Majesty's ship Rabo
arrived, and the first tidings we had of it in the morning were
communicated by Captain Qeuedechat himself, an honest, uproarious
sailor, who chose to begin, as many a worthy ends, by driving up to the
door of the lodging in a cart.

"Is the Captain of the small schooner that was swamped, here?" he asked
of Massa Pegtop.

Free and easy this, thought I.

"Yes, sir, Captain Cringle is here, but him no get up yet."
"Oh, never mind, tell him not to hurry himself; but where is the table
laid for breakfast?"

"Here, sir," said Pegtop, as he showed him into the piazza.

"Ah, that will do--so give me the newspaper--tol de rol," and he began
reading and singing, in all the buoyancy of mind consequent on escaping
from shipboard after a three months cruise.

I dressed and came to him as soon as I could; and the gallant Captain,
whom I had figured to myself a fine light gossamer lad of twenty--two,
stared me in the face as a fat elderly cock of forty at the least; and
as to bulk, I would not have guaranteed that eighteen stone could have
made him kick the beam. However, he was an excellent fellow, and that
day he and his crew were of most essential service in assisting me in
refitting the Wave, for which I shall always be grateful. I had spent
the greater part of the forenoon in my professional duty, but after two
o'clock I had knocked off, in order to make a few calls on the families
to whom I had introductions, and who were afterwards so signally kind to
me. I then returned to our lodgings in order to dress for dinner, before
I sallied forth to worthy old Mr N----'s, where we were all to dine,
when I met Aaron.

"No chance of our removing to Peter Gelid's this evening."

"Why?" I asked.

"Oh, poor Pepperpot Wagtail is become alarmingly ill; inflammatory
symptoms have appeared, and"--Here the colloquy was cut short by the
entrance of Mrs Peter Celid--a pretty woman enough.  She had come to
learn herself from our landlady, how Mr Wagtail was, and with the
kindliness of the country, she volunteered to visit poor little Waggy in
his sick--bed. I did not go into the room with her; but when she
returned, she startled us all a good deal, by stating her opinion that
the worthy man was really very ill, in which she was corroborated by the
doctor, who now arrived.  So soon as the medico saw him, he bled him,
and after prescribing a lot of effervescing draughts, and various
febrifuge mixtures, he left a large blister with the old brown landlady,
to be applied over his stomach if the wavering and flightiness did not
leave him before morning.  We returned early after dinner from Mr N----'s
to our lodgings, and as I knew Gelid was expected at his brother's in
the evening, to meet a large assemblage of kindred, and as the night was
rainy and tempestuous, I persuaded him to trust the watch to me; and as
our brown landlady had been up nearly the whole of the previous night, I
sent for Tailtackle to spell me, while the black valets acted with great
assiduity in their capacity of surgeon's mates.  About two in the
morning Mr Wagtail became delirious, and it was all that I could do,
aided by my sable assistants, and an old black nurse, to hold him down
in his bed.  Now was the time to clap on the blister, but he repeatedly
tore it off, so that at length we had to give it up for an impracticable
job; and Tailtackle, whom I had called from his pallet, where he had
gone to lie down for an hour, placed the caustico, as the Spaniards call
it, at the side of the bed.

"No use in trying this any more at present," said I; "we must wait until
he gets quieter, Mr Tailtackle; so go to your bed, and I shall lie down
on this sofa here, where Marie Paparoche" (this was our old landlady)
"has spread sheets, I see, and made all comfortable.  And send Mr Bang's
servant, will you;" (friend Aaron had ridden into the country after
dinner to visit a friend, and the storm, as I conjectured, had kept him
there;) "he is fresh, and will call me in case I be wanted, or Mr
Wagtail gets worse."

I lay down, and soon fell fast asleep, and I remembered nothing, until I
awoke about eleven o'clock next morning, and heard Mr Bang speaking to
Wagtail, at whose bedside he was standing.

"Pepperpot, my dear, be thankful--you are quite cool--a fine moisture on
your skin this morning--be thankful, my little man how did your blister
rise?"

"My good friend," quoth Wagtail, in a thin weak voice, "I can't tell--I
don't know; but this I perceive, that I am unable to rise, whether it
has risen or no."

"Ah--weak," quoth Gelid, who had now entered the room.

"Nay," said Pepperpot, "not so weak as deucedly sore, and on a very
unromantic spot, my dears."

"Why," said Aaron, "the pit of the stomach is not a very genteel
department, nor the abdomen neither."

"Why," said Wagtail, "I have no blister on either of those places, but
if it were possible to dream of such a thing, I would say it had been
clapped on"

Here his innate propriety tongue--tied him.

"Eh?" said Aaron; "what--has the caustico that was intended for the
frontiers of Belgium been clapped by mistake on the broad Pays Bas?"

And so in very truth it turned out; for while we slept, the patient had
risen, and sat down on the blister that lay, as already mentioned, on a
chair at his bedside, and again toppling into bed, had fallen into a
sound sleep, from which he had but a few moments before the time I write
of awoke.

"Why, now," continued Aaron, to the doctor of the Wave who had just
entered--"why, here is a discovery, my dear doctor.  You clap a hot
blister on a poor fellow's head to cool it, but Doctor Cringle there has
cooled Master Wagtail's brain, by blistering his stern--eh?--Make notes,
and mind you report this to the College of  Surgeons."

I cleared myself of these imputations.  Wagtail recovered; our refitting
was completed; our wood, and water, and provisions, replenished; and,
after spending one of the happiest fortnights of my life, in one
continued round of gaiety, I prepared to leave--with tears in my eyes, I
will confess--the clear waters, bright blue skies, glorious climate, and
warm hearted community of Nassau, New Providence.  Well might that old
villain Blackbeard have made this sweet spot his favourite rendezvous.
By the way, this same John Teach or Blackbeard, had fourteen wives in
the lovely island; and I am not sure but I could have picked out
something approximating to the aforesaid number myself, with time and
opportunity, from among such a galaxy of loveliness as then shone and
sparkled in this dear little town.  Speaking of the pirate Blackbeard, I
ought to have related that one morning when I was at breakfast at
Mrs C----'s, the amiable, and beautiful, and innocent girl matron ay, you
supercilious son of a sea--cook, you may turn up your nose at the
expression, but if you could have seen the burden of my song as I saw
her, and felt the elegancies of her manner and conversation as I felt
them--but let us stick to Blackbeard, if you please.  We were all
comfortably seated at breakfast; I had finished my sixth egg, had
concealed a beautiful dried snapper, before which even a rizzard haddock
sank into insignificance, and was bethinking me of finishing off with a
slice of Scotch mutton--ham, when in slid Mr Bang.  He was received with
all possible cordiality, and commenced operations very vigorously.

He was an amazing favourite of our hostess, (as where was he not a
favourite?) so that it was some time before he even looked my way.  We
were in the midst of a discussion regarding the beauty of New
Providence, and the West India Islands in general; and I was remarking
that nature had been liberal, that the scenery was unquestionably
magnificent in the larger islands, and beautiful in the smaller; but
there were none of those heart--stirring reminiscences, none of those
thrilling electrical associations, which vibrate to the heart at
visiting scenes in Europe famous in antiquity--famous as the spot in
which recent victories had been achieved--famous even for the very
freebooters, who once held unlawful sway in the neighbourhood.  "Why,
there never has flourished hereabouts, for instance, even one thoroughly
melodramatic thief." Massa Aaron let me go on, until he had nearly
finished his breakfast.  At length he fired a shot at me.

"I say, Tom, you are expatiating, I see.  Nothing heart stirring, say
you?  In new countries it would bother you to have old associations
certainly; and you have had your Rob Roy, I grant you, and the old
country has had her Robin Hood.  But has not Jamaica had her Three
fingered Jack? Ay, a more gentlemanlike scoundrel than either of the
former.  When did jack refuse a piece of yam, and a cordial from his
horn, to the wayworn man, white or black?  When did he injure a woman?
When did Jack refuse food and a draught of cold water, the greatest
boon, in our ardent climate, that he could offer, to a wearied child?
Oh, there was much poetry in the poor fellow!  And here, had they not
that most melodramatic (as you choose to word it) of thieves,
Blackbeard, before whom Bluebeard must for ever hide his diminished
head?  Why, Bluebeard had only one wife at a time, although he murdered
five of them, whereas Blackbeard had seldom fewer than a dozen, and he
was never known to murder above three.  But I have fallen in with such a
treasure!  Oh, such a discovery!  I have been communing with Noah
himself with an old negro, who remembers this very Blackbeard--the
pirate Blackbeard."

"The deuce," said I; "impossible!"
"But it is true.  Why it is only ninety--four years ago since the
scoundrel flourished, and this old cock is one hundred and ten. I have
jotted it down--worth a hundred pounds.  Read, my adorable Mrs C----,
read."

"But, my dear Mr Bang," said she, "had you not better read it yourself?"

"You, if you please," quoth Aaron, who forthwith set himself to make the
best use of his time.

MEMOIR OF JOHN TEACH, ESQUIRE VULGARLY CALLED BLACKBEARD.
BY AARON BANGS, ESQUIRE, F.R.S.

"He was the mildest mannered man.
That ever scuttled ship, or cut a throat;
With such true breeding of a gentleman,
You never could discern his real thought.
Pity he loved adventurous life's variety,
He was so great a loss to good society."


John Teach, or Blackbeard, was a very eminent man--a very handsome man,
and a very devil amongst the ladies.

He was a Welshman, and introduced the leek into Nassau about the year
1718, and was a very remarkable personage, although, from some singular
imperfection in his moral constitution, he never could distinguish
clearly between meum and tuum.

He found his patrimony was not sufficient to support him; and as he
disliked agricultural pursuits as much as mercantile, he got together
forty or fifty fine young men one day, and borrowed a vessel from some
merchants that was lying at the Nore, and set sail for the Bahamas.  On
his way he fell in with several West Indiamen, and, sending a boat on
board of each, he asked them for the loan of provisions and wine, and
all their gold, and silver, and clothes, which request was in every
instance but one civilly acceded to; whereupon, drinking their good
healths, he returned to his ship.  In the instance where he had been
uncivilly treated, to show his forbearance, he saluted them with twenty
one guns; but by some accident the shot had not been withdrawn, so that
unfortunately the contumacious ill bred craft sank, and as Blackbeard's
own vessel was very crowded, he was unable to save any of the crew.  He
was a great admirer of fine air, and accordingly established himself on
the island of New Providence, and invited a number of elegant young men,
who were fond of pleasure cruises, to visit him, so that presently he
found it necessary to launch forth in order to borrow more provisions.

At this period he was a great dandy; and amongst other vagaries, he
allowed his beard to grow a foot long at the shortest, and then plaited
it into three strands, indicating that he was a bashaw of no common
dimensions.  He wore red breeches, but no stockings, and sandals of
bullock's hide.  He was a perfect Egyptian in his curiousness in fine
linen, and his shirt was always white as the driven snow when it was
clean, which was the first Sunday of every month.  In waistcoats he was
especially select; but the cut of them very much depended on the fashion
in favour with the last gentleman he had borrowed from.  He never wore
any thing but a full dress purple velvet coat, under which bristled
three brace of pistols, and two naked stilettoes, only eighteen inches
long, and he had generally a lighted matchfizzing in the bow of his
cocked scraper whereat he lighted his pipe, or fired off a cannon, as
pleased him.

One of his favourite amusements, when he got half slewed, was to adjourn
to the hold with his compotators, and kindling some brimstone matches,
to dance and roar, as if he had been the devil himself, until his allies
were nearly suffocated.  At another time he would blow out the candles
in the cabin, and blaze away with his loaded pistols at random, right
and left, whereby he severely wounded the feelings of some of his
intimates by the poignancy of his wit, all of which he considered a most
excellent joke.  But he was kind to his fourteen wives so long as he was
sober, as it is known that he never murdered above three of them.  His
borrowing, however, gave offence to our government, no one can tell how;
and at length two of our frigates, the Lime and Pearl, then cruising off
the American coast, after driving him from his, stronghold, hunted him
down in an inlet in North Carolina, where, in an eight--gun schooner,
with thirty desperate fellows, he made a defence worthy of his
honourable life, and fought so furiously that he killed and wounded more
men of the attacking party than his own crew consisted of; and following
up his success, he boarded, sword in hand, the headmost of the two armed
sloops, which had been detached by the frigates, with ninety men on
board, to capture him; and being followed by twelve men and his trusty
lieutenant, he would have carried her out and out, maugre the disparity
of force, had he not fainted from loss of blood, when, falling on his
back, he died where he fell, like a hero--"His face to the sky, and his
feet to the foe" leaving eleven forlorn widows, being the fourteen
wives, minus the three that he had throttled.

"NO CHIVALROUS ASSOCIATIONS indeed!  Match me such a character as this."

We  all  applauded to the echo.  But I must end my song,  for  I  should
never  tire  in  dwelling  on  the happy days  we  spent  in  this  most
enchanting  little island.  The lovely blithe girls, and the  hospitable
kind  hearted men, and the children! I never saw such cherubs, with  all
the  sprightliness of the little pale--faced creoles of the West Indies,
while the healthy bloom of Old England blossomed on their cheeks.

"I say, Tom," said Massa Aaron, on one occasion when I was rather
tedious on the subject, "all those little cherubs, as you call them, at
least the most of them, are the offspring of the cotton bales captured
in the American war."

"The what?" said I.

"The children of the American war--and I will prove it thus taking the
time from no less an authority than Hamlet, when he chose to follow the
great Dictator, Julius Caesar himself, through all the corruption of our
physical nature, until he found him stopping a beer barrel--(only
imagine the froth of one of our disinterested friend Buxton's beer
barrels, savouring of quassia, not hop, fizzing through the clay of
Julius Caesar the Roman!)--as thus: If there had been no Yankee war,
there would have been no prize cargoes of cotton sent into Nassau; if
there had been no prize cargoes sent into Nassau, there would have been
little money made; if there had been little money made, there would have
been fewer marriages; if there had been fewer marriages, there would
have been fewer cherubs.  There is logic for you, my darling."

"Your last is a non sequitur, my dear sir," said I, laughing.  "But, in
the main, Parson Malthus is right, out of Ireland that is, after all."

That evening I got into a small scrape, by impressing three apprentices
out of a Scotch brig, and if Mr Bang had not stood my friend, I might
have, got into serious trouble.  Thanks to him, the affair was soldered.

When on the eve of sailing, my excellent friends, Messrs Bang, Gelid,
and Wagtail, determined, in consequence of letters which they had
received from Jamaica, to return home in a beautiful armed brig that was
to sail in a few days, laden with flour. I cannot well describe how much
this moved me.  Young and enthusiastic as I was, I had grappled myself
with hooks of steel to Mr Bang; and now, when he unexpectedly
communicated his intention of leaving me, I felt more forlorn and
deserted than I was willing to plead to.

"My dear boy," said he, "make my peace with Transom.  If urgent business
had not pressed me, I would not have broken my promise to rejoin him;
but I am imperiously called for in Jamaica, where I hope soon to see
you." He continued, with a slight tremor in his voice, which thrilled to
my heart, as it vouched for the strength of his regard,--"If ever I am
where you may come, Tom, and you don't make my house your home, provided
you have not a better of your own, I will never forgive you." He paused.
"You young fellows sometimes spend faster than you should do, and
quarterly bills are long of coming round. I have drawn for more money
than I want. I wish you would--let me be your banker for a hundred
pounds, Tom."

I squeezed his hand.  "No, no--many, many thanks, my dear sir but I
never outrun the constable. Goodbye, God bless you.  Farewell, Mr
Wagtail--Mr Gelid, adieu." I tumbled into the boat and pulled on board.
The first thing I did was to send the wine and sea stock, a most
exuberant assortment unquestionably, belonging to my Jamaica friends,
ashore; but, to my surprise, the boat was sent back, with Mr Bang's
card, on which was written in pencil, "Don't affront us, Captain
Cringle." Thereupon I got the schooner under weigh, and no event worth
narrating turned up until we anchored close to the post office at
Crooked Island, two days after.

We found the Firebrand there, and the post--office mail--boat, with her
red flag and white horse in it, and I went on board the corvette to
deliver my official letter, detailing the incidents of the cruise, and
was most graciously received by my captain.

There was a sail in sight when we anchored, which at first we took for
the Jamaica packet; but it turned out to be the Tinker, friend Bang's
flour--loaded brig; and by five in the evening our friends were all
three once more restored to us, but, alas! so far as regarded two of
them, only for a moment.  Messrs Gelid and Wagtail had, on second
thoughts, it seems, hauled their wind to lay in a stock of turtle at
Crooked Island, and I went ashore with them, and assisted in the
selection from the turtle crawls filled with beautiful clear water, and
lots of fine lively fresh--caught fish, the postmaster being the turtle
merchant.

"I say, Paul, happier in the fish way here than you were at Biggleswade
eh?" said Aaron.

After we had completed our purchases, our friends went on board the
corvette, and I was invited to meet them at dinner, where the aforesaid
postmaster, a stout conch, with a square--cut coatee and red cape and
cuffs, was also a guest.

He must have had but a dull time of it, as there were no other white
inhabitants that I saw, on the island besides himself; his wife having
gone to Nassau, which he looked on as the prime city of the world, to be
confined, as he told us.  Bang said, that she must rather have gone to
be delivered from confinement; and, in truth, Crooked Island was a most
desolate domicile for a lady; our friend the postmaster's family, and a
few negroes employed in catching turtle, and making salt, and dressing
some scrubby cotton--trees, composing the whole population.  In the
evening the packet did arrive, however, and Captain Transom received his
orders.

"Captain Transom, my boy," quoth Bang towards nightfall, "the best of
friends must part--we must move--good--night--we shall be off presently
good--by"--and he held out his hand.

"Devil a bit," said Transom; "Bang, you shall not go, neither you nor
your friends.  You promised, in fact shipped with me for the cruise, and
Lady----has my word and honour that you shall be restored to her longing
eye, sound and safe--so you must all remain, and send down the flour
brig to say you are coming."

To make a long story short, Massa Aaron was boned, but his friends were
obdurate, so we all weighed that night; the Tinker bearing up for
Jamaica, while we kept by the wind, steering for Conaives in St Domingo.

The third day we were off Cape St Nicholas, and getting a slant of wind
from the westward, we ran up the Bight of Leogane all that night, but
towards morning it fell calm; we were close in under the highland, about
two miles from the shore, and the night was the darkest I ever was out
in anywhere.  There were neither moon nor stars to be seen, and the dark
clouds settled down, until they appeared to rest upon our mastheads,
compressing, as it were, the hot steamy air upon us until it became too
dense for breathing.  In the early part of the night it had rained in
heavy showers now and then, and there were one or two faint flashes of
lightning, and some heavy peals of thunder, which rolled amongst the
distant hills in loud shaking reverberations, which gradually became
fainter and fainter, until they grumbled away in the distance in hoarse
murmurs, like the low notes of an organ in one of our old cathedrals;
but now there was neither rain nor wind--all nature seemed fearfully
hushed; for where we lay, in the smooth bight, there was no swell, not
even a ripple on the glasslike sea; the sound of the shifting of a
handspike, or the tread of the men, as they ran to haul on--a rope, or
the creaking of the rudder, sounded loud and distinct.  The sea in our
neighbourhood was strongly phosphorescent, so that the smallest chip
thrown overboard struck fire from the water, as if it had been a piece
of iron cast on flint; and when you looked over the quarter, as I
delight to do, and tried to penetrate into the dark clear profound
beneath,  you every now and then saw a burst of pale light, like a halo,
far down in the depths of the green sea, caused by the motion of some
fish, or of what Jack, no great natural philosopher, usually calls
blubbers; and when the dolphin or skip--jack leapt into the air, they
sparkled out from the still bosom of the deep dark water like rockets,
until they fell again into their element in a flash of fire.  This
evening the corvette had showed no lights, and although I conjectured
she was not far from us, still I could not with any certainty indicate
her whereabouts.  It might now have been about three o'clock, and I was
standing on the aftermost gun on the starboard side, peering into the
impervious darkness over the tafferel, with my dear old dog Sneezer by
my side, nuzzling and fondling after his affectionate fashion, while the
pilot, Peter Mangrove, stood within handspike length of me.  The dog had
been growling, but all in fun, and snapping at me, when in a moment he
hauled off, planted his paws on the rail, looked forth into the night,
and gave a short, anxious bark, Ii e the solitary pop of the sentry's
musket to alarm the main guard in outpost work.

Peter Mangrove advanced, and put his arm round the dog's neck.  "What
you see, my shild?" said the black pilot.

Sneezer uplifted his voice, and gave a long continuous growl.

"Ah!" said Mangrove sharply, "Massa Captain, something near we--never
doubt dat--de dog yeerie someting we can't yeerie, and see someting we
can't see."

I had lived long enough never to despise any caution, from whatever
quarter it proceeded.  So I listened, still as a stone.  Presently I
thought I heard the distant splash of oars.  I placed my hand behind my
ear, and waited with breathless attention.  Immediately I saw the
sparkling dip of them in the calm black water, as if a boat, and a large
one, was pulling very fast towards us.  "Look out, hail that boat," said
I.

"Boat ahoy!" sung out the man, to whom I had spoken.  No answer.
"Coming here?" reiterated the seaman.  No better success.  The boat or
canoe, or whatever it might be, was by this time close aboard of us,
within pistol--shot at the farthest--no time to be lost, so I hailed
myself, and this time the challenge did produce an answer.

"Sore boat--fruit and wegitab."

"Shore boat, with fruit and vegetables, at this time of night--I don't
like it," said I. "Boatswain's mate,--all hands--pipe away the boarders.
Cutlasses, men--quick, a piratical row--boat is close to." And verily we
had little time to lose, when a large canoe or row--boat, pulling twelve
oars at the fewest, and carrying twenty--five men, or thereabouts, swept
up on our larboard quarter, hooked on, and the next moment upwards of
twenty unlooked--for visitors scrambled up our shallow side, and jumped
on board.  All this took place so suddenly that there were not ten of my
people ready to receive them, but those ten were the prime men of the
ship.

"Surrender, you scoundrels--surrender.  You have boarded a man of--war.
Down with your arms, or we shall kill you to a man."

But they either did not understand me, or did not believe me, for the
answer was a blow from a cutlass, which, if I had not parried with my
night--glass, which it broke in pieces, might have effectually stopped
my promotion.

"Cut them down, boarders, down with them--they are pirates," shouted I;
"heave cold shot into their boat alongside--all hands, Mr Rousemout," to
the boatswain, "call all hands."

We closed.  The assailants had no firearms, but they were armed with
swords and long knives, and as they fought with desperation, several of
our people were cruelly haggled; and after the first charge, the
combatants on both sides became so blended, that it was impossible to
strike a blow, without running the risk of cutting down a friend.  By
this time all hands were on deck; the boat alongside had been swamped by
the cold shot that had been hove crashing through her bottom, when down
came a shower from the surcharged clouds, or waterspout--call it which
you will--that absolutely deluged the decks, the scuppers being utterly
unable to carry off the water.  So long as the pirates fought in a body,
I had no fears, as, dark as it was, our men, who held together, knew
where to strike and thrust; but when the torrent of rain descended in
bucketfuls, the former broke away, and were pursued singly into various
corners about the deck, all escape being cut off from the swamping of
their boat.  Still they were not vanquished, and I ran aft to the
binnacle, where a blue light was stowed away,--one of several that we
had got on deck to bum that night, in order to point out our whereabouts
to the Firebrand.  I fired it, and rushing forward cutlass--in--hand, we
set on the gang of black desperadoes with such fury, that after killing
two of them outright, and wounding and taking prisoners seven, we drove
the rest overboard into the sea, where the small--armed men, who by this
time had tackled to their muskets, made short work of them, guided as
they were by the sparkling of the dark water, as they struck out and
swam for their lives.  The blue light was immediately answered by
another from the corvette, which lay about a mile off; but before her
boats, two of which were immediately armed and manned, could reach us,
we had defeated our antagonists, and the rain had increased to such a
degree, that the heavy drops, as they fell with a strong rushing noise
into the sea, flashed it up into one entire sheet of fire.

We--secured our prisoners, all blacks and mulattoes, the most villainous
looking scoundrels I had ever seen, and shortly after it came on to
thunder and lighten, as if heaven and earth had been falling together.
A most vivid flash--it almost blinded me.  Presently the Firebrand burnt
another blue light, whereby we saw that her maintopmast was gone close
by the cap, with the topsail, and upper spars, and yards, and gear, all
hanging down in a lumbering mass of confused wreck; she had been struck
by the levin brand, which had killed four men, and stunned several more.

By  this  time the cold grey streaks of morning appeared in the  eastern
horizon,  and  soon  after the day broke; and  by  two  o'clock  in  the
afternoon,  both corvette and schooner were at anchor at Conaives.   The
village, for town it could not be called, stands on a low hot plain,  as
if  the  washings of the mountains on the left hand side as we stood  in
had  been  carried out into the sea, and formed into a white plateau  of
sand; all was hot and stunted, and scrubby. We brought up inside of  the
corvette,  in  three fathoms water.  My superior officer  had  made  the
private  signal to come on board and dine.  I dressed, and the boat  was
lowered  down, and we pulled for the corvette, but our course lay  under
the stern of the two English ships that were lying there loading cargoes
of coffee.

"Pray, sir," said a decent--looking man, who leant on the tafferel of
one of them--"Pray, sir, are you going on board of the Commodore?"

"I am," I answered.

"I am invited there too, sir; will you have the kindness to say I will
be there presently?"

"Certainly--give way, men."

Presently we were alongside the corvette, and the next moment we stood
on her deck, holystoned white and clean, with my stanch friend Captain
Transom and his officers, all in full fig, walking to and fro under the
awning, a most magnificent naval lounge, being thirty two feet wide at
the gangway, and extending fifty feet or more aft, until it narrowed to
twenty at the tafferel.  We were all--the two masters of the
merchantmen, decent respectable men in their way, included--graciously
received, and sat down to an excellent dinner, Mr Bang taking the lead
as usual in all the fun; and we were just on the verge of cigars and
cold grog, when the first lieutenant came down and said that the captain
of the port had come off, and was then on board.

"Show him in," said Captain Transom, and a tall, vulgar--looking
blackamoor, dressed apparently in the cast--off coat of a French
grenadier officer, entered the cabin with his chapeau in his hand, and a
Madras handkerchief tied round his woolly skull.  He made his bow, and
remained standing near the door.

"You are the captain of the port?" said Captain Transom.  The man
answered in French, that he was.  "Why, then, take a chair, sir, if you
please."

He begged to be excused and after tipping off his bumper of claret, and
receiving the Captain's report, he made his bow and departed.

I returned to the Wave, and next morning I breakfasted on board of the
Commodore, and afterwards we all proceeded on shore to Monsieur B----'s,
to whom Massa Aaron was known.  The town, if I may call it so, had
certainly a very desolate appearance.  There was nothing stirring; and
although a group of idlers, amounting to about twenty or thirty, did
collect about us on the end of the wharf, which, by the by, was terribly
out of repair, yet they all appeared ill clad, and in no way so well
furnished as the blackies in Jamaica; and when we marched up through a
hot, sandy, unpaved street into the town, the low, one--story, shabby
looking houses were falling into decay, and the streets more resembled
river--courses than thoroughfares, while the large carrion crows were
picking garbage on the very crown of the causeway, without apparently
entertaining the least fear of us, or of the negro children who were
playing close to them, so near, in fact, that every now and then one of
the urchins would aim a blow at one of the obscene birds, when it would
give a loud discordant croak, and jump a pace or two, with outspread
wings, but without taking flight.  Still many of the women, who were
sitting under the small piazzas, or projecting eaves of the houses, with
their little stalls, filled with pullicate handkerchiefs, and pieces of
muslin, and ginghams for sale, were healthy--looking, and appeared
comfortable and happy.  As we advanced into the town, almost every male
we met was a soldier, all rigged and well dressed, too, in the French
uniform; in fact, the remarkable man, King Henry, or Christophe,
took care to have his troops well fed and clothed in every case.  On
our way we had to pass by the Commandant, Baron B----'s house, when it
occurred to Captain Transom that we ought to stop and pay our respects;
but Mr Bang, being bound by no such etiquette, bore up for his friend
Monsieur B----'s.  As we approached the house--a long, low, one--story
building, with a narrow piazza, and a range of unglazed windows, staring
open, with their wooden shutters, like ports in a ship's side, towards
the street--we found a sentry at the door, who, when we announced
ourselves, carried arms all in regular style.  Presently a very good
looking negro, in a handsome aide de--camp's uniform, appeared, and, hat
in hand, with all the grace in the world, ushered us into the presence
of the Baron, who was lounging in a Spanish chair half asleep, but on
hearing us announced he rose, and received us with great amenity.  He
was a fat elderly negro, so far as I could judge, about sixty years of
age, and was dressed in very wide jean trowsers, over which a pair of
well polished Hessian boots were drawn, which, by adhering close to his
legs, gave him, in contrast with the wide puffing of his garments above,
the appearance of being underlimbed, which he by no means was, being a
stout old Turk.

After a profusion of congees and fine speeches, and superabundant
assurances of the esteem in which his master King Henry held our master
King George, we made our bows and repaired to Monsieur B----'s, where I
was engaged to dine.  As for Captain Transom, he went on board that
evening to superintend the repairs of the ship.

There was no one to meet us but Monsieur B----and his daughter, a tall
and very elegant brown girl, who had been educated in France, and did
the honours incomparably well.  We sat down, Massa Aaron whispering in
my lug, that in Jamaica it was not quite the thing to introduce brown
ladies at dinner; but, as he said, "Why not?  Neither you nor I are high
caste creoles--so en avant."

Dinner was nearly over, when Baron B----'s aide--de--camp slid into the
room.  Monsieur B----rose.  "Captain Latour, you are welcome--be seated.
I hope you have not dined?"

"Why no," said the negro officer, as he drew a chair, while he exchanged
glances with the beautiful Eugenie, and sat himself down close to el
Senor Bang.

"Hillo, Quashie!  Whereaway, my lad? a little above the salt, an't you?"
ejaculated our amigo; while Pegtop, who had just come on shore, and was
standing behind his master, stared and gaped in the greatest wonderment.
But Mr Bang's natural good breeding, and knowledge of the world,
instantly recalled him to time and circumstances; and when the young
officer looked at him, regarding him with some surprise, he bowed, and
invited him, in the best French he could muster, to drink wine.  The
aide--de--camp was, as I have said, jet--black as the ace of spades, but
he was, notwithstanding, so far as figure went, a very handsome man
tall and well made, especially about the shoulders, which were
beautifully formed, and, in the estimation of a statuary, would probably
have balanced the cucumber curve of the shin; his face, however, was
regular negro--flat nose, heavy lips, fine eyes, and beautiful teeth,
and he wore two immense gold earrings.  His woolly head was bound round
with a pullicate handkerchief, which we had not noticed until he took
off his laced cocked hat.  His coat was the exact pattern of the French
staff uniform at the time--plain blue, without lace, except at the cape
and cuffs, which were of scarlet cloth, covered with rich embroidery.
He wore a very handsome straight sword, with steel scabbard, and the
white trowsers, and long Hessian boots, already described as part of the
costume of his general.

Mr Bang, as I have said, had rallied by this time, and with the tact of
a gentleman, appeared to have forgotten whether his new ally was black,
blue, or green, while the claret, stimulating him into self possession,
was evaporating in broken French.  But his man Pegtop had been pushed
off his balance altogether; his equanimity was utterly gone.  When the
young officer brushed past him, at the first go off, while he was
rinsing some glasses in the passage, his sword banged against Pegtop's
derriere as he stooped down over his work.  He started and looked round,
and merely exclaimed--"Eigh, Massa Niger, wurra dat!" But now, when,
standing behind his master's chair, he saw the aide--de--camp consorting
with him whom he looked upon as the greatest man in existence, on terms
of equality, all his faculties were paralysed.

"Pegtop," said I, "hand me some yam, if you please."

He looked at me all agape, as if he had been half strangled.

"Pegtop, you scoundrel," quoth massa Aaron, "don't you hear what Captain
Cringle says, sir?"

"Oh yes, massa;" and thereupon the sable valet brought me a bottle of
fish sauce, which he endeavoured to pour into my wineglass.  All this
while Eugenie and the aide--de--camp were playing the agreeable--and in
very good taste, too, let me tell you.

I had just drank wine with mine host, when I cast my eye along the
passage that led out of the room, and there was Pegtop dancing, and
jumping, and smiting his thigh, in an ecstasy of laughter, as he doubled
himself up, with the tears welling over his cheeks.

"Oh, Lord!  Oh!--Massa Bang bow, and make face, and drink wine, and do
every ting shivil, to one dam black rascall nigger!--Oh, blackee more
worser clan me, Gabriel Pegtop----Oh, Lard!--ha! ha! ha!"--Thereupon he
threw himself down in the piazza, amongst plates and dishes and shouted
and laughed in a perfect frenzy, until Mr Bang got up, and thrust the
poor fellow out of doors, in a pelting shower, which soon so far quelled
the hysterical passion, that he came in again, grave as a judge, and
took his place behind his master's chair once more, and every thing went
on smoothly.  The aide de--camp, who appeared quite unconscious that he
was the cause of the poor fellow's mirth, renewed his attentions to
Eugenie; and Mr Bang, Monsieur B----, and myself, were again engaged in
conversation, and our friend Pegtop was in the act of handing a slice of
melon to the black officer, when a file of soldiers, with fixed
bayonets, stept into the piazza, and ordered arms, one taking up his
station on each side of the door.  Presently another aide--de--camp,
booted and spurred, dashed after them; and, as soon as he crossed the
threshold, sung out, "Place, pour Monsieur le Baron."

The electrical nerve was again touched--"Oh!--oh!--oh!  Caramighty! here
comes anoder on dem," roared Pegtop, sticking the slice of melon, which
was intended for Mademoiselle Eugenie, into his own mouth, to quell the
paroxysm, if possible, (while he fractured the plate on the black aide's
skull,) and immediately blew it out again, with an explosion, and a
scattering of the fragments, as if it had been the blasting of a stone
quarry.

"Zounds, this is too much,"--exclaimed Bang, as he rose and kicked the
poor fellow out again, with such vehemence, that his skull, encountering
the paunch of our friend the Baron, who was entering from the street at
that instant, capsized him outright, and away rolled his Excellency the
General de Division, Commandant de L'Arrondissement, &c. &c. digging his
spurs into poor Pegtop's transom, and sacring furiously, while the black
servant roared as if he had been harpooned by the very devil.  The aides
started to their feet and one of them looked at Mr Bang, and touched the
hilt of his sword, grinding the word 'satisfaction' between his teeth,
while the other ordered the sentries to run the poor fellow, whose mirth
had been so uproarious, through.  However, he got off with one or two
brogues in a very safe place; and when Monsieur B----explained how
matters stood, and that the "pauvre diable," as the black Baron coolly
called him, was a mere servant, and an uncultivated creature, and that
no insult was meant, we had all a hearty laugh, and every thing rolled
right again.  At length the Baron and his black tail rose to wish us a
good evening, and we were thinking of finishing off with a cigar and a
glass of cold grog, when Monsieur B----'s daughter returned into the
piazza, very pale, and evidently much frightened. "Mon pere," said she
while her voice quavered from excessive agitation--"My father--why do
the soldiers remain?"

We all peered into the dark passage, and there, true enough, were the
black sentries at their posts beside the doorway, still and motionless
as statues.  Monsieur B----, poor fellow, fell back in his chair at the
sight, as if he had been shot through the heart.

"My fate is sealed--I am lost--oh, Eugenie!" were the only words he
could utter.

"No, no," exclaimed the weeping girl, "God forbid--the Baron is a kind
hearted man--King Henry cannot--no, no--he knows you are not
disaffected, he will not injure you."

Here one of the black aides--de--camp suddenly returned.  It was the
poor fellow who had been making love to Eugenie during the
entertainment.  He looked absolutely blue with dismay; his voice shook,
and his knees knocked together as he approached our host.

He tried to speak, but could not.  "Oh, Pierre, Pierre," moaned, or
rather gasped Eugenie, "what have you come to communicate? what dreadful
news are you the bearer of?" He held out an open letter to poor B----,
who, unable to read it from excessive agitation, handed it to me.  It
ran thus:

"MONSIEUR LE BARON,
Monsieur--has been arrested here this morning; he is a white
Frenchman, and there are strong suspicions against him.  Place his
partner M. B----under the surveillance of the police instantly.  You are
made answerable for his safe custody."

"Witness his Majesty's hand and seal, at Sans Souci, this----"

The Count.


"Then I am doomed," groaned poor Mr B----.  His daughter fainted, the
black officer wept, and having laid his senseless mistress on a sofa, he
approached and wrung B----'s hand.  "Alas, my dear sir--how my heart
bleeds!  But cheer up--King Henry is just--all may be right--all may
still be right; and so far as my duty to him will allow, you may count
on nothing being done here that is not absolutely necessary for holding
ourselves blameless with the Government."

