The next morning, early, she stood on the steps waving farewell to
Arthur, without a trace of ill-humour. And he, though vaguely
uncomfortable, had submitted at last to what he felt was her fixed
purpose of avoiding a scene. Moreover, the "eternal child" in him, which
made both his charm and his weakness, had already scattered his
compunctions of the preceding day, and was now aglow with the sheer joy
of holiday and change. He had worked very hard, he had had a great
success, and now he was going to live for three weeks in the lap of
luxury; intellectual luxury first and foremost--good talk, good company,
an abundance of books for rainy days; but with the addition of a supreme
_chef_, Lord Dunstable's champagne, and all the amenities of one of the
best moors in Scotland.

Doris went back into the house, and, Arthur being no longer in the
neighbourhood, allowed herself a few tears. She had never felt so lonely
in her life, nor so humiliated. "My moral character is gone," she said
to herself. "I have no moral character. I thought I was a sensible,
educated woman; and I am just an ''Arriet,' in a temper with her
''Arry.' Well--courage! Three weeks isn't long. Who can say that Arthur
mayn't come back disillusioned? Rachel Dunstable is a born tyrant. If,
instead of flattering him, she begins to bully him, strange things may
happen!"

The first week of solitude she spent in household drudgery. Bills had to
be paid, and there was now mercifully a little money to pay them with.
Though it was August, the house was to be "spring-cleaned," and Doris
had made a compact with her sulky maids that when it began she would do
no more than sleep and breakfast at home. She would spend her days in
the Campden Hill studio, and sup on a tray--anywhere. On these terms,
they grudgingly allowed her to occupy her own house.

The studio in which she worked was on the top of Campden Hill, and
opened into one of the pleasant gardens of that neighbourhood. Her
uncle, Charles Bentley, an elderly Academician, with an ugly, humorous
face, red hair, red eyebrows, a black skull-cap, and a general weakness
for the female sex, was very fond of his niece Doris, and inclined to
think her a neglected and underrated wife. He was too fond of his own
comfort, however, to let Meadows perceive this opinion of his; still
less did he dare express it to Doris. All he could do was to befriend
her and make her welcome at the studio, to advise her about her
illustrations, and correct her drawing when it needed it. He himself was
an old-fashioned artist, quite content to be "mid" or even "early"
Victorian. He still cultivated the art of historical painting, and was
still as anxious as any contemporary of Frith to tell a story. And as
his manner was no less behind the age than his material, his pictures
remained on his hands, while the "vicious horrors," as they seemed to
him, of the younger school held the field and captured the newspapers.
But as he had some private means, and no kith or kin but his niece, the
indifference of the public to his work caused him little disturbance.
He pleased his own taste, allowing himself a good-natured contempt for
the work which supplanted him, coupled with an ever-generous hand for
any post-Impressionist in difficulties.

On the August afternoon when Doris, escaping at last from her maids and
her accounts, made her way up to the studio, for some hours' work on the
last three or four illustrations wanted for a Christmas book, Uncle
Charles welcomed her with effusion.

"Where have you been, child, all this time? I thought you must have
flitted entirely."

Doris explained--while she set up her easel--that for the first time in
their lives she and Arthur had been seeing something of the great world,
and--mildly--"doing" the season. Arthur was now continuing the season in
Scotland, while she had stayed at home to work and rest. Throughout her
talk, she avoided mentioning the Dunstables.

"H'm!" said Uncle Charles, "so you've been junketing!"

Doris admitted it.

"Did you like it?"

Doris put on her candid look.

"I daresay I should have liked it, if I'd made a success of it. Of
course Arthur did."

"Too much trouble!" said the old painter, shaking his head. "I was in
the swim, as they call it, for a year or two. I might have stayed there,
I suppose, for I could always tell a story, and I wasn't afraid of the
big-wigs. But I couldn't stand it. Dress-clothes are the deuce! And
besides, talk now is not what it used to be. The clever men who can say
smart things are too clever to say them. Nobody wants 'em! So let's
'cultivate our garden,' my dear, and be thankful. I'm beginning a new
picture--and I've found a topping new model. What can a man want more?
Very nice of you to let Arthur go, and have his head. Where is
it?--some smart moor? He'll soon be tired of it."

Doris laughed, let the question as to the "smart moor" pass, and came
round to look at the new subject that Uncle Charles was laying in. He
explained it to her, well knowing that he spoke to unsympathetic ears,
for whatever Doris might draw for her publishers, she was a passionate
and humble follower of those modern experimentalists who have made the
Slade School famous. The subject was, it seemed, to be a visit paid to
Joanna the mad and widowed mother of Charles V., at Tordesillas, by the
envoys of Henry VII., who were thus allowed by Ferdinand, the Queen's
father, to convince themselves that the Queen's profound melancholia
formed an insuperable barrier to the marriage proposals of the English
King. The figure of the distracted Queen, crouching in white beside a
window from which she could see the tomb of her dead and adored
husband, the Archduke Philip, and some of the splendid figures of the
English embassy, were already sketched.

"I have been fit to hang myself over her!" said Bentley, pointing to the
Queen. "I tried model after model. At last I've got the very thing! She
comes to-day for the first time. You'll see her! Before she comes, I
must scrape out Joanna, so as to look at the thing quite fresh. But I
daresay I shall only make a few sketches of the lady to-day."

"Who is she, and where did you get her!"

Bentley laughed. "You won't like her, my dear! Never mind. Her
appearance is magnificent--whatever her mind and morals may be."

And he described how he had heard of the lady from an artist friend who
had originally seen her at a music-hall, and had persuaded her to come
and sit to him. The comic haste and relief with which he had now
transferred her to Bentley lost nothing in Bentley's telling. Of course
she had "a fiend of a temper." "Wish you joy of her! Oh, don't ask me
about her! You'll find out for yourself." "I can manage her," said Uncle
Charles tranquilly. "I've had so many of 'em."

"She is Spanish?"

"Not at all. She is Italian. That is to say, her mother was a
Neapolitan, the daughter of a jeweller in Hatton Garden, and her father
an English bank clerk. The Neapolitans have a lot of Spanish blood in
them--hence, no doubt, the physique."

"And she is a professional model!"

"Nothing of the sort!--though she will probably become one. She is a
writer--Heaven save the mark!--and I have to pay her vast sums to get
her. It is the greatest favour."

"A _writer_?"

"Poetess!--and journalist!" said Uncle Charles, enjoying Doris's
puzzled look. "She sent me her poems yesterday. As to journalism"--his
eyes twinkled--"I say nothing--but this. Watch her _hats_! She has the
reputation--in certain circles--of being the best-hatted woman in
London. All this I get from the man who handed her on to me. As I said
to him, it depends on what 'London' you mean."

"Married?"

"Oh dear no, though of course she calls herself 'Madame' like the rest
of them--Madame Vavasour. I have reason, however, to believe that her
real name is Flink--Elena Flink. And I should say--very much on the
look-out for a husband; and meanwhile very much courted by boys--who go
to what she calls her 'evenings.' It is odd, the taste that some youths
have for these elderly Circes."

"Elderly?" said Doris, busy the while with her own preparations. "I was
hoping for something young and beautiful!"

"Young?--no!--an unmistakable thirty-five. Beautiful? Well, wait till
you see her ... H'm--that shoulder won't do!"--Doris had just placed a
preliminary sketch of one of her "subjects" under his eyes--"and that
bit of perspective in the corner wants a lot of seeing to. Look here!"
The old Academician, brought up in the spirit of Ingres--"le dessin,
c'est la probité!--le dessin, c'est l'honneur!"--fell eagerly to work on
the sketch, and Doris watched.

They were both absorbed, when there was a knock at the door. Doris
turned hastily, expecting to see the model. Instead of which there
entered, in response to Bentley's "Come in!" a girl of four or five and
twenty, in a blue linen dress and a shady hat, who nodded a quiet "Good
afternoon" to the artist, and proceeded at once with an air of business
to a writing-table at the further end of the studio, covered with
papers.

"Miss Wigram," said the artist, raising his voice, "let me introduce you
to my niece, Mrs. Meadows."

The girl rose from her chair again and bowed. Then Doris saw that she
had a charming tired face, beautiful eyes on which she had just placed
spectacles, and soft brown hair framing her thin cheeks.

"A novelty since you were here," whispered Bentley in Doris's ear.
"She's an accountant--capital girl! Since these Liberal budgets came
along, I can't keep my own accounts, or send in my own income-tax
returns--dash them! So she does the whole business for me--pays
everything--sees to everything--comes once a week. We shall all be run
by the women soon!"

       *       *       *       *       *

The studio had grown very quiet. Through some glass doors open to the
garden came in little wandering winds which played with some loose
papers on the floor, and blew Doris's hair about her eyes as she stooped
over her easel, absorbed in her drawing. Apparently absorbed: her
subliminal mind, at least, was far away, wandering on a craggy Scotch
moor. A lady on a Scotch pony--she understood that Lady Dunstable often
rode with the shooters--and a tall man walking beside her, carrying, not
a gun, but a walking stick:--that was the vision in the crystal. Arthur
was too bad a shot to be tolerated in the Dunstable circle; had indeed
wisely announced from the beginning that he was not to be included among
the guns. All the more time for conversation, the give and take of wits,
the pleasures of the intellectual tilting-ground; the whole watered by
good wine, seasoned with the best of cooking, and lapped in the general
ease of a house where nobody ever thought of such a vulgar thing as
money except to spend it.

Doris had in general a severe mind as to the rich and aristocratic
classes. Her own hard and thrifty life had disposed her to see them _en
noir_. But the sudden rush of a certain section of them to crowd
Arthur's lectures had been certainly mollifying. If it had not been for
the Vampire, Doris was well aware that her standards might have given
way.

As it was, Lady Dunstable's exacting ways, her swoop, straight and
fierce, on the social morsel she desired, like that of an eagle on the
sheepfold, had made her, in Doris's sore consciousness, the
representative of thousands more; all greedy, able, domineering,
inevitably getting what they wanted, and more than they deserved;
against whom the starved and virtuous intellectuals of the professional
classes were bound to contend to the death. The story of that poor girl,
that clergyman's daughter, for instance--could anything have been more
insolent--more cruel? Doris burned to avenge her.

Suddenly--a great clatter and noise in the passage leading from the
small house behind to the studio and garden.

"Here she is!"

Uncle Charles sprang up, and reached the studio door just as a shower of
knocks descended upon it from outside. He opened it, and on the
threshold there stood two persons; a stout lady in white, surmounted by
a huge black hat with a hearse-like array of plumes; and, behind her, a
tall and willowy youth, with--so far as could be seen through the chinks
of the hat--a large nose, fair hair, pale blue eyes, and a singular
deficiency of chin. He carried in his arms a tiny black Spitz with a
pink ribbon round its neck.

The lady looked, frowning, into the interior of the studio. She held in
her hand a very large fan, with the handle of which she had been rapping
the door; and the black feathers with which she was canopied seemed to
be nodding in her eyes.

"Maestro, you are not alone!" she said in a deep, reproachful voice.

"My niece, Mrs. Meadows--Madame Vavasour," said Bentley, ushering in the
new-comer.

Doris turned from her easel and bowed, only to receive a rather scowling
response.

"And your friend?" As he spoke the artist looked blandly at the young
man.

"I brought him to amuse me, Maestro. When I am dull my countenance
changes, and you cannot do it justice. He will talk to me--I shall be
animated--and you will profit."

"Ah, no doubt!" said Bentley, smiling. "And your friend's name?"

"Herbert Dunstable--Honourable Herbert Dunstable!--Signor Bentley," said
Madame Vavasour, advancing with a stately step into the room, and waving
peremptorily to the young man to follow.

Doris sat transfixed and staring. Bentley turned to look at his niece,
and their eyes met--his full of suppressed mirth. The son!--the
unsatisfactory son! Doris remembered that his name was Herbert. In the
train of this third-rate sorceress!

Her thoughts ran excitedly to the distant moors, and that magnificent
lady, with her circle of distinguished persons, holiday-making
statesmen, peers, diplomats, writers, and the like. Here was a humbler
scene! But Doris's fancy at once divined a score of links between it and
the high comedy yonder.

Meanwhile, at the name of Dunstable, the girl accountant in the distance
had also moved sharply, so as to look at the young man. But in the
bustle of Madame Vavasour's entrance, and her passage to the sitter's
chair, the girl's gesture passed unnoticed.

"I'm just worn out, Maestro!" said the model languidly, uplifting a
pair of tragic eyes to the artist. "I sat up half the night writing. I
had a subject which tormented me. But I have done something _splendid_!
Isn't it splendid, Herbert?"

"Ripping!" said the young man, grinning widely.

"Sit down!" said Madame, with a change of tone. And the youth sat down,
on the very low chair to which she pointed him, doing his best to
dispose of his long legs.

"Give me the dog!" she commanded. "You have no idea how to hold
him--poor lamb!"

The dog was handed to her; she took off her enormous hat with many sighs
of fatigue, and then, with the dog on her lap, asked how she was to sit.
Bentley explained that he wished to make a few preliminary sketches of
her head and bust, and proceeded to pose her. She accepted his
directions with a curious pettishness, as though they annoyed her; and
presently complained loudly that the chair was uncomfortable, and the
pose irksome. He handled her, however, with a good-humoured mixture of
flattery and persuasion, and at last, stepping back, surveyed the
result--well content.

There was no doubt whatever that she was a very handsome woman, and that
her physical type--that of the more lethargic and heavily built
Neapolitan--suggested very happily the mad and melancholy Queen. She had
superb black hair, eyes profoundly dark, a low and beautiful brow, lips
classically fine, a powerful head and neck, and a complexion which, but
for the treatment given it, would have been of a clear and beautiful
olive. She wore a draggled dress of cream-coloured muslin, very
transparent over the shoulders, somewhat scandalously wanting at the
throat and breast, and very frayed and dirty round the skirt. Her feet,
which were large and plump, were cased in extremely pointed shoes with
large paste buckles; and as she crossed them on the stool provided for
them she showed a considerable amount of rather clumsy ankle. The hands
too were large, common, and ill-kept, and the wrists laden with
bracelets. She was adorned indeed with a great deal of jewellery,
including some startling earrings of a bright green stone. The hat,
which she had carefully placed on a chair beside her, was truly a
monstrosity!--but, as Doris guessed, an expensive monstrosity, such as
the Rue de la Paix provides, at anything from a hundred and fifty to two
hundred and fifty francs, for those of its cosmopolitan customers whom
it pillages and despises. How did the lady afford it? The rest of her
dress suggested a struggle with small means, waged by one who was greedy
for effect, obtained at a minimum of trouble. That she was rouged and
powdered goes without saying.

And the young man? Doris perceived at once his likeness to his father--a
feeble likeness. But he was evidently simple and good-natured, and to
all appearance completely in the power of the enchantress. He fanned her
assiduously. He picked up all the various belongings--gloves,
handkerchiefs, handbag--which she perpetually let fall. He ran after the
dog whenever it escaped from the lady's lap and threatened mischief in
the studio; and by way of amusing her--the purpose for which he had been
imported--he kept up a stream of small cryptic gossip about various
common acquaintances, most of whom seemed to belong to the music-hall
profession, and to be either "stars" or the satellites of "stars."
Madame listened to him with avidity, and occasionally broke into a
giggling laugh. She had, however, two manners, and two kinds of
conversation, which she adopted with the young man and the Academician
respectively. Her talk with the youth suggested the jealous ascendency
of a coarse-minded woman. She occasionally flattered him, but more
generally she teased or "ragged" him. She seemed indeed to feel him
securely in her grip; so that there was no need to pose for him,
as--figuratively as well as physically--she posed for Bentley. To the
artist she gave her opinions on pictures or books--on the novels of Mr.
Wells, or the plays of Mr. Bernard Shaw--in the languid or drawling tone
of accepted authority; dropping every now and then into a broad cockney
accent, which produced a startling effect, like that of unexpected
garlic in cookery. Bentley's gravity was often severely tried, and Doris
altered the position of her own easel so that he and she could not see
each other. Meanwhile Madame took not the smallest notice of Mr.
Bentley's niece, and Doris made no advances to the young man, to whom
her name was clearly quite unknown. Had Circe really got him in her
toils? Doris judged him soft-headed and soft-hearted; no match at all
for the lady. The thought of her walking the lawns or the drawing-rooms
of Crosby Ledgers as the betrothed of the heir stirred in Arthur
Meadows's wife a silent, and--be it confessed!--a malicious convulsion.
Such mothers, so self-centred, so set on their own triumphs, with their
intellectual noses so very much in the clouds, deserved such sons! She
promised herself to keep her own counsel, and watch the play.

The sitting lasted for two hours. When it was over, Uncle Charles, all
smiles and satisfaction, went with his visitors to the front door.

He was away some little time, and returned, bubbling, to the studio.

"She's been cross-examining me about her poems! I had to confess I
hadn't read a word of them. And now she's offered to recite next time
she comes! Good Heavens--how can I get out of it? I believe, Doris,
she's hooked that young idiot! She told me she was engaged to him. Do
you know anything of his people?"

The girl accountant suddenly came forward. She looked flushed and
distressed.

"I do!" she said, with energy. "Can't somebody stop that? It will break
their hearts!"

Doris and Uncle Charles looked at her in amazement.

"Whose hearts?" said the painter.

"Lord and Lady Dunstable's."

"You know them?" exclaimed Doris.

"I used to know them--quite well," said the girl, quietly. "My father
had one of Lord Dunstable's livings. He died last year. He didn't like
Lady Dunstable. He quarrelled with her, because--because she once did a
very rude thing to me. But this would be _too_ awful! And poor Lord
Dunstable! Everybody likes him. Oh--it must be stopped!--it _must_!"


CHAPTER IV


When Doris reached home that evening, the little Kensington house, with
half its carpets up and all but two of its rooms under dust-sheets,
looked particularly lonely and unattractive. Arthur's study was
unrecognisable. No cheerful litter anywhere. No smell of tobacco, no
sign of a male presence! Doris, walking restlessly from room to room,
had never felt so forsaken, so dismally certain that the best of life
was done. Moreover, she had fully expected to find a letter from Arthur
waiting for her; and there was nothing.

It was positively comic that under such circumstances anybody should
expect her--Doris Meadows--to trouble her head about Lady Dunstable's
affairs. Of course she would feel it if her son made a ridiculous and
degrading marriage. But why not?--why shouldn't he come to grief like
anybody else's son? Why should heaven and earth be moved in order to
prevent it?--especially by the woman to whose possible jealousy and pain
Lady Dunstable had certainly never given the most passing thought.

All the same, the distress shown by that odd girl, Miss Wigram, and her
appeal both to the painter and his niece to intervene and save the
foolish youth, kept echoing in Doris's memory, although neither she nor
Bentley had received it with any cordiality. Doris had soon made out
that this girl, Alice Wigram, was indeed the clergyman's daughter whom
Lady Dunstable had snubbed so unkindly some twelve months before. She
was evidently a sweet-natured, susceptible creature, to whom Lord
Dunstable had taken a fancy, in his fatherly way, during occasional
visits to her father's rectory, and of whom he had spoken to his wife.
That Lady Dunstable should have unkindly slighted this motherless girl,
who had evidently plenty of natural capacity under her shyness, was just
like her, and Doris's feelings of antagonism to the tyrant were only
sharpened by her acquaintance with the victim. Why should Miss Wigram
worry her self? Lord Dunstable? Well, but after all, capable men should
keep such wives in order. If Lord Dunstable had not been scandalously
weak, Lady Dunstable would not have become a terror to her sex.

As for Uncle Charles, he had simply declined all responsibility in the
matter. He had never seen the Dunstables, wouldn't know them from Adam,
and had no concern whatever in what happened to their son. The situation
merely excited in him one man's natural amusement at the folly of
another. The boy was more than of age. Really he and his mother must
look after themselves. To meddle with the young man's love affairs,
simply because he happened to visit your studio in the company of a
lady, would be outrageous. So the painter laughed, shook his head, and
went back to his picture. Then Miss Wigram, looking despondently from
the silent Doris to the artist at work, had said with sudden energy, "I
must find out about her! I'm--I'm sure she's a horrid woman! Can you
tell me, sir"--she addressed Bentley--"the name of the gentleman who was
painting her before she came here?"

Bentley had hummed and hawed a little, twisting his red moustache, and
finally had given the name and address; whereupon Miss Wigram had
gathered up her papers, some of which had drifted to the floor between
her table and Doris's easel, and had taken an immediate departure, a
couple of hours before her usual time, throwing, as she left the
studio, a wistful and rather puzzled look at Mrs. Meadows.

Doris congratulated herself that she had kept her own counsel on the
subject of the Dunstables, both with Uncle Charles and Miss Wigram.
Neither of them had guessed that she had any personal acquaintance with
them. She tried now to put the matter out of her thoughts. Jane brought
in a tray for her mistress, and Doris supped meagrely in Arthur's
deserted study, thinking, as the sunset light came in across the dusty
street, of that flame and splendour which such weather must be kindling
on the moors, of the blue and purple distances, the glens of rocky
mountains hung in air, "the gleam, the shadow, and the peace supreme"!
She remembered how on their September honeymoon they had wandered in
Ross-shire, how the whole land was dyed crimson by the heather, and how
impossible it was to persuade Arthur to walk discreetly rather than,
like any cockney tripper, with his arm round his sweetheart. Scotland
had not been far behind the Garden of Eden under those circumstances.
But Arthur was now pursuing the higher, the intellectual joys.

She finished her supper, and then sat down to write to her husband. Was
she going to tell him anything about the incident of the afternoon? Why
should she? Why should she give him the chance of becoming more than
ever Lady Dunstable's friend--pegging out an eternal claim upon her
gratitude?

Doris wrote her letter. She described the progress of the spring
cleaning; she reported that her sixth illustration was well forward, and
that Uncle Charles was wrestling with another historical picture, a
_machine_ neither better nor worse than all the others. She thought that
after all Jane would soon give warning; and she, Doris, had spent three
pounds in petty cash since he went away; how, she could not remember,
but it was all in her account book.

And she concluded:

    I understand then that we meet at Crewe on Friday fortnight? I have
    heard of a lodging near Capel Curig which sounds delightful. We
    might do a week's climbing and then go on to the sea. I really
    _shall_ want a holiday. Has there not been ten minutes even--since
    you arrived--to write a letter in?--or a postcard? Shall I send you
    a few addressed?

Having thus finished what seemed to her the dullest letter she had ever
written in her life, she looked at it a while, irresolutely, then put it
in an envelope hastily, addressed, stamped it, and rang the bell for
Jane to run across the street with it and post it. After which, she sat
idle a little while with flushed cheeks, while the twilight gathered.

       *       *       *       *       *

The gate of the trim front garden swung on its hinges. Doris turned to
look. She saw, to her astonishment, that the girl-accountant of the
morning, Miss Wigram, was coming up the flagged path to the house. What
could she want?

"Oh, Mrs. Meadows--I'm so sorry to disturb you--" said the visitor, in
some agitation, as Doris, summoned by Jane, entered the dust-sheeted
drawing-room. "But you dropped an envelope with an address this
afternoon. I picked it up with some of my papers and never discovered it
till I got home."

