"Dear, dear Peggy," my benevolent Billiken addressed me, and as I read,
the thunder rolled like the far-away drums of Fort Alvarado or El Paso.
"This is my first real letter to you, for I don't count notes; and I
wish it could be a better one. I'm afraid you must be pretty mad about
not getting a telegram at Chicago, or anyhow at Mrs. Main's, when you'd
taken all the trouble to wire me your address. But it was intimated to
all of us concerned that we weren't to telegraph news about _you know
what_ to our families or friends, and that we were even to be discreet
about our letters. I've been so indiscreet with you on that subject
already, on a never-to-be-forgotten night, however, that the latter bit
of fatherly instruction doesn't hold good in my case. Only, before
telling you what I have to tell, I'll just take the liberty of reminding
you once again of your promise to keep mum till Gabriel's trumpet
sounds--or till I take off the embargo (is that the way to spell it, I
wonder, and what exactly does it mean?). As matters look at present, one
thing is liable to happen about the same time as the other. Well, now
I'm going to tell you news of the court-martial as best I can. I'm no
great shakes at telling things, you know. Vandyke was 'seedy' (as you
say in your truly British fashion) the day appointed for the trial, and
as he was the principal witness it had to be put off for twenty-four
hours. You'd have thought it would be March, if anybody, who was on the
sick list, wouldn't you? But he was all right in health. I don't know
what was the matter with Vandyke, except that I happened to hear our old
Doc say he had a temperature way up in C. Maybe it was stage fright. I
felt like that myself--queer all over when the time came, as a fellow
does when he's just going to be seasick.

"The court-martial was what you call a 'field-general court-martial,'
which can be convened when forces are on active service, as of course we
are now (though we've had nothing very active to do, except on a certain
night none of us will forget, and on Army Day when we all marched and
sweated to give the populace an impressive show). A field general
court-martial can try cases just as grave as a general court-martial
can, and its proceedings are conducted with more secrecy. It consists of
not less than three officers, none of them under the rank of captain,
but the president of the court may be a general officer, a colonel, or
lieutenant-colonel. In this case, which was considered very important,
both on account of March's fine record and the necessary secrecy that
had to be maintained, we had the general commanding the Fort for
president, and the other two officers of the court were a colonel and a
major. I don't think you met either of them when you were here, so their
names wouldn't interest you.

"The courtroom was just a plain ordinary room in the barracks at Fort
Bliss; but there wasn't a map or copy of 'rules and regulations' hanging
on the yellowish white walls that I can't see now, whenever I shut my
eyes. I guess they were all photographed on my 'mental retina,' as the
writing folks say. The three officers were in full uniform, to do honour
to the case, and of course there wasn't a man present dressed in 'cits.'
All were army chaps, even to the headquarters clerk who took notes of
the proceedings, the orderly who kept the door, and the witnesses. There
weren't many of those. I was one of the principal witnesses and you've
heard from me before how little I had to say.

"March, who as prisoner had to be formally conducted in by an officer,
had a seat on the left of the judges' table, and his friend, Major Dell,
sat beside him. If you could have been a fly on that beastly wall,
looking down at your hero, I guess you'd have been proud of the way he
held himself. If he'd been brought there to receive a medal of honour
instead of to be tried for a big, insane sort of offence calculated to
bring about international complications he couldn't have had a prouder
bearing. And he wasn't even pale. He looked just brown and calm and
natural. I had to confess to when you asked me a point-blank question
that night in the park, that I was all muddled up in my mind about his
conduct in ordering the gunfire. I didn't know whether he'd gone off his
chump, or been fooled, or what. But I can tell you one thing: I felt
proud of him as a man and as my superior officer when I saw the way he
bore himself for his trial. I don't know now the rights of the matter
any more than I did then, in spite of the court's findings; but
something tells me--as girls say--that March _wasn't to blame_. There's
a black mystery in this, and I don't see how it's ever going to be
cleared up, as things are. But to go back to the court-martial.

"March was accused by the prosecutor of having fired without orders
three charges from field guns into a country living at peace with the
United States, to the detriment of its inhabitants and property, and to
the imminent peril of disturbing international relations. He could have
objected legally to any of the judges and stated his objections. But he
didn't object to them, nor to the shorthand-writer, whom he had a right
to throw out if he could show reasons for thinking that the man was
likely to be partial in his notes of the proceedings.

"Of course, I as a mere witness wasn't present all the time; but I know
what took place, because I've heard some of it from different quarters.
I know that when 'the court had been duly sworn, the accused was
arraigned,' which means that the president read out the charges against
March, and asked him whether he pleaded guilty or not guilty. Can't you
just hear March answering steadily in that pleasant, quiet voice of his:
'Not guilty!' The next thing to follow was the prosecutor's address,
outlining the case against the prisoner, and mentioning the witnesses he
meant to summon. Then he called the evidence for the prosecution, and
that's where, as I've heard from other witnesses, those present got
their first big surprise.

"Naturally there'd been no end of whispering among those in the know
before the court met; and it was discussed whether or not March would
bring into his defence the state of feeling between Vandyke and himself.
Some thought he would be justified in doing so, and quixotic not to, as
the bad blood between them, and the cause of it (I hope you don't mind
my saying this?) was already a sort of open secret. Others argued that
if the ill-feeling were once lugged in, the name of the lady concerned
and other details would certainly be dragged into the case through
inquiries which would have to be made; and that March wasn't the man to
run such a risk even if it were likely to do him any good. The surprise
of the court came when Vandyke accused March of giving the order for
firing the guns without authority, but deliberately putting the
responsibility on him--Vandyke--with the object of ruining him. Did you
ever know the like of that?

"From one way of looking at the thing, it was a jolly smart way for
Vandyke to turn the tables, because it would take all the wind out of
March's sails, in case he meant to accuse Vandyke of the same intention
toward him. I don't suppose there ever was such a queer case between
officers as this one; both men highly placed and popular in the service
and society.

"I believe March brought out his notebook in evidence (the
khaki-coloured one with his monogram on it in silver, which I'd often
seen, and which you say you gave him) to show the newly torn-out leaf;
and his friend, Major Dell, who was his classmate at West Point (you've
seen him here; fine-looking cavalry chap), suggested that the page
underneath should be examined with a magnifying glass for the impression
of writing on the missing page with a blunt pencil which had borne
heavily on the paper. No words could be definitely made out, even with
the magnifier, and even if they could have been, I'm afraid that
wouldn't have made much difference in the case. March had had the
notebook in his possession after the gunfiring, you see, and could
easily have written what he liked and then torn out the leaf.

"Vandyke's orderly being dead, there was no evidence as to the part he
had played for either side; but I suppose he would have been a witness
for the prosecution, so his disappearance off the scene was perhaps a
good thing for March. I was called for the defence, but nothing I had to
say was of any good. I felt that; and being keen to serve March's
interest if I could with truth, put such a strain on me to be careful of
each word that you could have knocked me down with a feather after I was
released. When my evidence was read over (they always do that to every
witness before he leaves the court) it seemed to me I'd given the most
rotten answers every time; but I couldn't have made them any better if
I'd tried to explain them away, or amend them as I should have had the
right to do; so I let them go as they were.

"March cross-examined me himself, about the distance he was from the
guns when the orderly was supposed to come up; and the darkness of the
night; and the nature of the ground for muffling the sound of footsteps.
He didn't seem a bit disgusted or hurt with me because I could not do
better for his case. He had a real friendly look in his eyes whenever
they met mine; and I tell you, Peggy, I could have blubbed like a kid
when I thought of it later, after I knew what the verdict was.

"Once I saw him cross glances with Vandyke, and if you won't think I'm
getting sentimental on top of all the rest, I'll tell you I thought
March's look was like a sword. Vandyke was yellow and bloodshot as if
he'd had a bilious attack, and perhaps bile had been the trouble when he
went on sick report and the case had to be delayed for him.

"The findings were considered in closed court. And now you must take
this one bit of comfort to yourself, Peggy, in your trouble about your
friend Captain March: things might have gone a lot harder for him than
they did in such a serious case. Vandyke's accusation against him was
mighty bad, and there was some evidence to support it. March didn't seem
to use such weapons as he had to hit back with, quite as smartly as he
might have done, though that was, no doubt, in his determination to keep
your sister's name from coming into the affair. He did defend himself to
the extent of saying he'd tried to save the situation by firing blank
instead of shell; but that didn't help him much, for the whole point of
the accusation against him was that he had had no right to fire at all.
None of his witnesses could help him any more than I could, whereas
Vandyke had several who took their oath to seeing him in the auto with
his orderly, leaving old Fort Bliss at much about the time when March
said Johnson came to him with the second verbal order. March could have
been sentenced to imprisonment or chucked out of the army if the court
had believed in his giving the order to fire the guns on his own
responsibility out of sheer madness, or spite against Vandyke. As it
was, they accepted the theory that he had been hoaxed by some one
unknown, purporting to be the orderly of Major Vandyke, then acting as
colonel. Owing to the comparative darkness of the night (luckily there
wasn't a moon, only stars) it would have been possible for a nervous,
jumpy man to mistake the identity of a person masquerading as another
person. Now _you_ know, and _I_ know, and everybody who knows him knows
March is the last fellow in the world to get nerves or jumps in any
circumstances whatever. All the same, giving him credit for them on a
night when a Mexican raid on the town had been predicted offered the
court an excuse to let the accused down lightly. He was sentenced merely
to 'severe censure for rashness and carelessness,' etc., etc. In
sequence to this our Old Man--the colonel, I mean--has had to advise
March to resign. That's part of the programme. And equally it is part of
the programme that March should take the advice.

"Now, dear, I've told you the story as well or as badly as I can.
Anyhow, you know as much as I do, and that is a good deal more than you
ought to know, or others are likely to know. If you hear anything
further, it will be from March himself.

"When the Mexican bees have settled down in their hive again, and we're
back at Fort Alvarado, I'm going to have a good try for a month's leave
or longer, so as to cross the blue with the mater and sis. Of course,
entirely with the object of looking after them, and perhaps getting an
invitation to Lady Di's wedding, and not a bit for the sake of seeing
you or jogging your memory about a certain decision! Yours till the end
of beyond, Billiken."

For a while, after I had read this long letter through, to the
accompaniment of thunder, lightning, and rain, I sat with the four
closely written sheets of paper in my hand, not thinking, only feeling.
I could not console myself with "the one bit of comfort" which Tony
waved under my eyes. Eagle March was a born soldier. He cared more for
his career than for his life, and it had been taken from him. Though the
world was not to know what he was accused of doing, all the world would
know that he had left the army because his country no longer needed his
services. And he owed this to his love for my sister! This was what
Diana and I had brought upon the bravest and best man we should ever
meet.

"What will he do? What will become of him?" I asked myself miserably;
and the rain beating on the window seemed to give a desolating answer.
But there was still the letter I had waited to read until I learned the
best or worst from Tony. Perhaps that would tell me what I wished to
know!


CHAPTER XIV


Eagle March's letter was characteristic. Though he must have felt as if
he stood alone, at the jumping-off place of the world, he had more to
say about me than of himself.

He had read in the El Paso papers that I was going to sail for England,
and all the first part of his letter was concerned with "bon voyage." It
was only in the last paragraph that he mentioned his own affairs.
"You'll have heard already," he said, "of what has happened to me. I've
had a blow, but I'm not going to lie down under it. There must be work
for me somewhere, and when I've found it you'll hear from me again. Not
until then though, for I'm rather hard hit, and might be inclined to
grumble. But I shall think of you constantly, and I don't believe if I
wrote a volume I could make you understand how much the thought will
help. I shall wear it like armour."

Not a word of Diana. But I read between the lines. He was "rather hard
hit." Just when he was facing an attack from the front she had stabbed
him in the back. In one way, the letter was a bitter disappointment, for
I had longed to be told Eagle's plans; yet in the hint that I should
hear again when he had "found work," there was a thrill like that which
comes with martial music. I was far from guessing then what that work
would be, and how quickly and surprisingly he would find it; but vaguely
I felt that there was only one kind of work worth Eagle March's while:
soldier work.

Because I mustn't expect to hear, that did not prevent my writing from
the ship. "This isn't 'good-bye,'" I said. "Always I'll be looking
forward to great things for you. And (you may laugh, but I'm in earnest)
I shall live in the hope of 'righting' you in the world's eyes. The day
may come. I believe it will--the best day of my life."

When the _Mauretania_ passed "Liberty" I sent back a last message by the
statue to Eagle. "Till the day!" I said. But it was a pang to see the
last of her. I went down to my stateroom and cried--oh! how I cried!

As if to flaunt the glorious difference between this summer and last,
Father took a furnished house in Norfolk Street, Hyde Park, which was to
let with the owner's servants. It was very rich looking, though the
elaborate decorations reminded me of houses in moving-picture plays.
Father was able to splurge, on Di's prospects; and probably Kitty Main
contributed to the expense, for she and her maid came to stay with us.
We began to be expensively gay; and I believe if any duke or earl who
tangoed with Diana had offered himself for the dance of life, she would
have thrown over Sidney Vandyke at the eleventh hour. But no one
exciting showed signs of entangling himself permanently, and so, when
Major Vandyke wired that the situation in Mexico permitted him to ask
for leave, Di's engagement was announced in the _Morning Post_.

Soon after this, Sidney arrived with cartloads of luggage, which seemed
to detach him from America forever. He had got long leave and intended
to resign from the army at the end of it. He took up his quarters at the
Savoy Hotel, but he was at our house morning, noon, and night; and
though everybody who saw him for the first time said how handsome he
was, it struck me from the minute we met that he had changed for the
worse. He looked older and stouter, and black and white would no longer
express him in a picture. A suffusion of red for the face, as well as
for the lips under the black moustache, would have been needed. I
wondered if he were drinking; and though, when he lunched or dined with
us he was always careful (except with champagne, which he loved as a
child loves sweets), he might be less cautious when out of Diana's
sight.

At first I could hardly bear to sit down at the same table with Sidney
Vandyke; but as time went on, I found an impish pleasure in watching
him, in staring openly, as a baby stares. I had the satisfaction of
feeling that he was disturbed by my gaze, and that he knew, even when
not looking, that my eyes were on him. Sometimes in the midst of talk he
would break down and forget what he had meant to say next. I affected
him with a kind of aphasia, erasing the words he wanted from his brain.
But otherwise my tactics were changed. I was no longer rude to my future
brother-in-law. I wished to study him, and I didn't object to his
knowing that I studied him.

A silent battle was being fought between us under a smooth surface of
civility, and Sidney might easily have complained to Diana that my owl
stare was "getting on his nerves," even though he could have brought no
other complaint. If he had spoken to her she would have made some excuse
to scratch me off her list of bridesmaids. I hoped she would, and save
me trouble! But perhaps Sidney felt that I was yearning for him to
"squeal," and resolved not to please me. In any case, nobody not in the
secret of our hearts could have guessed that anything was wrong. And I
had to play at spraining my ankle in order to escape being one of the
eight.

It was well to be civil in word and deed, and "bide my time," but to be
in at the death, and marry my sister to a man who'd stolen her from
Eagle March and ruined him, was a different thing. I drew the line at
that.

It's quite simple for a girl vowed to the conscientious life and no fibs
to wrench her ankle, if she'll wear high heels. All she has to do when
walking in the street is to look out for banana peel; or an apple paring
may do at a pinch. She launches herself upon it, with a skating
movement. Her foot turns, and the deed is done. She can in this way
produce a "strain," if not a "sprain"; and only doctors know the
difference. The difficult part comes in remembering to limp. I was so
fearful of forgetting in some moment of excitement, that I took to
wearing shoes which were not mates. They were actually incompatible. One
had a Louis Quinze heel and the other had none at all; but my dresses by
this time were so "grown up" and long that nobody noticed. Besides,
though refusing to see a doctor, I stopped in bed for days, and
hypnotically impressed the idea of a sprain on every one.

Those who didn't know why I wouldn't for the world be bridesmaid to
Diana sat by my bedside and sympathized, among others Mrs. Dalziel and
Milly, who had followed us in time to have all the season's fun in
London before the wedding. Tony hoped to get leave and arrive for "the
great day." Afterward he and his mother and sister planned a motor tour
through Belgium, and Luxemburg, and France, before the time when Tony
must rejoin his regiment. I had a sneaking idea that they meant me to
go, too; but at that moment--before other things had happened--I told
myself that I would do nothing of the kind. I was homesick for Ireland
and Ballyconal.

The date of Di's wedding wasn't definitely settled until after Sidney
came. Then it was fixed for the ninth of July, and the bride and
bridegroom were to have four weeks' motoring in the north of England.
When the honeymoon was officially over they were to make country-house
visits in Scotland for the shooting season. Sidney Vandyke boasted of
being a crack shot, and Diana hoped to be proud of her American husband
among British sportsmen.

Meanwhile they had some time before the wedding in which to find a town
house, and choose furniture and things so that they might be "at home"
in the autumn. I think Di really loved Sidney the day he consented to
buy a house--a very expensive though small house--in Park Lane. She had
set her heart upon Park Lane; for, you see, there was always something
rootedly Victorian about Di; such as being convinced that Park Lane was
the Mount Olympus of London, and that you couldn't be properly married
except at St. George's. She was, and is, up-to-date only on the surface,
in such details as clothes and hats, and tango, and the latest slang.
Probably Di had never been so happy as in gathering together materials
for her future frame; and if Sidney was chagrined because Father didn't
offer to lend for the honeymoon our ancestral castle (to which he and Di
had frequently alluded in America) he kept his feelings to himself. He
would have been twice as much chagrined by the castle could he have seen
it before Kitty Main got in her deadly work. The Trowbridges of Chicago
would have rejoiced to tell him what it was really like.

I don't quite know why it is the fashion for brides to shut themselves
up and not "go out" for days before the wedding; but perhaps they are
supposed to pass their close time in prayer and maiden meditation,
thanking heaven for what it has provided, and dwelling on the
responsibilities of the future. Di spent her days in being fitted for
frocks (goodness knew who would pay for them, unless Sidney, on ceasing
to be a bridegroom and turning into a husband), receiving wedding
presents, having photographs taken, and giving discreet interviews to
journalists. She told the male ones what a heroic person Major Vandyke
was; and to the female ones she showed her dresses. There wasn't an
illustrated daily or weekly paper in London that didn't produce a
picture of Sidney in uniform, looking dashing, and Di looking down, all
modesty and eyelashes.

The last night she went out to anything big before the wedding was to a
dinner at the Russian embassy; and though nothing which seemed to us
sensationally interesting happened that night, something was led up to
later. It came through Milly Dalziel, for whom Father and Di had
contrived to get an invitation. She met Captain Count Stefan
Stefanovitch, the military attaché of the Russian Embassy.

There is something irresistible to some natures about a Russian count;
and to Russian counts about American heiresses, particularly those with
red hair. When the two had seen each other three times they were
engaged, subject to the consent of the count's father. Everybody in that
family was a count or countess, a delicious prospect for Milly when she
wished to talk of her Russian relatives. Stefan was to stay and see
Milly in her bridesmaid's dress; then he was going to make a dash for
Petrograd (we called it St. Petersburg then!) armed with her photograph
and substantial accounts of her father's bank balance, returning as soon
as the consent was insured. There seemed to be something almost feudally
old-fashioned about Russians, Milly thought, for a mere wire to _her_
father had been considered adequate. But then, Tony Senior wasn't a
count or a "vitch," or anything exciting like that.

It was after this dinner that I began to prowl for banana peel. I hadn't
wanted to be premature; still, it was necessary to give some other girl
time to get a bridesmaid's dress. Just then the only thing in London
that anybody cared about was the Russian opera and ballet, and it
occurred to Di that it would be original to clothe her eight attendant
maidens in Léon Bakst designs. Most of the girls were pale blondes, whom
she had chosen because they would form an effective contrast to herself;
but they were very brave about the Bakst effects. The measure of their
fingers had been taken, and they were expecting presents of rings
beautiful enough to console them for worse disasters. Besides, Sidney
had brought over from America a Captain Beatty to be his best man. He
was rather rich and very good-looking.

During all this time of our new popularity I had heard nothing of Eagle
March, except that he had turned his back on his native land after
resigning from the army, and that various "ugly stories" were in
circulation. It was even said that he had been bribed by Mexico with
immense sums of money to betray his country. It was Tony who wrote me
this, in answer to a question. But he knew no more than this gossip, not
even when he arrived in London the day before Diana's wedding.

"For all I can tell," he said, when he had congratulated me on my limp,
"March may have offered himself and his aeroplane to the Viceroy of
India or the Sultan of Turkey or even the Emperor of Japan. There's only
one thing certain about him: he'll have to be a soldier
somewhere--somehow!"

"Blessed is the bride the sun shines on," they say, but the sun did not
shine on Diana. The ninth of July dawned gray and blustering, with a
queer rasping chill in the air like an autumn day slipped back in the
calendar. I hated the thought of seeing Di married to Sidney Vandyke. It
seemed like aiding and abetting the enemy, but unless I had another
accident at the last minute, such as falling downstairs, I could see no
way of stopping at home without a row.

What would Eagle want me to do? I asked myself. It was almost as if I
could hear his voice saying, "Don't hurt Diana on such a day by stopping
away from her wedding."

I decided to be there; and it was arranged for me to sit with Kitty
Main, Mrs. Dalziel, and Tony. I didn't mind this, because Tony couldn't
very well propose in church with "The voice that breathed o'er Eden"
resounding to the roof.

The wedding was fixed for two o'clock at St. George's, Hanover Square;
and if any were left in London who didn't know the hour and all other
details, it must have been because they didn't read the halfpenny
papers. It had even been announced that one of the bridegroom's many
magnificent presents to the bride would be a high-powered Grayles-Grice
car, in which Lady Diana Vandyke would drive from the church with her
husband to the house of her father, for the wedding reception, and go on
for the honeymoon tour afterward. This paragraph was truer than some of
the others, but the day before the wedding the car hadn't yet been
delivered by the makers. A frantic telegram from Sidney brought the
assurance that he might count without fail on its arriving by ten
o'clock next day at latest. The firm regretted deeply the unforeseen
delay which had occurred owing to a strike, but the automobile had been
shipped. Still Sidney and Diana were anxious.

Kitty and Mrs. Dalziel and Tony and I started rather late, for Kitty had
superintended the bride's dressing. The other two came for us in a motor
car, but Mrs. Dalziel had to stop for a look at Di. As for me, I'm not
sure how I felt about my sister. She was so lovely in her lace and
silver brocade gown, and her cap-veil, that my eyes clung to her, yet it
was hateful that her beauty should be for Sidney Vandyke. My thoughts
flew to Eagle, wherever he might be--at the other end of the world,
perhaps--and I wondered if he knew what was happening in London.

Our places at church were at the front, in one of the pews reserved for
the bride's relatives and intimate friends, so our being late didn't
matter. But already the back part of the church was full, and the air
heavy with the perfumes women wore, and the fragrance of roses and
lilies which made the decorations. As we went in, a sense of suffocation
gripped me. I felt as if I could easily faint, and I realized that the
long strain on my nerves had begun to tell. I had a queer impression
that I was only a body, and that my soul was far away looking for some
one it could not find. I was glad when we were settled in our seats, but
still the odour of the flowers oppressed me. I fancied that the brooding
gloom of the day would end in a thunderstorm.

People were whispering and rustling in their seats, wondering if it were
not almost the time for the bride music to begin. I had a jumpy
sensation that somebody behind me must be staring, and strongly willing
me to look round. Always I have been sensitive to that kind of
influence, and often, too, I've tried to make others feel it. I kept
turning my head, but could see no one who seemed to be taking an undue
interest in me. Presently, however, I caught Tony's eyes, which fixed
themselves on mine in an owlish stare.

"What makes you keep on twisting round like that?" he inquired in a
stage whisper. "Are you looking for any one in particular?"

"No--o," I said, "but I have a funny sort of feeling as if some one were
looking for me!"

"By Jove!" exclaimed Tony, and repressed himself at a glare from his
mother. "I wonder if it's possible----" He stopped, and began carefully
to smooth his silk hat which was poised on his knee.

"If what's possible?" I wanted to know, bending my head near to his,
regardless of somebody's plume which grazed my eye.

"Oh--er, nothing much. Only just a silly idea of mine."

"Tell me, and let me judge whether it's silly or not. You're rousing my
curiosity." And all the while I tingled with that almost irresistible
desire to turn my head again. It was as if I were missing something very
important.

"I'd rather not now," said Tony. "I'll tell you afterward."

Before I had time to wheedle the mystery out of him (as I felt confident
I could) the "Wedding March" from Lohengrin struck up. Of course, Diana
_would_ have that! It went with St. George's and the rest of it: the
"historic" thing.

She came up the aisle, her hand on Father's arm.

"Oh, doesn't he look _handsome_?" murmured Kitty Main.

"He?" I murmured back.

"Lord Ballyconal. But dear Diana is wonderful, of course."

Her wondrousness was largely a tribute to Kitty, who had given the bride
everything she had on, everything that was packed away in her trunks at
home, or laid out ready to go away in.

It all passed off exactly like any other wedding on a grand scale,
except that Tony, sitting by my side, drew a long breath when the bishop
who was marrying Diana to Sidney Vandyke finished the conventional pause
following "or else forever after hold his peace." I flashed another
glance at Tony but he was looking more like an imperturbable Billiken
than he had ever looked.

A magnificent feast delights us, and a sordid one displeases. What I
discover to be true in some instances, I suppose to be so in all; and
take it for granted at present, without any farther proof, that every
cause of pride, by its peculiar qualities, produces a separate pleasure,
and of humility a separate uneasiness.

Again, in considering the subjects, to which these qualities adhere,
I make a new supposition, which also appears probable from many
obvious instances, viz, that these subjects are either parts of
ourselves, or something nearly related to us. Thus the good and bad
qualities of our actions and manners constitute virtue and vice, and
determine our personal character, than which nothing operates more strongly
on these passions. In like manner, it is the beauty or deformity
of our person, houses, equipage, or furniture, by which we are
rendered either vain or humble. The same qualities, when transfered
to subjects, which bear us no relation, influence not in the smallest
degree either of these affections.

Having thus in a manner supposed two properties of the causes of
these affections, viz, that the qualities produce a separate pain or
pleasure, and that the subjects, on which the qualities are placed,
are related to self; I proceed to examine the passions themselves,
in order to find something in them, correspondent to the supposed
properties of their causes.

First, I find, that the peculiar object of pride and humility is determined
by an original and natural instinct, and that it is absolutely
impossible, from the primary constitution of the mind, that these
passions should ever look beyond self, or that individual person.
of whose actions and sentiments each of us is intimately conscious.

Here at last the view always rests, when we are actuated by either of
these passions; nor can we, in that situation of mind, ever lose sight
of this object.

For this I pretend not to give any reason; but consider such a peculiar
direction of the thought as an original quality.

The SECOND quality, which I discover in these passions, and which
I likewise consider an an original quality, is their sensations,
or the peculiar emotions they excite in the soul, and which constitute
their very being and essence.

Thus pride is a pleasant sensation, and humility a painful; and
upon the removal of the pleasure and pain, there is in reality no pride
nor humility. Of this our very feeling convinces us; and beyond our
feeling, it is here in vain to reason or dispute.

If I compare, therefore, these two established properties of the passions,
viz, their object, which is self, and their sensation, which is either
pleasant or painful, to the two supposed properties of the causes, viz,
their relation to self, and their tendency to produce a pain or pleasure,
independent of the passion; I immediately find, that taking these
suppositions to be just, the true system breaks in upon me with an
irresistible evidence. That cause, which excites the passion, is related
to the object, which nature has attributed to the passion; the
sensation, which the cause separately produces, is related to the
sensation of the passion: From this double relation of ideas and
impressions, the passion is derived.

The one idea is easily converted into its correlative; and the one
impression into that, which resembles and corresponds to it:
With how much greater facility must this transition be made, where
these movements mutually assist each other, and the mind receives
a double impulse from the relations both of its impressions and
ideas?

That we may comprehend this the better, we must suppose, that nature has
given to the organs of the human mind, a certain disposition fitted to
produce a peculiar impression or emotion, which we call pride: To this
emotion she has assigned a certain idea, viz, that of self, which it
never fails to produce. This contrivance of nature is easily conceived.

We have many instances of such a situation of affairs. The nerves of the
nose and palate are so disposed, as in certain circumstances to convey
such peculiar sensations to the mind: The sensations of lust and
hunger always produce in us the idea of those peculiar objects,
which are suitable to each appetite.

These two circumstances are united in pride.
The organs are so disposed as to produce the passion; and the passion,
after its production, naturally produces a certain idea. All this needs
no proof. It is evident we never should be possest of that passion, were
there not a disposition of mind proper for it; and it is as evident,
that the passion always turns our view to ourselves, and makes us think
of our own qualities and circumstances.

This being fully comprehended, it may now be asked, WHETHER NATURE
PRODUCES THE PASSION IMMEDIATELY, OF HERSELF; OR WHETHER SHE MUST
BE ASSISTED BY THE CO-OPERATION OF OTHER CAUSES?

For it is observable, that in this particular her conduct is different
in the different passions and sensations. The palate must be excited
by an external object, in order to produce any relish: But hunger arises
internally, without the concurrence of any external object. But however
the case may stand with other passions and impressions, it is certain,
that pride requires the assistance of some foreign object, and
that the organs, which produce it, exert not themselves like the
heart and arteries, by an original internal movement.

For first, daily experience convinces us, that pride requires certain
causes to excite it, and languishes when unsupported by some
excellency in the character, in bodily accomplishments, in cloaths,
equipage or fortune.

SECONDLY, it is evident pride would be perpetual, if it arose immediately
from nature; since the object is always the same, and there is no disposition
of body peculiar to pride, as there is to thirst and hunger.

Thirdly, Humility is in the very same situation with pride; and therefore,
either must, upon this supposition, be perpetual likewise, or must
destroy the contrary passion from, the very first moment; so that none
of them coued ever make its appearance.

Upon the whole, we may rest satisfyed with the foregoing conclusion,
that pride must have a cause, as well as an object, and that the
one has no influence without the other.

The difficulty, then, is only to discover this cause, and find what
it is that gives the first motion to pride, and sets those organs
in action, which are naturally fitted to produce that emotion.

Upon my consulting experience, in order to resolve this difficulty, I
immediately find a hundred different causes, that produce pride;
and upon examining these causes, I suppose, what at first I perceive
to be probable, that all of them concur in two circumstances; which
are, that of themselves they produce an impression, allyed to the
passion, and are placed on a subject, allyed to the object of the
passion.

When I consider after this the nature of relation, and its effects both
on the passions and ideas, I can no longer doubt, upon these
suppositions, that it is the very principle, which gives rise to
pride, and bestows motion on those organs, which being naturally
disposed to produce that affection, require only a first impulse or
beginning to their action. Any thing, that gives a pleasant sensation,
and is related to self, excites the passion of pride, which is
also agreeable, and has self for its object.

What I have said of pride is equally true of humility. The sensation of
humility is uneasy, as that of pride is agreeable; for which reason
the separate sensation, arising from the causes, must be reversed,
while the relation to self continues the same.

Though pride and humility are directly contrary in their effects, and
in their sensations, they have notwithstanding the same object;
so that it is requisite only to change the relation of impressions,
without making any change upon that of ideas.

Accordingly we find, that a beautiful house, belonging to ourselves,
produces pride; and that the same house, still belonging to ourselves,
produces humility, when by any accident its beauty is changed into
deformity, and thereby the sensation of pleasure, which corresponded
to pride, is transformed into pain, which is related to humility.

The double relation between the ideas and impressions subsists in
both cases, and produces an easy transition from the one emotion to the
other.

In a word, nature has bestowed a kind of attraction on certain
impressions and ideas, by which one of them, upon its appearance,
naturally introduces its correlative.

If these two attractions or associations of impressions and ideas concur
on the same object, they mutually assist each other, and the transition
of the affections and of the imagination is made with the greatest ease
and facility.

When an idea produces an impression, related to an impression, which is
connected with an idea, related to the first idea, these two impressions
must be in a manner inseparable, nor will the one in any case be unattended
with the other. It is after this manner, that the particular causes
of pride and humility are determined. The quality, which operates on
the passion, produces separately an impression resembling it; the
subject, to which the quality adheres, is related to self, the
object of the passion: No wonder the whole cause, consisting of a
quality and of a subject, does so unavoidably give rise to the pass
on.

To illustrate this hypothesis. we may compare it to that, by which I
have already explained the belief attending the judgments, which we
form from causation.

I have observed, that in all judgments of this kind, there is always a
present impression. and a related idea; and that the present impression
gives a vivacity to the fancy, and the relation conveys this vivacity,
by an easy transition, to the related idea.

Without the present impression, the attention is not fixed, nor the spirits
excited. Without the relation, this attention rests on its first object,
and has no farther consequence.

There is evidently a great analogy betwixt that hypothesis. and our
present one of an impression and idea, that transfuse themselves
into another impression and idea by means of their double relation:
Which analogy must be allowed to be no despicable proof of both
hypotheses.

SECT. VI LIMITATIONS OF THIS SYSTEM

But before we proceed farther in this subject, and examine particularly
all the causes of pride and humility, it will be proper to make
some limitations to the general system, THAT ALL AGREEABLE OBJECTS,
RELATED TO OURSELVES, BY AN ASSOCIATION OF IDEAS AND OF IMPRESSIONS,
PRODUCE PRIDE, AND DISAGREEABLE ONES, HUMILITY: And these limitations
are derived from the very nature of the subject.

I.

Suppose an agreeable object to acquire a relation to self, the first
passion, that appears on this occasion, is joy; and this passion
discovers itself upon a slighter relation than pride and vain-glory.

We may feel joy upon being present at a feast, where our senses are regard
with delicacies of every kind: But it is only the master of the feast,
who, beside the same joy, has the additional passion of self-applause
and vanity. It is true, men sometimes boast of a great entertainment, at
which they have only been present; and by so small a relation convert
their pleasure into pride: But however, this must in general be
owned, that joy arises from a more inconsiderable relation than vanity,
and that many things, which are too foreign to produce pride, are yet
able to give us a delight and pleasure, The reason of the difference may
be explained thus.
A relation is requisite to joy, in order to approach the object to
us, and make it give us any satisfaction.

But beside this, which is common to both passions, it is requisite to
pride, in order to produce a transition from one passion to another, and
convert the falsification into vanity.
As it has a double task to perform, it must be endowed with double force
and energy.

To which we may add, that where agreeable objects bear not a very close
relation to ourselves, they commonly do to some other person; and
this latter relation not only excels, but even diminishes, and
sometimes destroys the former, as we shall see afterwards.

[Part II. Sec. 4.]
Here then is the first limitation, we must make to our general position,
that every thing related to us, which produces pleasure or pain, produces
likewise pride or humility. There is not only a relation required, but
a close one, and a closer than is required to joy.

II.

The second limitation is, that the agreeable or disagreeable object
be not only closely related, but also peculiar to ourselves, or at
least common to us with a few persons. It is a quality observable
in human nature, and which we shall endeavour to explain afterwards, that
every thing, which is often presented. and to which we have been long
accustomed, loses its value in our eyes, and is in a little time despised
and neglected. We likewise judge of objects more from comparison than
from their real and intrinsic merit; and where we cannot by some contrast
enhance their value, we are apt to overlook even what is essentially
good in them.

These qualities of the mind have an effect upon joy as well as pride;
and it is remarkable, that goods. which are common to all mankind, and
have become familiar to us by custom, give us little satisfaction;
though perhaps of a more excellent kind, than those on which, for
their singularity, we set a much higher value.

But though this circumstance operates on both these passions, it has a
much greater influence on vanity. We are rejoiced for many goods, which,
on account of their frequency, give us no pride. Health, when it
returns after a long absence, affords us a very sensible satisfaction;
but is seldom regarded as a subject of vanity, because it is shared
with such vast numbers.

The reason, why pride is so much more delicate in this particular than
joy, I take to be, as follows. In order to excite pride, there are
always two objects we must contemplate. viz, the cause or that
object which produces pleasure; and self, which is the real object
of the passion.

But joy has only one object necessary to its production. viz, that which
gives pleasure; and though it be requisite, that this bear some relation
to self, yet that is only requisite in order to render it agreeable; nor
is self, properly speaking, the object of this passion.

Since, therefore, pride has in a manner two objects, to which it directs
our view; it follows, that where neither of them have any singularity,
the passion must be more weakened upon that account, than a passion,
which has only one object.

Upon comparing ourselves with others, as we are every moment apt to do,
we find we are not in the least distinguished; and upon comparing
the object we possess, we discover still the same unlucky circumstance.

By two comparisons so disadvantageous the passion must be entirely
destroyed.

III The third limitation is, that the pleasant or painful object be very
discernible and obvious, and that not only to ourselves, but to
others also.

This circumstance, like the two foregoing, has an effect upon joy,
as well as pride.

We fancy Ourselves more happy, as well as more virtuous or beautiful,
when we appear so to others; but are still more ostentatious of our
virtues than of our pleasures. This proceeds from causes, which I shall
endeavour to explain afterwards.

IV. The fourth limitation is derived from the inconstancy of the cause
of these passions, and from the short duration of its connexion
with ourselves.

What is casual and inconstant gives but little joy, and less pride. We
are not much satisfyed with the thing itself; and are still less
apt to feel any new degrees of self-satisfaction upon its account.

We foresee and anticipate its change by the imagination; which makes us
little satisfyed with the thing: We compare it to ourselves, whose existence
is more durable; by which means its inconstancy appears still greater.
It seems ridiculous to infer an excellency in ourselves from an object,
which is of so much shorter duration, and attends us during so
small a part of our existence.

It will be easy to comprehend the reason, why this cause operates not
with the same force in joy as in pride; since the idea of self is not
so essential to the former passion as to the latter.

V. I may add as a fifth limitation, or rather enlargement of this
system, that general rules have a great influence upon pride and
humility, as well as on all the other passions. Hence we form a notion
of different ranks of men, suitable to the power of riches they are possest
of; and this notion we change not upon account of any peculiarities
of the health or temper of the persons, which may deprive them of
all enjoyment in their possessions.

This may be accounted for from the same principles, that explained the
influence of general rules on the understanding.
Custom readily carries us beyond the just bounds in our passions, as
well as in our reasonings.

It may not be amiss to observe on this occasion, that the influence
of general rules and maxims on the passions very much contributes
to facilitate the effects of all the principles, which we shall
explain in the progress of this treatise.

For it is evident, that if a person full-grown, and of the same
nature with ourselves, were on a sudden-transported into our world,
he would be very much embarrased with every object, and would. not
readily find what degree of love or hatred, pride or humility, or
any other passion he ought to attribute to it.

The passions are often varyed by very inconsiderable principles; and
these do not always play with a perfect regularity, especially on the
first trial.
But as custom and practice have brought to light all these principles, and
have settled the just value of every thing; this must certainly contribute
to the easy production of the passions, and guide us, by means of
general established maxims, in the proportions we ought to observe
in preferring one object to another.

This remark may, perhaps, serve to obviate difficulties, that mayarise
concerning some causes, which I shall hereafter ascribe to particular
passions, and which may be esteemed too refined to operate so universally
and certainly, as they are found to do.

I shall close this subject with a reflection derived from these five
limitations. This reflection is, that the persons, who are proudest, and
who in the eye of the world have most reason for their pride, are not
always the happiest; nor the most humble always the most miserable, as
may at first sight be imagined from this system. An evil may be
real.
though its cause has no relation to us: It may be real, without
being peculiar: It may be real, without shewing itself to others:
It may be real, without being constant: And it may he real, without
falling under the general rules.

Such evils as these will not fail to render us miserable, though they
have little tendency to diminish pride: And perhaps the most real and
the most solid evils of life will be found of this nature.

SECT. VII OF VICE AND VIRTUE

Taking these limitations along with us, let us proceed to examine
the causes of pride and humility; and see, whether in every case
we can discover the double relations, by which they operate on the
passions.

If we find that all these causes are related to self, and produce a
pleasure or uneasiness separate from the passion, there will remain no
farther scruple with regard to the present system.
In the street where it
had all happened was a stain of blood, Captain March's no doubt; but in
the excitement of changing the bride from one vehicle to the other he
had time to vanish as completely as if he'd wrapped himself in an
invisible cloak.

"Just as well, too, considering who he was, and who he's saved," Tony
finished ungrammatically. "It would have been mighty awkward for all
parties if he'd fallen down in a faint, and Lord Ballyconal out of
gratitude had had to put him up here, where the wedding party's going
on. Or even if he'd been all right, but coralled by the crowd, the bride
would have been called upon to address him as 'my preserver'--what?
Can't you see Vandyke obliged to shower blessings on March for saving
both their lives?"

"And yet, how awful that he should go without a word of thanks--go
wounded and bleeding!" The thought made me choke.

"I guess March is a bit like a sick cat that way," said Tony dryly.
"He'd rather crawl off and get well alone than be bothered by sympathy,
even yours, my child. That's like him. And like him to save the very man
who's spoilt his life. But blest if I can see that being there in church
was like him, no matter what you say! Anyhow, it was a blamed good thing
for every one concerned that he just dropped from heaven like manna in
the nick of time, and then was absorbed back into clouds again, blood
and all."

"Diana's dress must have been baptized in that blood," I muttered, for
my own benefit, but Tony caught me up. "Gee _whiz_! did she get her gown
spattered with it?"

"A drop or two on her silver train. Poetic justice! The blood had been
spilt for her."

"Dashed bad luck to get it on her wedding dress, though, I've heard
superstitious folks say--but what rotten nonsense to talk like this to
you! Of course, there's nothing in it."

"I'm not sure how Di would feel if she knew. But _I_ feel as if a drop
of Eagle March's blood would be like the blood of the prince in a fairy
story I used to love. Just the faintest smear of it brought fortune for
the heroine and all her family," I said. "Di doesn't know. I didn't tell
what I saw. And would you believe this, Tony? My noble brother-in-law
pretends to believe that Eagle got up the whole scene, like a plot in
that melodrama you were talking about. I suppose he'd like Di to think
that Eagle bribed the livery people to send nervous horses and a weak
coachman, and that he hired a motor cyclist to swing round the corner on
a cue at the right instant, in order that he himself might play the
gallant hero. Rather elaborate! But that shows how a man judges another
by what he would do in his place! Isn't it a proof that the El Paso
affair was a plot--a plot Sidney accuses Eagle of revenging in this wild
way?"

"That's quite a neat suggestion," said Tony, smiling an
"indulge-the-poor-child" smile which made me want to box his
ears--though not hard. "I don't think you need be afraid, though," he
hurried on, to calm me. "Vandyke won't openly accuse March of anything
more, I guess, unless in the bosom of his family where it won't do much
harm. If he dealt out any 'plot' talk of that sort, he'd make himself a
laughing-stock, and he wouldn't stand for that. He'll just try to forget
the whole business, and help other folks to forget--cut it out."

"It will be better for him!" I said, as fiercely as a small dog growling
in the kennel of a big one. "But Di and Sidney, too, both accuse _me_ of
being in the 'plot.' They say I knew Eagle was in England, and secretly
invited him to the wedding. I haven't even heard from him since we came
back from America."

"Haven't you?" Tony's face brightened. "Well, I shall never cease
wondering what brought March to the church, till I know--which may be
never. Unless you tell me when you hear."

"_If_ I hear!"

"I guess you're sure to sooner or later. He must know now that he was
recognized. No use hiding his head in the sand! He'll want to explain
why he--er--well, sort of intruded."

"No, he wouldn't need to explain," I reiterated. "What's the use of
friendship, if it doesn't understand and take things for granted?
And--if Eagle never writes, I shall know he doesn't want me to seek him.
So I won't do that, even though he has been hurt for us, and maybe is
suffering."

"You're a soldier," Tony complimented me. "March would be just the man
to appreciate that if he could hear you now."

"I believe he would understand me as I understand him," I said. "Still
it is hard not to know if he's badly hurt."

"By the way he shot through the crowd like a streak of greased
lightning, I should say it wasn't fatal," Tony cheered me. "But if you'd
like to have me do a bit of secret service work and 'phone to a few
hotels or hospitals----"

I shook my head decidedly. "I know the hotel where he goes," I said. "I
shan't send. I think if he were very badly wounded, he _would_ let me
know. He'd trust me to stand between him and--the others. Now--let's go
and see Di cut her wedding cake. You can have a piece to dream on if you
like."

"No good!" said Tony. "I always dream of you anyhow, when I dream at
all--except when I eat welsh rabbit: then I dream of the devil." But he
went with me like a lamb, and we spoke no more of Captain March.


CHAPTER XVI


I think if Sidney Vandyke had never taken the trouble actually to hate
me, he exerted himself to that extent on his wedding day.

I kept my distance when the others gave the bride and bridegroom a
send-off of waving hands and showering rice as they skimmed away in the
Grayles-Grice car (ready at last); but I'd caught a wandering glance or
two meanwhile from my new brother-in-law, and thanked my stars that
Heaven hadn't made me some poor private soldier under his command. Di
turned her cheek with the look of a martyred saint when I was supposed
to kiss her good-bye; and altogether I fancied that I should not be
urged to visit in Park Lane when the happy pair came back in the autumn.
I intended to be at Ballyconal then; but a thousand things were fated to
change my scheme and the schemes of all the other unsuspecting mice in
England and Europe.

The first thing--oh, such a small thing compared to those that were to
follow--which happened after Di's marriage was an announcement from
Father. He had proposed to Mrs. Main, and she had been "good enough to
accept him." That was his formal way of breaking the news to me, for we
had been on official terms only for some days following the wedding;
though to his darling Di he would probably have put it "Look here, girl,
she's jumped at me! Hurrah! The luck of Ballyconal's come right side up
again!" And Di would have congratulated dear old Bally, reminding him
that third times were always successful.

Of course, whenever I stopped to think of it, I had told myself that
this announcement was bound to come, and to come soon. But my head had
been full as a hive of bees with other thoughts; and besides, I hadn't
realized how I should feel the blow when it fell.

Vaguely, I'd taken it for granted that life would go on for me as
before. I liked Kitty, and she didn't dislike me, though, of course, Di
had been brilliantly her favourite. I had told myself that Kitty and
Father would trot off somewhere and leave me free at Ballyconal to
hibernate in some neglected corner, while the place was glorified into a
stately British home for an American millionairess. Then (I had gone on
dimly planning) they would return in state, and Kitty would be duly
honoured by a picturesque welcome from the hastily cleaned up tenants.
After that, nobody would take much notice of little Peggy. I should be
tacitly permitted to play among my books, and the peasants I loved the
best, for whose sake I had been trying to learn the art of nursing.

Father's way of telling his news, however, showed me the truth about
myself. I didn't feel in the least related to him; and I decided to use
the month before their return from the wedding journey in finding some
other way of spending my life. I couldn't make a "crowd" in that
"company" of two!

I was nice to Father and charming to Kitty, and all the time I was
polishing my brain as if it were the genie's lamp, and summoning the
genie to bring me inspiration. I couldn't be a governess on the strength
of languages alone. Not knowing the multiplication table, having to do
hasty sums on my fingers, and being ignorant of principal rivers,
boundaries, and all dates except that of Waterloo, was too big a
handicap; and in sheer poverty of invention I seemed to be driven back
to Billiken, that god of "things as they ought to be." Perhaps it was
fate that I had been invited by Mrs. Dalziel to a "boy and girl" theatre
party the very night when I had to congratulate Father, and wish wishes
for Kitty which short of a miracle couldn't come true.

It was only two days after Di's wedding, but already that event seemed
long ago. No news had come from Eagle, and he was referred to in London
newspapers as "the modest stranger" who had disappeared after saving the
lives of the bride and bridegroom, "leaving no trace except a little
blood shed in their service." The dinner at the Savoy and the boy and
girl party at the theatre afterward were given, no doubt, more in honour
of "Milly's count" (who was starting for Petrograd next morning) than
for me; but I was made to feel myself a guest of importance; and at the
St. James I had Tony next to me. There had been no chance to pour out my
news at dinner, but now it came and I seized it instantly. Tony was
always nice and sympathetic to tell things to! He actually listened and
seemed interested, which I've noticed that few people do except in their
own affairs. But the next minute I was sorry I'd spoken, for he proposed
again immediately. I might have known he would! "You see, your whole
family's bound to marry Americans, so I might as well be the one for
you," he said. "If you don't take me, Mrs. Main will produce a nephew of
hers. I know him--poisonous blighter--and he'll be shoved down your
throat, sure as fate. He's _some_ homelier than me, if possible."

I laughed. "Dear Tony! You're much too good to be a refuge for the
destitute."

"Depends on the destitute," said he. "I'd love to be a sort of asylum or
young ladies' home for you. Do take me this time, and have done with it
once and for all."

"It wouldn't be done with," I reminded him. "That's the worst of it."

"It might be the best of it, if I played my cards right. You know,
Peggy, not very long ago as the bird of time flies, you said you liked
me better than any other fellow. Has my stock gone down, or stands it
where it did?"

"Where it did, or even a point or two higher," I assured him. "But, dear
Tony, I'm afraid even _that_ isn't high enough for--for marriage, and
fearfully serious things like that, though lovely for a dance or the
theatre. Besides, I didn't say _exactly_ what you think I said."

"About liking me better than other men? Oh, I know you made one
exception. 'Tisn't jolly likely I'd forget! But you said the One
Exception didn't count. I haven't forgotten that either. He looked on
you as his sister or his maiden aunt."

"Oh, _not_ his maiden aunt!" I moaned. "I could bear anything but that.
And--and I'm afraid, after all, he _does_ count--just in my mind, you
know, not in any other way. But he's there and I can't--can't put him
out. I'm afraid I don't want to."

"Gee! That's a bad prospect for me," said Tony with a big sigh, luckily
not audible over the orchestra which was loudly playing between acts
"You made me love you, I didn't want to do it!" with variations. "But
see here, Peggy, it's just the same with me about you. I can't put _you_
out of my mind, and I don't mean to. There you are! What are we going to
do about this? Your best man won't come and play in your backyard, and
my best girl won't put her nose in mine. You'll always be my best girl,
because you're the best girl there is. So here's an idea: suppose I
don't ask to be best with you, and don't whine to be on the ground floor
or anything conceited? Couldn't you spare me a third-story back bedroom
in your heart's house? Just sort of lend it to me, you know. I'd promise
to turn out if you couldn't get along with me as a boarder when you've
given me a fair trial. Of course, though, dear, I don't want to nag at
you if there's a grain of chance that the best man--the real tenant of
the house--will ever come to his right senses!"

"His right senses!" I almost laughed. "Why, Tony, for him to like me--in
_that_ way--would be to lose them. You don't know who he is."

Tony was silent.

"Or--_do_ you? Have you been guessing?"

"Mayn't have guessed right," grumbled Billiken evasively. And then I
knew that he knew the poor little secret I had thought to keep.

"I think you have guessed right," I said. "Don't look as if you were
afraid you'd hurt me. You haven't. I don't much mind your knowing. And
that's the greatest compliment I could pay you. It's Eagle March, of
course."

With that the orchestra stopped dead as if on purpose to eavesdrop, and
I had made a present of the name to the whole audience. But luckily that
was all I had given. Any girl may yell any man's name, just as any cat
may look at any king. All the same my cheeks were hot throughout the
next act, during which I pretended to be passionately absorbed in the
play. The minute it was over and forced silence at an end, Tony boldly
said, "I knew it must be March, all the time. Not that you showed it!"
he hurried to add. "You're too good plucked an infant for that! And I'm
sure he never twigged. Not he! He's not that kind. It was only because
you saw a lot of him, that I thought so; and a girl who wouldn't fall
head over ears in love with March, if he was always underfoot, wouldn't
have wit enough to know which side her bread was buttered. See?"

I laughed again more than before, for Tony when he meant to be intensely
serious was generally funny. "Poor me!" I said. "There was no butter on
my bread, nor any jam. I'm a fool to go on eating it bare and stale!
Imagine a man who loved Di anticlimaxing over to me!"

"I can't imagine any man not beginning and ending with you," said Tony
stoutly, and I shouldn't have been a human girl if his loyal admiration
hadn't pleased me. "But I suppose you're a better judge of March than I
am," he went on, "and so, if his name's not down on the programme, won't
you write mine there--to be figurative again? Scribble it in pencil if
you like, not in ink. Then you can easily rub it out if you get tired of
seeing it always under your eyes."

"What do you mean?" I asked, really puzzled by his allegories.

"Why, be engaged to me on the instalment plan. Stop payment whenever you
want to. Agreement to be drawn up that way. All these weeks you've been
trying, according to promise, haven't you, to like me enough to be
engaged? Now, instead, try _being_ engaged, and see whether you can like
me enough to strike a fast bargain by and by. You might come along to
Belgium with mater and Milly and me--they're dying to have you. Milly
wants to bore you talking about her Russian--and we'll see such a lot of
each other, travelling, that you'll know your own mind by the time my
leave's up. Think, if I could take you back to God's own country with me
as my--no, I won't say the word. I see it shocks you."

"It does," I said. "And even if I did what you ask, which would be nice
for me, but not fair to you, nothing would induce me to--to----"

"Marry?"

"Yes, so soon. I'm too--young. Unless I loved you perfectly. Then I'd
marry you if I were _eight_ instead of eighteen."

"I wouldn't marry you! Must draw the line somewhere. But if you really
think it would be nice, why not do it? I think it's fair, and I'm the
judge. Say yes, quick, before that darned orchestra stops again. You
shan't be married till you like, even if I have to wait as long as Jacob
did for Rachel. Not that I know how long that was. Say yes----"

"Yes, then!" I shouted over an appalling blast of instruments. And Tony
squeezed my hand.

That is how I happened to start for Belgium with Mrs. Dalziel and Milly,
the day after Father's quiet wedding with Kitty Main, and the day before
Austria delivered her ultimatum to Servia.


CHAPTER XVII


Not being politicians or war prophets, but only tourists, we didn't
realize what a flame would sweep over Europe on the winds of fury from
this one far-off fiery spark. Tony read us out the news at breakfast in
a hotel at Bruges: "Austria's Ultimatum to Servia"; whereupon we went on
drinking our coffee and eating our crisp rolls as if nothing had
happened.

"Dear me, what a pity!" sighed Mrs. Dalziel absently. She was thinking
of our sight-seeing expedition for which we were already late. Milly
remarked that somebody was always throwing an ultimatum at somebody
else's head, and asked for jam. Tony said intelligently that it was just
what he had expected, after the murder of the archduke and the duchess,
and looked at his watch. As for me, it did shoot through my mind that
Russia might have something to say if Servia were attacked; and I
thought that if I were Milly I should have a qualm of anxiety about my
captain-count. But I didn't wish to worry her with such a remote
suggestion, and our war conversation ended there. None of us bothered
seriously with the papers for the next day or two. Sight-seeing in
Belgium seemed to us the last thing on earth which could possibly
connect itself with an ultimatum, or even a declaration of war on
Servia. We went from Bruges to Ghent, from Ghent to Antwerp, from
Antwerp to Brussels, from Brussels to Namur, to Louvain, and Spa, and so
at last arrived at Liége. The next item on our programme was a run into
Luxemburg, which was to finish our trip; and in a few days more Tony was
to leave us to catch his ship for home, as his holiday was over. He had
been behaving so well that I minded being engaged less than I'd
expected; and it was nice to be petted by Milly and Mrs. Dalziel and
loaded with presents. It was the first time in my life that I had
experienced anything of the sort, for I had always been the one who
didn't matter, at home. Each place we visited seemed more beautiful than
the last, and I was trying hard to say to myself, "This is happiness, or
all you can expect to know. Make the most of it, and be a sensible
Peggy!"

It was late on the night of Wednesday, July 29th, when we arrived at
quaint old Liége; and though we knew that Austria had declared war, and
that all the great powers were muttering thunderously, it didn't seem as
if anything devastating would really happen. That was much too bad to be
true, and everything seemed so peaceful and comfortable. Hotel keepers
smiled and said that the war scare was sure to blow over as it had blown
over time after time in the past. We met other people gayly touring like
ourselves. They all appeared to be easy in their minds and free from
care, so we followed their pleasant example; and the sun shone on us,
and Belgium seemed the prettiest and most pacific of all countries,
basking under a cloudless sky.

"Telegram for you, dear," Mrs. Dalziel said to Milly as she sorted the
post handed to her by the man in the hotel bureau at Liége. Then she
dealt out envelopes to Tony and me, and we were rather sleepily busied
with them when Milly gave a gasp. "Oh, Mamma, he's got to _fight_!" she
squealed.

"He--who?" questioned Mrs. Dalziel dazedly in the midst of deciphering a
closely written and crossed page of thin foreign paper.

"Stefan!" Milly choked on the name. "Oh, it's awful! His father has
consented to his marrying me all right, but _of course_ he'll go
and--and be _killed_ now, and I shall never see him again! I'm the
unluckiest girl that ever lived. And just when I thought everything was
going to be so splendid."

I heard her wailing as I finished my letter, which was from Di: the
first she had written me. It had gone to Brussels and been forwarded
from there to Liége. "Sidney and I are rushing back to London as fast as
the car will take us," she wrote. "This war news is terrible. Any minute
we may hear that England's mixed up in the business. There's no more fun
motoring about the country in this suspense; and if there's war, all the
house parties we were asked to in Scotland are sure to be given up. We
want to be where we can have news every minute, and will hurry up the
decorators so we can get into our house, even if things are at sixes and
sevens there. From what I hear, everybody will be congregating in London
to be in the heart of things. It makes me sick to think of all my
_lovely_ clothes! If there's war, nobody will be wearing _anything_. All
the nicest men will be away at the front. Isn't it _sickening_? Luckily,
Sidney won't have to fight, as America's not involved. But I don't want
to go over there and have people at home calling me a _coward_, to sneak
away from under the Zeppelins and things the Germans will be sending
over. I want to do what everybody else does, though Heaven alone knows
yet what that will be. I expect Bally and Kitty will come back from
Harrogate, where poor dear Bally is celebrating his honeymoon by taking
a strict cure, and I hear Kitty is doing mud baths to reduce her flesh.
They wire that there isn't one waiter out of sixty left in their
hotel--all were _Germans_; so you see what that means. And Kitty's maid
had hysterics this morning because war's to be declared on her country,
and because the hotel chambermaids are all turned into waitresses, and
she had to make Bally's and Kitty's beds. One realizes that war will be
horrible for _all classes_. Your life won't be safe on the Continent,
you know, and you'd better persuade Mrs. D. to bring you back
immediately. Though you've been so horrid to Sidney, he'll overlook it
in this crisis, for my sake, when even Ulsterites and Nationalists are
forgiving each other. Father and Kitty will have to stay with us when
they arrive, as the Norfolk Street house is given up; and you must of
course come, too. You can be our guest till you and Tony are married, if
you don't want your engagement to last _too_ long."

I hardly knew whether I most wanted to laugh or cry over that letter.
All I did know was that nothing would induce me to stay with Diana and
Sidney Vandyke. I would even rather be married, if worst came to worst;
but though Tony and I were playing at being engaged, the thought of
actually marrying him was like jumping over a precipice. I wasn't ready
for the precipice yet, and must avoid it if I could.

I folded up the letter and kept its news and its suggestions to myself.
I sympathized with Milly; and hoped that, after all, even if Russia and
Austria and Servia and Germany flew in each others' faces, it might be
possible for England and France and Italy to keep the peace. Di was
always inclined to exaggerate, and probably she was glad of any excuse
by this time to put an end to a motoring _tête-à-tête_ with Sidney.

I went to bed and tried to believe that I had had a bad dream, but next
morning I was still dreaming it. The papers told us how the Stock
Exchange in London had closed, which seemed like hearing that England
had suddenly gone under the sea. Belgrade was being bombarded. The
Germans as well as Russians were mobilizing furiously. King George had
telegraphed to the Czar, but before his message had time to reach
Petrograd, the Kaiser had declared war on Russia. Belgium had begun
mobilizing too, and only just in time. Trains were wanted for the
soldiers. Frightened tourists clamoured in vain to get away. Even those
who had automobiles could hardly move along the roads, and many
chauffeurs were called to their colours. Ours was French, and went off
at a moment's notice, with just time for a polite "_Adieu, peut-être
pour toujours._" Tony hated everything mechanical except rifles and
revolvers, and had never learned to drive a car; Belgian chauffeurs had
something better to do than help travellers out of trouble; so there we
were!

It seemed only another phase of the dream from which we could not wake,
when glittering hordes of German cavalry, the Kaiser's beloved uhlans,
were said to be clanking over the frontier to violate the neutrality of
Belgium, and we heard that Great Britain had declared war on Germany. I
would have given anything to be back in England then, not because I was
afraid of what might happen in Belgium, but because my blood was hot
with pride of my country, and I wanted to be there to see the spirit of
the people rise. There was little time to think, however, for Liége was
seething with excitement. Fugitives began to pour into the town, with
children and bundles in queer little carts drawn by dogs. Soldiers bade
their families good-bye in the streets, and marched or rode off in
clouds of dust. Wounded men were brought from the frontier, and an annex
of our old-fashioned, dormer-windowed hotel was hastily turned into a
hospital. Red Cross nurses appeared from somewhere, and several women
among the penned-up tourists volunteered to help. Mrs. Dalziel could do
nothing, because she had collapsed with fear, and was sure that she was
in for nervous prostration. Milly had her mother to care for; but I was
free, and thanks to my work in Ballyconal, I knew something about first
aid. Ever since I met Eagle and he had given me the old cadet chevron,
which I carried with me everywhere, I had grown more and more keen on
learning to do what I could for others, and war talk in Texas had
prompted me to buy books on nursing.

I mentioned this as a personal recommendation; the real nurses smiled.
But they accepted my services as a probationer, strong and willing, and
glad to do what she was told, even to scrub floors with disinfectant
fluid.

"You'll spoil you hands," said Milly.

I laughed.

Almost at once after this began the bombardment of the forts at Liége;
and all day long and most of the night we were deafened with the boom of
great guns across the river. It was a relief to be allowed to watch
through the dark hours beside soldiers whose wounds were not serious
enough to need expert care that I could not give. Even if I had been in
bed I should not have slept. I felt as if my brain were part of the
battlefield where armies marched and fought. My heartbeats were the
drums. We grew used to the firing of cannon. It seemed a part of
everyday life. It was hard to remember after the first that each "boom!"
meant lives ended in violence. Perhaps if we had remembered we should
have gone mad.

Suddenly, on the third day, just at dawn, came a new sound, a great
whirring like a thousand racing automobiles, and then two loud
explosions, one after the other, different from the roar of cannon or
the shots from the field guns that night at El Paso. The whole building
shook as if it must fall, and wounded men who had slept restlessly
through the thunder from the forts waked with a wild start. My charge, a
Belgian boy of nineteen whose arms had been amputated, shivered and then
relapsed into stoical calm as the house ceased to shake. "Zeppelin," he
said, in a quiet voice. "They have dropped bombs."

It seemed that two must have fallen and burst close by, the noise had
been so ear-shattering. Up from the street below our windows came a
clamour of voices, shrill and sharp, which cut through the constant
whirr of the giant motor. Near the head of the bed was an open window,
and mechanically, rather than of my own free will, I leaned far out, as
some of the professional nurses were leaning from other windows.

"You might get a bomb on your head," said my soldier, in his tired
voice. But I did not draw back. I was surprised to find that I was not
afraid. It seemed just then ridiculous, puny, to care about one's self.
I was awe-struck rather than terrified, realizing with a solemnity I had
never known that the next minute might be the last on earth for all of
us in that dimly lit room of narrow beds.

The sky was faintly gray with coming dawn. I looked up, up into the pale
dome, seeking with my eyes the great bird of evil that had laid its eggs
of death. There it was, immensely high above the black, shadowy roofs
and steeples of the hill and plain; a sinister shape, like all the
German sausages in the world rolled into one; and hanging from it cars
full of men reduced to the size of beetles by that great height.

The thing was almost directly overhead as I looked up, and it seemed
that if it dropped a parting bomb as it sailed our poor little hospital
must be struck. Yet I continued to stare, fascinated. Life and death
were twin brother and sister, equally terrible and splendid.

"I wish I could have seen Eagle just once again," I heard myself
thinking, as one hears the ticking of a watch under a pillow. But I felt
a strange, throbbing eagerness to know quickly the great secret of what
comes next after this world, with its seeming muddle of injustice and
disappointment, its joys and broken aspirations. "Why! it was like this
with me when we had our accident in the _Golden Eagle_!" I thought. And
even as the remembrance flitted ghostlike through my brain, I saw
tearing through the sky, far above the big bulk of the Zeppelin, a
monoplane etched in black against the light of dawn.

I could hardly believe that it was really there. It must be an image
called up by memory of that long-past moment, some strange illusion of
an exalted mind: but the image persisted. Like a hawk it swept along the
sky, coming from a direction opposite to that of the Zeppelin, as if to
swoop upon it from above. I thought I heard shots. The great dirigible
turned and sailed faster. I felt as if I were all eyes and pounding
heart. Could the sight be real, this duel in the sky? Perhaps others
watched it with me--I do not know. It seemed that I was alone on earth
gazing at the incredible battle.

The Zeppelin made off, away from the town toward the fortifications, but
the monoplane kept above it, despite the shots which spattered futilely.
Just as the dirigible passed over the bridge, which hadn't yet been
blown up, looking enormous, for it hung lower now, the monoplane--tiny
in comparison--dived full upon it. With an explosion of gas from the
huge cigar-shaped balloon, the dirigible dropped earthward, its bird
enemy seeming to fall with it.

I gave a cry and covered my eyes with both hands.

       *       *       *       *       *

I felt that I had been broken, crumpled up like a singed moth, burnt by
the vivid flame of that awful sight. But arms caught me from behind, as
I would have sunk to the floor with the roar of another explosion in my
ears, each brick of the house quivering on another. A kind Belgian voice
was soothing me: "_Pauvre enfant!_" and hands, strong, though womanly,
would have pulled me away from the window to lay me down on some
unoccupied bunk, if I had not struggled to keep my place. "No--no!" I
stammered. "I'm not going to faint. I must see! I must!" And shaking off
the nurse's protecting arms, I stared out toward an open space away from
the town, where a vast mass of wreckage blazed, turning the gray dawn
red.


CHAPTER XVIII


"_Quel héros!_" rapturously sobbed the Belgian nurse who held me. "It is
he who has saved the lives of all our poor wounded ones, and our lives,
too. Did you not see the monster over our heads? It had to turn just in
the nick of time. An instant more, and there would have been a bomb for
us. Thank heaven! No one will deny, that a negligence in this particular is a fault;
and as faults are nothing but smaller vices, and this fault can
have no other origin than the uneasy sensation, which it excites
in others, we may in this instance, seemingly so trivial, dearly
discover the origin of the moral distinction of vice and virtue in
other instances.

Besides all those qualities, which render a person lovely or valuable,
there is also a certain JE-NE-SCAI-QUOI of agreeable and handsome, that
concurs to the same effect.

In this case, as well as in that of wit and eloquence, we must have
recourse to a certain sense, which acts without reflection, and
regards not the tendencies of qualities and characters.

Some moralists account for all the sentiments of virtue by this
sense.

Their hypothesis is very plausible.

Nothing but a particular enquiry can give the preference to any other
hypothesis.

When we find, that almost all the virtues have such particular
tendencies; and also find, that these tendencies are sufficient
alone to give a strong sentiment of approbation: We cannot doubt,
after this, that qualities are approved of, in proportion to the
advantage, which results from them.

The decorum or indecorum of a quality, with regard to the age, or
character, or station, contributes also to its praise or blame. This
decorum depends, in a great measure, upon experience. It is usual to
see men lose their levity, as they advance in years. Such a degree of
gravity, therefore, and such years, are connected together in our
thoughts. When we observe them separated in any person's character,
this imposes a kind of violence on our imagination, and is disagreeable.

That faculty of the soul, which, of all others, is of the least
consequence to the character, and has the least virtue or vice in its
several degrees, at the same time, that it admits of a great variety
of degrees, is the memory.

Unless it rise up to that stupendous height as to surprize us, or sink
so low as, in some measure, to affect the judgment, we commonly take no
notice of its variations, nor ever mention them to the praise or dispraise
of any person. It is so far from being a virtue to have a good
memory, that men generally affect to complain of a bad one; and
endeavouring to persuade the world, that what they say is entirely
of their own invention, sacrifice it to the praise of genius and
judgment.
Yet to consider the matter abstractedly, it would be difficult to give a
reason, why the faculty of recalling past ideas with truth and
clearness, should not have as much merit in it, as the faculty of
placing our present ideas, in such an order, as to form true propositions
and opinions.

The reason of the difference certainly must be, that the memory is exerted
without any sensation of pleasure or pain; and in all its middling degrees
serves almost equally well in business and affairs. But the least
variations in the judgment are sensibly felt in their consequences; while
at the same time that faculty is never exerted in any eminent degree,
without an extraordinary delight and satisfaction.

The sympathy with this utility and pleasure bestows a merit on the
understanding; and the absence of it makes us consider the memory as a
faculty very indifferent to blame or praise.

Before I leave this subject of natural abilities, I must observe, that,
perhaps, one source of the esteem and affection, which attends
them, is derived from the importance and weight, which they bestow on the
person possessed of them. He becomes of greater consequence in life.
His resolutions and actions affect a greater number of his
fellow-creatures.
Both his friendship and enmity are of moment. And it is easy to observe,
that whoever is elevated, after this manner, above the rest of mankind,
must excite in us the sentiments of esteem and approbation. Whatever
is important engages our attention, fixes our thought, and is
contemplated with satisfaction.

The histories of kingdoms are more interesting than domestic stories:
The histories of great empires more than those of small cities and
principalities: And the histories of wars and revolutions more than
those of peace and order. We sympathize with the persons that suffer,
in all the various sentiments which belong to their fortunes.

The mind is occupied by the multitude of the objects, and by the strong
passions, that display themselves. And this occupation or agitation
of the mind is commonly agreeable and amusing. The same theory accounts
for the esteem and regard we pay to men of extraordinary parts and
abilities.
The good and ill of multitudes are connected with their actions.
Whatever they undertake is important, and challenges our attention.
Nothing is to be over-looked and despised, that regards them. And where
any person can excite these sentiments, he soon acquires our esteem;
unless other circumstances of his character render him odious and
disagreeable.

SECT. V SOME FARTHER REFLECTIONS CONCERNING THE NATURAL VIRTUES

It has been observed, in treating of the passions, that pride and humility,
love and hatred, are excited by any advantages or disadvantages
of the mind, body, or fortune; and that these advantages or disadvantages
have that effect by producing a separate impression of pain or
pleasure.

The pain or pleasure, which arises from the general survey or view of any
action or quality of the mind, constitutes its vice or virtue, and
gives rise to our approbation or blame, which is nothing but a fainter
and more imperceptible love or hatred. We have assigned four different
sources of this pain and pleasure; and in order to justify more
fully that hypothesis, it may here be proper to observe, that the
advantages or disadvantages of the body and of fortune, produce a
pain or pleasure from the very same principles.

The tendency of any object to be useful to the person possess d
of it, or to others; to convey pleasure to him or to others; all
these circumstances convey an immediate pleasure to the person, who
considers the object, and command his love and approbation.

To begin with the advantages of the body; we may observe a phaenomenon,
which might appear somewhat trivial and ludicrous, if any thing coued
be trivial, which fortified a conclusion of such importance, or
ludicrous, which was employed in a philosophical reasoning.

It is a general remark, that those we call good women's men, who have
either signalized themselves by their amorous exploits, or whose make
of body promises any extraordinary vigour of that kind, are well
received by the fair sex, and naturally engage the affections even of
those, whose virtue prevents any design of ever giving employment
to those talents. Here it is evident, that the ability of such a person
to give enjoyment, is the real source of that love and esteem he meets
with among the females; at the same time that the women, who love and
esteem him, have no prospect of receiving that enjoyment themselves, and
can only be affected by means of their sympathy with one, that has a
commerce of love with him. This instance is singular, and merits our
attention.

Another source of the pleasure we receive from considering bodily advantages,
is their utility to the person himself, who is possessed of them. It is
certain, that a considerable part of the beauty of men, as well as of
other animals, consists in such a conformation of members, as we
find by experience to be attended with strength and agility, and
to capacitate the creature for any action or exercise.

Broad shoulders, a lank belly, firm joints, taper legs; all these are
beautiful in our species. because they are signs of force and vigour,
which being advantages we naturally sympathize with, they convey
to the beholder a share of that satisfaction they produce in the
possessor.

So far as to the utility, which may attend any quality of the body.

As to the immediate pleasure, it is certain, that an air of health, as
well as of strength and agility, makes a considerable part of beauty;
and that a sickly air in another is always disagreeable, upon account
of that idea of pain and uneasiness, which it conveys to us. On
the other hand, we are pleased with the regularity of our own features,
though it be neither useful to ourselves nor others; and it is necessary
at a distance, to make it convey to us any satisfaction. We commonly
consider ourselves as we appear in the eyes of others, and sympathize
with the advantageous sentiments they entertain with regard to us.

How far the advantages of fortune produce esteem and approbation from the
same principles, we may satisfy ourselves by reflecting on our precedent
reasoning on that subject. We have observed, that our approbation
of those, who are possess d of the advantages of fortune, may be
ascribed to three different causes.

First, To that immediate pleasure, which a rich man gives us, by the view
of the beautiful cloaths, equipage, gardens, or houses, which he possesses.
Secondly, To the advantage, which we hope to reap from him by his
generosity and liberality.

Thirdly, To the pleasure and advantage, which he himself reaps from his
possessions, and which produce an agreeable sympathy in us. Whether we
ascribe our esteem of the rich and great to one or all of these causes,
we may clearly see the traces of those principles, which give rise to
the sense of vice and virtue. I believe most people, at first sight,
will be inclined to ascribe our esteem of the rich to self-interest,
and the prospect of advantage.

But as it is certain, that our esteem or deference extends beyond any
prospect of advantage to ourselves, it is evident, that that sentiment
must proceed from a sympathy with those, who are dependent on the person
we esteem and respect, and who have an immediate connexion with him.
We consider him as a person capable of contributing to the happiness or
enjoyment of his fellow-creatures, whose sentiments, with
regard to him, we naturally embrace. And this consideration will serve
to justify my hypothesis in preferring the third principle to the other
two, and ascribing our esteem of the rich to a sympathy with the
pleasure and advantage, which they themselves receive from their
possessions.

       For as even the other two principles cannot operate to a due extent,
or account for all the phaenomena, without having recourse to a
sympathy of one kind or other; it is much more natural to chuse
that sympathy, which is immediate and direct, than that which is
remote and indirect.

To which we may add, that where the riches or power are very great, and
render the person considerable and important in the world, the
esteem attending them, may, in part, be ascribed to another source,
distinct from these three, viz. their interesting the mind by a prospect
of the multitude, and importance of their consequences: Though, in order
to account for the operation of this principle, we must also have
recourse to sympathy; as we have observed in the preceding section.

It may not be amiss, on this occasion, to remark the flexibility of
our sentiments, and the several changes they so readily receive
from the objects, with which they are conjoined.

All the sentiments of approbation, which attend any particular
species of objects, have a great resemblance to each other, though
derived from different sources; and, on the other hand, those
sentiments, when directed to different objects, are different to
the feeling, though derived from the same source.

Thus the beauty of all visible objects causes a pleasure pretty
much the same, though it be sometimes derived from the mere species
and appearance of the objects; sometimes from sympathy, and an idea
of their utility.

In like manner, whenever we survey the actions and characters of men,
without any particular interest in them, the pleasure, or pain, which
arises from the survey (with some minute differences) is, in the main,
of the same kind, though perhaps there be a great diversity in the
causes, from which it is derived. On the other hand, a convenient house,
and a virtuous character, cause not the same feeling of approbation;
even though the source of our approbation be the same, and flow from
sympathy and an idea of their utility. There is something very inexplicable
in this variation of our feelings; but it is what we have experience
of with regard to all our passions and sentiments.

SECT. VI CONCLUSION OF THIS BOOK

Thus upon the whole I am hopeful, that nothing is wanting to an accurate
proof of this system of ethics.

We are certain, that sympathy is a very powerful principle in human
nature. We are also certain, that it has a great influence on our sense
of beauty, when we regard external objects, as well as when we judge
of morals. We find, that it has force sufficient to give us the
strongest sentiments of approbation, when it operates alone, without the
concurrence of any other principle; as in the cases of justice,
allegiance, chastity, and good-manners. We may observe, that all the
circumstances requisite for its operation are found in most of the
virtues; which have, for the most part, a tendency to the good of society,
or to that of the person possessed of them.

If we compare all these circumstances, we shall not doubt, that
sympathy is the chief source of moral distinctions; especially when
we reflect, that no objection can be raised against this hypothesis in
one case, which will not extend to all cases. Justice is certainly
approved of for no other reason, than because it has a tendency to the
public good: And the public good is indifferent to us, except so
far as sympathy interests us in it.

We may presume the like with regard to all the other virtues, which have
a like tendency to the public good. They must derive all their merit
from our sympathy with those, who reap any advantage from them: As the
virtues, which have a tendency to the good of the person possessed of
them, derive their merit from our sympathy with him.

Most people will readily allow, that the useful qualities of the mind are
virtuous, because of their utility.

This way of thinking is so natural, and occurs on so many occasions,
that few will make any scruple of admitting it. Now this being once
admitted, the force of sympathy must necessarily be acknowledged. Virtue
is considered as means to an end.
Means to an end are only valued so far as the end is valued.

But the happiness of strangers affects us by sympathy alone. To that
principle, therefore, we are to ascribe the sentiment of approbation,
which arises from the survey of all those virtues, that are useful
to society, or to the person possessed of them.

These form the most considerable part of morality.

Were it proper in such a subject to bribe the reader's assent, or
employ any thing but solid argument, we are here abundantly supplied
with topics to engage the affections. All lovers of virtue (and
such we all are in speculation, however we may degenerate in
practice) must certainly be pleased to see moral distinctions derived
from so noble a source, which gives us a just notion both of the
generosity and capacity of human nature.

It requires but very little knowledge of human affairs to perceive,
that a sense of morals is a principle inherent in the soul, and one
of the most powerful that enters into the composition.

But this sense must certainly acquire new force, when reflecting
on itself, it approves of those principles, from whence it is
derived, and finds nothing but what is great and good in its rise
and origin.

Those who resolve the sense of morals into original instincts of the
human mind, may defend the cause of virtue with sufficient authority;
but want the advantage, which those possess, who account for that sense
by an extensive sympathy with mankind. According to their system, not
only virtue must be approved of, but also the sense of virtue: And
not only that sense, but also the principles, from whence it is
derived.

So that nothing is presented on any side, but what is laudable and
good.

He stood with his
head down for a minute, while I ached with pity for him and for
myself--though I hated myself, too, because I was hurting him.

"You must go with Mrs. Dalziel and Milly," I said, when he didn't speak.
"It's the only way. I shall be safe enough--as safe as the other nurses.
Who knows," and I laughed uneasily to break the barrier of restraint,
"but Eagle will take me away in his monoplane? That would be a splendid
solution of the difficulty, wouldn't it?" I spoke only in jest, but Tony
accepted the idea half seriously.

"Yes, that's exactly what _will_ happen, I expect," he said. "You'll go
off with him. Anyhow, I've lost you! I see that. You could never put up
with me after this experience. That's true, isn't it, Peggy?"

The same thought, put in a less brutal way, had been heavy in my heart
since my glimpse of Eagle lying unconscious on the litter. I knew then
that I was married to my love for him and that any other marriage would
be worse than illegal.

I hesitated how to answer, but perhaps my silence spoke as clearly as
words. "Don't look as if you'd just lost your last friend, my poor
child," Tony said, in his good, warm way. "You haven't lost me, you
know, though I've lost you. And you needn't look so guilty, either, as
if you'd murdered me and buried me under the leaves! I was always
expecting this thing to come, though I didn't foresee the way of it. If
ever I felt tempted to believe our engagement was getting to be the real
thing, why, I said to myself, 'Wait till she sees March again before you
begin to be cocksure, my man.' Well, now you've seen him. And I guess
you've seen in the same minute that our experiment has failed."

"I'm--afraid that's true, Tony!" I sighed. "I can't help it! It wouldn't
be fair to you for us to go on as we are. I shall have to break my word
to you, if I'm to be faithful to myself."

"You won't be breaking any old word!" he said. "It was never an
iron-clad promise. I teased you till you agreed to try how the thing
would work. It's been my fault all through, and now I'll take my
medicine. Our engagement was never insured against war risks, and when I
get back my senses I'm going to be glad you saw March before it was too
late. I--brought you two together, sort of inadvertently, as you might
say, didn't I? But, honest Injun, Peggy, I'd do the thing over again,
knowing all I know. I only wish--yes, before the Lord I _do_ wish--that
good may come of it to you both."

"You're an angel, Tony, a real angel!" I almost sobbed. "But you needn't
think that anything will 'come of it' in the way you mean, because it
won't. I don't delude myself. I don't even hope. All the same, I must be
true--to my own heart. And I beg of you to forgive me because I didn't
know it well enough before."

"There isn't any question of forgiveness," said he, with his head up,
and his nice Billiken face very pink. "I bless you--bless you for all
you've been or done to me. And I wouldn't forget or undo anything if I
could, you can bet your life on that. I think I could bear the whole
business like a man, if I could stay right here and see you through.
But--there's mater and Milly to think of--and the regiment.
And--and--oh, well, life's just one damn thing after another!"

Mrs. Dalziel and Milly came and pleaded with me after that, and tried to
frighten me into going with them; but, as Milly burst out desperately at
last, I was "as hard as nails." Tony had told them nothing, I found,
about the failure of our experiment or the identity of Monsieur Mars. I
well understood why, and was grateful--grateful for that and for many
things; most of all for bringing me to Belgium, and neither grudging nor
regretting what he had done. So, as a lover, Tony went out of my life;
but as a friend, he never can go.

I had no time to cry or feel lonely, or tell myself what a beast I'd
been, after the three had reluctantly left me to my fate; for when I
went back on duty after the good-byes, it was to find that I had been
sent for to hasten to the principal ward. Monsieur Mars was being
delirious in English, and the doctors and nurses understood too little
of the language to know whether he were merely babbling or pouring forth
important information.

There Eagle lay in his narrow, white bed, clean and pale, with his head
swathed in bandages, a very different man from the grimy, bloodstained
vision that had flashed on me a few hours before. The merest stranger
who had ever seen Captain March would have deserved no credit for
recognizing him now.

The nurses waited eagerly for me to translate his mutterings; but he
only mumbled again and again, "It's all over, all over!"

If I could guess at a sad hidden meaning for the words, it was one which
need not be handed on to others; and I proved so broken a reed as a
translator that I expected to receive marching orders, right-about face.
Strange to say, however, though his eyes were half closed and he seemed
to see nothing, know nothing that went on around him, after I had spoken
in a low tone to his nurse Eagle stopped muttering. For a moment he
appeared to listen, and then with a deep sigh as if of relief from pain
or some heavy anxiety, the half-open eyelids closed. The slight frown
which had drawn his brows together slowly faded away. He had the air of
being at rest.

"One would almost fancy," said the head nurse, who had been watching the
scene, speaking thoughtfully when she had beckoned me away from the
bedside, "that this brave monsieur recognized your voice, Mademoiselle."

Then I took heart of grace and did what I had told Tony I meant to do. I
said that I had met Monsieur Mars in England and America. I had
recognized him at once when the Red Cross men brought him into the
hospital, but I had said nothing of this at the time, because I had felt
that it would be considered unimportant.

"On the contrary, Mademoiselle," answered that adorable woman, "it is of
the _greatest_ importance. This heroic monsieur has saved us from death.
If there is anything, little or big, which we can do for him in return,
how gladly will we do it! Your voice has soothed him in his
unconsciousness. Who knows what your presence may do when consciousness
comes back? Why, it would be like throwing away an elixir to waste you
after this in the ward above. You are from now on promoted as assistant
nurse to our hero."

She was a stout, plain person, with bulgy eyes and a pink end to her
nose, but I saw her as the most beautiful woman the world has ever
produced.

I took up my new duties at once, trying not to act as if the moon were
my footstool. All the rest of the day and far into the night Eagle lay
as if asleep, with occasional fits of restlessness which, somehow, I
could always soothe; and this state, though it seemed alarming to me,
was approved by the doctor. It was better, he said, that after
concussion the brain should have for a while repose in unconsciousness.
The symptom was not good when the patient talked rationally too soon.
But if monsieur should waken and show signs of wishing to ask questions,
he must be answered clearly and quietly, if possible by the Demoiselle
Irlandaise who would best be able to understand and satisfy him.

The Demoiselle Irlandaise was advised by the matron to take her repose
early in the night, in order to be ready for such an emergency as
monsieur the doctor suggested. But the demoiselle felt no need of
repose. Sleep seemed some strange and foreign thing. She sat through the
night watching the hero of Liége; and though guns boomed and were
answered, and the nurses occasionally discussed beneath their breath
what would happen to us all when the Germans came, never in her life had
that Demoiselle Irlandaise felt so happy and so useful.

She had the reward of her vigil toward dawn, four-and-twenty hours
almost to the minute after the Zeppelin and its crew had been brought
down. Suddenly Eagle opened his eyes and fixed them on the nurse. At
first he stared as if dazed by what he saw; then came a flash of
recognition which changed to incredulity.

"I'm--_dreaming_ you!" he whispered huskily.

I bent over him with an invalid's cup of liquid food prepared for this
emergency, kept hot in a vacuum flask. "No you're not dreaming me," I
cheerfully replied as I made him drink. "It's Peggy, taking care of you.
Now go to sleep again. I'll still be here when you wake up next time."

"But----" he went on, staring round the room; "where am I? The horse
kicked me, I remember; only that seems so long ago! I thought--a lot of
things had happened since then. I hoped--but I suppose it's all a dream
about--about----"

"Being in Belgium?" I prompted him, seeing his sharp anxiety. "That's
not a dream, but true. You're Monsieur Mars, the hero of Liége, because
you brought down the Zeppelin and the men who came to drop bombs on us.
We're all grateful to you, and praying that you may get well soon."

"Thank God that it _is_ true!" he sighed. "I wanted to do something. I'd
have been disappointed to wake up and find I'd only dreamed after
all--to find that I was back in London. I was afraid for a minute it was
the day of--but it's all right now. How is it that you're here? It
seems----"

"Oh, I just happened to be travelling in Belgium with the Dalziels when
the war broke out, and we got caught. They've gone now, but I stayed.
The nurses let me help them a little. I do the best I can. I told them
I'd met you at home. But every one here calls you 'Monsieur Mars.' They
know no other name."

"Don't let them know any other. Don't let any one know."

"I won't. You needn't worry! Now, will you sleep, please?--or they may
think I'm doing you more harm than good."

"You do me the greatest good. I'll sleep, yes. But first--tell me one
thing more; about the _Golden Eagle_. I planed down part of the way, but
the motor'd stopped working. The last I remember is when I began to
fall."

"The _Eagle's_ safe," I assured him. "Hardly hurt at all; and there's a
Belgian flying man in Liége to-day, Simon Sorel, who knows you. His
mechanic is working on the _Golden Eagle_. She'll be ready for you when
you're ready for her."

"That will be soon. Good man, Sorel!" he said, and closed his eyes.
"Little Peggy!" I heard him muttering later. But three minutes afterward
he had dropped into a natural sleep.

"Magnifique!" was the Belgian doctor's verdict in his next round, when
Eagle had waked again, and had been attended by a nurse wiser and more
experienced than I. There was little that I was allowed to do for him,
but that little was a joy worth being born for; and I could have died of
happiness to see how, when he was awake and fully conscious, his eyes
followed me when I moved about. But it was better to live than to die
just then, and I did live with all my might. I lived in every nerve and
vein for those two days while "Monsieur Mars" was my patient. After the
first twenty-four hours he insisted that he was well enough to be
changed into the ward above, and leave his bed on the ground floor to
some one more seriously injured. On the second day he sat up in a
reclining chair, and announced that twelve hours more would see him out
of hospital. Doctors and nurses protested that he would throw himself
back into a fever, and the consequences might be serious; but as at that
very time the danger of the town being taken was imminent, arguments for
prudence lost their force. Toward evening on the third day Eagle, with
his head and one hand still in bandages, was limping about the field
where the _Golden Eagle_ had been repaired; and when he came back it was
to say that he thought he might get off at midnight with dispatches for
the king in Brussels. He calmly announced this intention to me as I
handed him an innocent cup of broth, better suited to a confirmed
invalid than to a recovered aeronaut. But he quietly accepted the cup;
and I saw by the look in his eyes that I was to expect the first real
talk we had had together.

"What about your going with me, Peggy?" he asked, as simply as if he
were proposing a short pleasure jaunt in a motor car. "You know, I
wouldn't suggest it if I didn't think it honestly the safest thing for
you. With luck we can make the trip in less than an hour, by air. Heaven
knows how long it would take you by earth; and there's no one here,
anyhow, to help smuggle you away if I go and leave you behind. I can't
bear to do it! Besides, from Brussels, there's a good chance of your
getting out with refugees, if you don't wait too long. And you can do as
much good work in London as in Liége. What do you say?"

I wished that it might take us many hours to get to Brussels instead of
less than one. But I didn't put the wish into words. I said only, yes, I
would go; and many thanks.

"Good! That's settled then," said he.

"I must tell our matron," I hesitated. "I _hope_ she won't think me a
coward!"

Eagle smiled almost as he used to smile ages ago in London, when first
we were friends, and he still thought of me as a "little girl." "Few
people would call it a cowardly act for a young woman to fly out of a
beleaguered town in a battered aeroplane with a battered airman, and I
don't think your matron will be one of them. She'll thank you for what
you've done here, and bid you God-speed. But don't go yet to tell her. I
have some things to say to you. You'll be my passenger and 'observer'
when I start to-night, but we'll have no chance to talk; and in these
times we must face the fact that we may never have another chance this
side of heaven."

The words went through me like a bayonet, for I knew too well how deadly
true they were. I didn't try to contradict him, or talk about "hoping
for the best"; for prattle of that sort seemed too futile. I only said,
"Let's take this chance, then. I've plenty of time--hours yet. Stretch
yourself out in the _chaise longue_ and rest while we talk. I'll sit
here by you on the window seat."

No one was very ill in this upper ward, which was kept for
convalescents. Some of the men had been given cigarettes to smoke. Some
were having their supper. It was generally known that Monsieur Mars and
the Demoiselle Irlandaise had been friends in England; and the news
having run round the wards that Monsieur Mars had practically discharged
himself as a patient, we were allowed to talk in peace. Not an errand
was found for me, not a nurse looked--or allowed us to see that she
looked--our way.

"I didn't mean to remind you of my existence, you know, Peggy, till I
had something to say about myself worth saying," Eagle began, speaking
lightly, yet with a nervousness he couldn't quite hide. "I told you that
in my last letter. But Providence has stage-managed things differently."

"Yes. We didn't expect to act together in a continental theatre, did
we?" I was deliberately flippant. "But I'm glad to be in this great play
with you, even in one scene, and such a little part!"

"Maybe the part seems little to you. It doesn't to me! You've helped me
to get well twice as soon as I should have done among strangers.
Heavens! But I was glad to see your little face! I'd have told you that
first morning when I waked up what I'm going to tell you now, if you had
let me then. Things were rather mixed in my brain. I thought I was in
London, and you'd found me at a sort of nursing home I retired into for
a couple of days to get patched up, after that--er--that little accident
I had. I suppose you heard something of it at the time, though I don't
think you were on the spot to see."

"Tony told me you were in church, and that it was you who stopped the
horses when they started to run away," I said, without beating round the
bush, for I thought he was bidding for my frankness on this sore
subject.

"I hoped I might have passed unrecognized; but I feared that was too
much to expect. I was tempted to break my resolution and write to you
after all, explaining why I went to Lady Diana's wedding. But I stuck it
out because--well, because it _was_ a resolution. Silly maybe! all the
same, I had it a good deal at heart to find a new place for myself in
the world before I made a sign to any of my friends, even loyal Peggy.
Besides, I had a safe sort of feeling you wouldn't misjudge me."

"I'm glad you felt that," I said. "Almost glad enough to be glad you
didn't write. Though--I should have liked to hear."

"Well, I thought of you a lot, if I didn't write. And I couldn't help
looking at you in church that day. I sent you wireless messages with my
eyes once or twice, although I knew it would be best if you didn't get
any of them."

"I believe I did get them. I seemed to know that some one was calling
me."

"It wasn't a S. O. S. call!" Eagle smiled. "I found--well, I found that
I wasn't in distress, or need of help. That's precisely why I went to
St. George's, Peggy. I wanted to test myself. Did you think the reason
might be that?"

"No! I thought of a dozen things it might be, but never that one!"

"It was the only motive that could have taken me there. I felt it gave
me a right to go, even though--if people who knew how things had been
saw me, they might--well, they might think me guilty of very bad taste.
But I didn't mean to be seen. I wasn't asked to show a card. I walked in
early and chose a place at the back of the church. I trusted to the
crowd to hide me, and it did. Dalziel may have caught a glimpse of me
between women's hats, but he couldn't have been sure if it hadn't been
for that affair afterward. That was bad luck, in a way, although I was
glad, if the accident had to happen, that I could be of use. However, it
didn't affect the question of my being in church. And I must tell you
about that. I didn't go to England for the purpose of making the
experiment with myself. It was another reason which took me there. But
being in England, I--tried it--tried it with success."

"You mean me to understand that--you _didn't care_?"

"Not exactly that! I'm not made of iron or marble. I didn't sit there in
church without a qualm. But the feelings I had were not those I'd
thought I must defend myself against. What I felt was--was no more and
no less than a rage of hatred against that damned--forgive me,
Peggy!--against that----"

"Damned villain, Sidney Vandyke," I fiercely finished the sentence as he
had meant to end it.

"I can't pretend that that word wasn't the only one to express my
feelings for him on his wedding day," Eagle admitted. "Not because he'd
taken Diana from me, though. That's the strange part! I found it out
while she was being married to Vandyke, and it was the thing I'd wanted
to find out. In the relief, I ought to have forgiven him everything. But
I didn't forgive. The ruin he'd wrought on my career overtopped
everything else in my mind even at that minute. If some great power
could have put me in Vandyke's place at the altar, and given Diana to me
instead of to him, I would not have taken her--not even with her love.
It seemed to me that what she would call her love wasn't worth the name
of love, after--what had passed. It was only the memory of all I'd felt
for her which hurt just then, so far as she was concerned. But for
him--God, Peggy! to see him at the height of his hopes and ambitions
made me mad to choke his life out! It does me good to confess this to
you now, for you're the only one on earth to whom I'd speak."

"Yet, when you went out of church, you saved him from danger of death!"
I said thoughtfully.

"That's just one of life's little ironies, isn't it?" Eagle laughed a
low and bitter laugh. "It occurred to me afterward that I'd spoilt a
good melodramatic plot. Hero secretly goes to church to see the woman
who jilted him marry the villain to whom he owes his ruin. Villain is
killed before his eyes on the way to the wedding reception. Big climax!"

"I think it was more dramatic," said I, "for the hero to save the
villain's life."

"Too conventional. Obvious sort of thing!" sneered Eagle. "But I _am_
conventional and obvious, I suppose. I did what I did simply because I
couldn't help it, and I'd probably do it all over again. I'd have
regretted it afterward, perhaps, if Di--if Lady Diana hadn't been in
danger, too. I bear her no grudge."

"You're very noble," I said.

"It's not nobility. It's more like callousness. I freed myself from Lady
Diana on her wedding day, or found that I was free. But if you could see
into my soul when I think of Vandyke, you wouldn't call me 'noble.' I
honestly pray for the day when I can remember him with indifference, and
when I can say of what he did to me that good is born of evil. That's
what I'm working for. But the time hasn't come yet. Maybe it will if I
can manage to make myself of real use in this war. I've done nothing yet
except a little scouting."

"Liége thinks differently, and so will all the world when it knows."

"I'm not working to reinstate myself in the world's eyes, but in my
own--and most of all to help Belgium. There are things one does just for
the thing itself. I have a fellow-feeling with a country suffering
unjustly. After what I've gone through myself, I seem to owe her
allegiance, as to a friend who understands. The moment this war cloud
began to gather, I thought it would burst over Belgium, and I crossed
the frontier from France with the _Eagle_, to offer my services. I'm
glad now I failed in the hope that brought me over from America to
England. I wanted to join Shackleton's Polar expedition, but he had no
need of me."

"So that was why you came to England?"

"Yes. I told you it wasn't for the sole purpose of testing my feelings
at St. George's Church. Being in London----"

"I understand. But, oh, Eagle! To _think_ you would have gone away for
years without bidding me good-bye!"

"You don't quite understand yet or you wouldn't say that." His eyes were
wistful. "I was disgraced--put beyond the pale, down and out, unless I
could work my way up again out of the mud. Mentally, I was a sick man.
Now I see clearer. I'm on my way to get well in spite of scars. Life or
death will cure me soon. It doesn't much matter which!"

It mattered to me--mattered so much that I could not speak.

       *       *       *       *       *

A few hours later I had said good-bye to all my friends at the Liége
hospital. Again I was a passenger of the _Golden Eagle_, flying through
darkness as once I had flown through sunshine. Hidden by the night, we
winged our way to Brussels safely and surely, and landed outside the
town after forty minutes in the air--forty minutes which seemed to me
worth as many years.

We came down in a farm field, safely but not silently, and waked the
farmer, and his three sons not yet of soldier age. They ran out with
rifles prepared for any emergency, but a few words of explanation warmed
their hearts to welcome us.

I with my little bundle--my only luggage--was taken to the wife and
mother, who exclaimed over me as if I had dropped from another planet,
and gave me a bed for the rest of the night. One of the boys offered to
guard the monoplane while Eagle went off on the bicycle of the other
into town with dispatches from General Leman to the king.

In the morning "Monsieur Mars" came back with the news that a party of
English ladies were starting for home in the care of a clergyman, and
that he had asked if I might go with them. They had consented to take
me, and I must be ready in twenty minutes. An automobile belonging to an
officer would call for me at the farm. It came promptly, and in it Eagle
and I had our last minutes alone together. We talked cheerfully; but I
knew as well as he knew that the chances were ten to one against our
ever meeting again on earth.


CHAPTER XX


I could not bear to go away to safety in England while Eagle stayed
behind, daily risking his life. But he would not listen to my faltering
hints that I should take up Red Cross work again in Brussels. "If you
want to give me peace of mind, go," he said. So I argued no more, and
smiled my best smile as we clasped hands for the last time. That was in
the thronged railway station, where Eagle came to see me off and help
our pilot parson steer his charges through the crowd. I was glad then
that we had said our real good-bye alone.

It took us two days to get out of Belgium at that busy time of
mobilization. We changed trains so often that we lost count, and
frequently waited for hours at wayside places in pouring rain or
broiling sun. We hadn't much to eat, but most of what we had we gave to
refugees worse off than ourselves, or to tired, hungry soldiers. It was
a hard, almost a terrible journey; but it gave me two friends, and
carried me one stage farther on the strange road along which Fate was
leading me blindfold.

The two friends were old maiden ladies, the sort of old maiden ladies
Father and Di would have avoided like a pestilence if they had met them
travelling on the Continent. They were twin sisters, exactly alike in
figure and face. Their name was Splatchley; their looks were as
repellent as their name; and their natures were angelic. They were tall
and thin and sprawling, with corrugated iron foreheads, and grizzled
hair which they crimped over it in little bunches. They had wistful,
wondering brown eyes, like dogs' eyes (if you can imagine dogs wearing
pince-nez!), the sort of noses manufactured by the gross to fit any
face, and large stick-out teeth, which made you feel sure that no man
would ever have kissed the poor ladies at any price. Their clothes and
hats and shoes resembled French caricatures of British tourists, and
they had a habit of talking together in a way to rasp the nerves. But to
me they were adorable. All their lives they had lived in a country
village, fussing happily over church work; but an uncle, who had made
jam and lots of money, died, leaving everything to his nieces. Part of
that "everything" was a large house in Fitzjohn's Avenue, Hampstead, in
which, by the uncle's will, the Miss Splatchleys were obliged to live
for nine months of the year. They had done their duty by it for the
first nine months, and had then, with great excitement and some
trepidation, started with a maid as old as themselves for their first
trip abroad. They had just conscientiously worked, by the aid of
Baedeker, from France into Belgium when the war broke out; and the
heart-rending sights they saw among refugees inspired them with a
brilliant and benevolent scheme. It occurred to them that their big
house could be turned into a home for Belgian refugees, and they
resolved to offer a thousand pounds toward the expense of bringing
penniless people over to England. They could have their largest bedrooms
altered into beehives of cubicles for single women, and stick little
families of mothers and children into the smaller rooms.

"Parkins will help," they said, as we whiled away dreary hours of
waiting in discussing over and over again their plans. And so saying
they smiled square-toothed, affectionate smiles at the old woman who had
been in their service since they were all three young together.

"But we must have at least a couple of nurses to help the poor,
distracted mothers with the children, and, of course, there must be a
second cook and another housemaid to make things comfortable," they went
on. "We must try and think of some nice young girl, too, among our
friends, who would give up her time to work with us. We're too old to
make a success alone."

Then they ran over a list of the girls they knew, in town and country,
but were able to suggest no one whom they both--Jane and Emma--could
agree upon as suitable. While these two angels were busily racking their
brains, I sat with a great idea developing in mine. I suppose I must
have looked intelligent and eager while this was happening, for Miss
Jane was moved to inquire if, by chance, I knew of anybody who would do?
"A girl who is kind, and willing, and bright and strong, and rich enough
to give up all her time for nothing," explained the dear old lady. "It's
a very difficult combination, I know. And, anyhow, your friends wouldn't
care to bother perhaps with such a middle-class institution as ours will
be. There'll be hundreds of charities organized by princesses and
duchesses, smart affairs that will do good on a grander scale than we
can, and maybe get a little fun out of it, too. But you _did_ look as if
you had something on your mind to help us out with; so you must excuse
me if I asked."

"I know a girl who would like to help you," I said, "if you'd have her.
She's willing and strong, though not at all kind, and perhaps not so
very bright. She isn't rich, either, but poor as the churchiest mouse!
Still, she'll gladly give up all her time if she may stay with you,
because she has no home that she can properly call a home."

"We should _want_ her to stay with us, of course!" they protested, both
together, as usual. "But, if she isn't kind----"

"Perhaps she could learn to be kind! She would try hard," I said meekly.
"Her name is Peggy O'Malley."

They thought I was joking at first; and when I'd made them understand
that I was in dead earnest, they shook their heads and looked dubious,
fearing it "wouldn't work."

"You see, my dear," Miss Emma explained, volubly assisted by Miss Jane,
"you are the only earl's daughter, or indeed _any_ member of the
aristocracy--higher than a knight's family--we have ever met
socially--if you can speak of this as 'socially'--being actually _thrown
together_, in all senses of the word, whenever they're in too great a
hurry to couple our train nicely, or when we fall out in a heap at some
wayside place like this. We don't flatter ourselves that you'd be likely
to select us for acquaintances if you were able to _choose_ at this
time; and you mightn't be pleased with our ways at home. We have kippers
for breakfast sometimes, and always cold supper Sunday nights."

I assured them passionately that if Providence had made them both
expressly for my taste, we couldn't be better suited to each other. As
for being an "earl's daughter," said I, there was nothing in that except
extra charges from dressmakers and hotels, and having things you had
never done attributed to you in paragraphs of penny weeklies. Then I
drew on all my funds of pathos, describing myself as unwanted and
unloved. This did the trick! The twin angels took me to their hearts and
promised me a place in their home and scheme. By the time we got on
board the boat they had dropped my handle and were calling me "Peggy
dear."

In London a crowd had come to the station expressly to welcome and cheer
us returning wanderers. And London was not the same London we had left a
few weeks ago. It was a city under a spell, a London of some strange
dream, all the stranger because the only change was in the people.
Later, it changed again, becoming almost gay and lively in outer
appearance, but at this time the balance was not adjusted.

Soldiers and recruits were marching through the streets, which but for
them and those who dazedly watched them were almost empty. Instead of
the mad herds of motor omnibuses, which had gone charging up and down in
"old days," a few moved sedately, with here an ancient horse bus
unearthed from oblivion. Of the lively streams of taxis, blue and green
and black and gray, the source seemed suddenly more than half to have
dried up. Some melancholy four-wheelers and hansoms had made bold to
steal out, and were finding customers. Little boys were playing soldiers
in the middle of Pall Mall, no longer a maelstrom. There was no din of
traffic to drown the frog-like music of their sixpenny drums and penny
trumpets. Looking into the doorways of the biggest shops one saw nobody
but the attendants, waiting to serve customers who were not there and
would not come. Outside the little shops the proprietors were frankly
standing, to wonder sadly what had happened to them and to London, and
what worse thing was likely to happen next? They talked in low voices to
each other, trying to smile or read the latest war edition of some
newspaper.

Most of the people who were in the streets seemed to have come there to
look at the soldiers or to read the papers, which they did regardless of
bumping into all the others who were doing the same thing. Nobody
appeared to think of buying anything, though the shopkeepers had already
pathetically changed the aspect of their windows to suit altered
circumstances. Instead of displaying lovely dresses, they showed rolls
of khaki cloth, or linen, cotton, or flannel for shirts, and gray army
blankets. Shoemakers had bundled away their attractive paste-buckled
slippers, and put forward conspicuously thick-soled brown boots to which
they drew the attention of officers and soldiers. Chemists had hung
printed cards, advising the public to "Keep up Their Strength in War
Time" by taking So and So's Tonic Wine. But no one cared. No one bought.
There was a dazed look on most of the faces. If those who read
newspapers cannoned into each other, instead of glaring or swearing they
smiled mildly, wistfully, and perhaps fell into conversation about the
war. One felt able to guess what all the millions in London and even in
all England and Europe were talking about and thinking about at any
given moment; yet it was strange to us who had come from the hot red
heart of the war to see no other sign of it except this dreamlike
silence which hid the pain of parting from those loved best.

Nobody came to meet me at the station, because, not knowing when I
should succeed in arriving, I had not tried to wire; nor would a message
have been likely to reach its destination if I had. The Miss Splatchleys
took me home with them, as if I had been an adopted child; and it was
from the appropriate address of "The Haven" that I telegraphed Father
and Diana: "Reached London safely with friends who have asked me to
visit them. Writing explanations."

Miss Jane and Miss Emma prophesied that "his lordship" would put down
his foot on our plans, but they did not know him. I did. Having received
my promised explanations, he was more genial on paper than he often took
the trouble to be for "only Peggy."

He wrote from Di's new house in Park Lane, a letter eminently fitted to
be read aloud, and to impress with his graciousness the middle classes
personified by estimable if vulgar females labelled Splatchley. He had,
it seemed, made inquiries about these ladies, and was in receipt of
quite satisfactory references. I had his permission to visit them until
further notice, and help in their good work, which he thoroughly
approved in these early trying days when everybody was organizing
something. Also, he was prepared to make me a small weekly allowance for
personal expenses and charities. He enclosed a cheque for the first
week. It was for two guineas.

Kitty added a postscript with a good many italics. She was _so_ glad
that I was safe after that terrible time when she and dear Ballyconal
had been _so_ worried about me, and would have been even _more_ anxious
if they had had any time to think of themselves. Of course, in the
circumstances, she could _quite_ understand that it would be awkward for
me to accept Major Vandyke's hospitality, so perhaps things were best as
they were, especially as I would be working for the good cause. But I
_must_ come and see them. Surely I could do that? And it would make talk
if I did not. She was sure I would be interested in the sewing guild
which Di had started. Everybody was starting a guild of some sort, but
this was a very special one, consisting of the most _top-wave swells_.
Not a woman on the list of workers whose name you couldn't find in Burke
and Debrett!

Diana also wrote, not at all hurt that I hadn't accepted her invitation.
Indeed, she seemed to have forgotten the episode, quite taking it for
granted that I was disposed of with the Miss Splatchleys for some time
to come. "Kitty and I will motor out to see you the first day we have a
chance," she said, "if we can _find_ Fitzjohn's Avenue. I never heard of
it. But then, one doesn't hear of streets in Hampstead, I suppose,
except in war, or crises like that, when we're all as democratic as
saints. You might ask your friends for a subscription to buy shirt
material for us to make up. I can get more workers than I need, but very
little money, and we need a lot, especially as some of us have had no
experience in sewing and we do waste rather a lot of material getting
things wrong at first! Still, we are persevering, and you must come and
see us at work cutting out and putting together garments for the wounded
every afternoon in my drawing-room, where the decorations are all
finished and immensely admired. We have tea, and I've engaged a palmist,
who tells us what will happen to our friends at the front and how the
war will end. She encourages us and keeps us up. Later we hope to get
convalescent officers to tell us their experiences while we sew. Could
you do any knitting for us? I remember you learnt from your nurse when
you were a small child. I thought it so irritating of you, but it might
come in useful now, if you remember the stitch. Some of us can crochet,
but it seems that won't do for socks. A good many use worsted of a
pretty colour which doesn't clash with their frocks; but as for me, I've
thrown aside _all_ vanity. Don't forget to ask the Miss Splatchleys for
a cheque, as Bally says they're rich; and I do hope you haven't jilted
poor Tony. He has gone, as of course you have heard, and the Dalziels
don't know _anything_--I mean about you and T----I see them every day.
Milly spoiled two shirts this afternoon, but her mother bought us some
beautiful readymade ones instead, with tucked fronts."

Work was so real and so pressing with us at "The Haven" that I laughed
at the picture of Diana's guild with its list of helpers from Debrett,
its palmist, and its tea. Miss Jane and Miss Emma, however, said that it
was my duty to go and see my family, as I was younger than they were,
and it was not to be expected that they could get to me. The desired
cheque I hadn't meant to mention, but in reading the funny part of the
letter aloud one of Di's references to it fell out inadvertently, and
the generous creatures caught it up. They were prepared to spend many
hundreds of pounds in turning "The Haven" into a refuge, and in
supporting the homeless Belgian women and children to whom they offered
hospitality, but they couldn't allow my sister to ask in vain. I was
given twenty guineas for the guild and told that I ought to take the
cheque myself, for I would discover that "it was the busiest people who
could always find time."

We were busy from six-thirty in the morning till ten-thirty at night,
with indigestibly short intervals snatched for meals; but, as the two
angels said, there was always time to do one more thing. On that
principle I contrived to go to Diana's on one of her "afternoons," armed
with the Splatchley cheque and my own knitting, strongly resolved not to
drink any of Sidney Vandyke's tea or eat one of his horrid éclairs.

I was ushered into the house by two powdered footmen far too big for it.
It is a small house for Park Lane, all up and down stairs; but the
drawing-room is of good size; and when a bishop-like butler published my
name at the door, I saw that the room was full of women, young, old, and
middle-aged, seated at sewing-machines, or standing at long tables
cutting out strange-looking shapes from hideous materials.

There were some quaint sights to be seen at "The Haven," rooms being
partitioned off into cubicles; others being turned into dormitories,
nurseries, or refectories for the refugees, who had already begun to
arrive, before things were half ready to receive them. But Diana's smart
new drawing-room in Park Lane presented a far more extraordinary study
in contrasts than anything the middle-class "Haven" could show.

Improbable Louis-Seize furniture was pushed back against white and gold
and silk-panelled walls. Gilt-legged tables and chairs were piled with
rolls of bleached and unbleached cotton, feverishly pink flannelette,
and scarlet flannel; or littered with cut-out parts of garments, some of
which (judging from the confusion and clamour about them) had got badly
mixed. On the garland-embroidered curtains of primrose yellow silk were
pinned placards announcing patriotic meetings of women who wished to
assist or form recruiting agencies; or appeals from the Red Cross
Society or the Prince of Wales' Fund. Rugs had been rolled up, and the
polished parquet floor was strewn with shirt buttons, reels of cotton,
and torn papers of pins. Scissors hid among scraps of waste material,
and on request were searched for by very young girls whose apparent
business was to supply the sewing-machines with cut-out and basted-up
garments, to fold and stack the finished things according to kind, and
to knit wildly at intervals on immense stockings with singularly long
feet which clearly could suit no one but Santa Claus.

As, according to my stepmother, all the ladies of the guild were
"top-wave swells," I'd expected to find the fair brigade of volunteers
exquisitely dressed in the latest Paris fashions of "before the war."
But no! They had invented a still later fashion of their own. It was to
be frumpish. The smart thing for the women of Great Britain was to have
their hair done plainly, with an angelic effect of putting patriotism
before vanity, and having no time to spend on self. No money, either, to
judge from their frocks! Where they had raked up their old clothes, I
can't imagine. There were skirts and blouses in that transformed
drawing-room in which, a few weeks ago, their wearers would not have
gone out to burn down a church or to be dragged to prison. Still, I must
say that most of the wearers contrived to look very distinguished, even
those at the sewing-machines, who had got tousled as children do over
unaccustomed schoolroom tasks. No one had on any jewellery except Kitty,
Mrs. Dalziel, and Milly, and one or two others who were also evidently
Americans not required to sacrifice everything for Great Britain's sake.
They, with their pretty dresses, their rings and earrings and strings of
large, glistening pearls, were like gay flowers in a kitchen garden.

Kitty, fat and fashionable, and Di, slim and elaborately frumpish, came
to meet me with pajama legs in their hands. They didn't trouble to take
off their thimbles, and I thought they seemed far from being ashamed of
the needle pricks on their fingers.

A few of the girls I knew already, and some of the older women. All had
heard from Di or from the Dalziels that I had been doing a little
amateur work as a nurse in Belgium, but no one--not even Di
herself--expressed curiosity as to details. They had so much to think of
that interested them more; and I was thankful for the self-absorption of
Kitty and Di which saved me from awkward questions as to how I had
contrived to get out of Liége. It was simply taken for granted by my
family that, according to my own written account, I had made the journey
home with thoroughly reputable refugees. I felt sure that Tony had not
given his mother and sister any indiscreet information about "Monsieur
Mars." Neither did he appear to have told them that our engagement was
definitely broken off. Their unsuspecting friendliness made me feel
guilty, and I decided that I ought sooner or later to let them know the
truth.

That day at Di's, however, they gave me no chance to speak, even if I'd
had strength of mind to snatch it. Tony was safely on his way to
America, travelling in the steerage, having given up his cabin to as
many ladies as it could hold. He was admiringly mentioned, and then
dismissed as a subject of conversation in favour of others more exciting
to his family and closer at hand. Milly, while sewing spasmodically on a
weirdly shaped shirt which could only be got on or off by a weirdly
shaped man, talked about Stefan and produced a letter from him, which
she cherished inside her blouse. He had been wounded, seriously though
not dangerously, in Poland, and invalided home. It was not thought that
he would be able to do any more fighting, and so when he was strong
enough, he hoped to try and reach England in order that they might be
married at once, if Milly would not mind taking an invalid for a
husband. Apparently Milly did not mind in what condition she took her
count provided she was sure of getting him. She was looking forward, if
all went well, to becoming a Russian countess within a few weeks, for
Stefan expected to arrive in a ship from Archangel along a sea route
protected by the British navy. She had so little fear of anything going
wrong that she was "encouraging dressmakers" by starting her trousseau,
and had begun to study the Russian language as a surprise for her
fiancé. Mrs. Dalziel talked about Stefan, too, and how she would help
nurse him back to health in a suite at the Savoy, when he and Milly were
married. Meanwhile, mother and daughter were giving themselves up to
good works, it seemed, whenever they had a minute to spare from their
own affairs. Milly went three times a week to the Russian Embassy to sew
for the Russians, and came twice a week to Diana's guild. Mrs. Dalziel
had joined two committees got up by stranded Americans at the Savoy: one
to supply money for moneyless millionaires, and the other to find
clothes for clotheless millionairesses.

Whenever one of Diana's workers collapsed with fatigue, she was given
tea or something to eat, and allowed an interval's repose in Di's
boudoir, which had become the temporary consulting-room of Madame
Mesmerre. The tame clairvoyant was expressly forbidden to foretell
anything depressing; if she could not get visions of husbands, sons, and
lovers coming safely home, it was distinctly understood with Diana (who
paid by the afternoon) that she mustn't have any visions at all. This
arrangement, however, was a family secret, which Kitty betrayed to me in
confidence. Every one said that Madame Mesmerre was wonderful, but I
didn't consult her.

I don't understand much about sewing or other really useful things of
that sort, but I've picked up enough (thanks to helping my poor friends
at Ballyconal) to know that men's shirts ought to have armholes bigger
than those for little boys, and that they shouldn't be as short as bibs,
or as long as surplices. Even this small amount of knowledge made me
unexpectedly useful at the guild, where every member seemed to have her
own original conception of what shape a shirt ought to be, and what it
should be made of. Even my brief apprenticeship with the Miss
Splatchleys, to whom most kinds of domestic work was as easy as
breathing, made these fashionable women's desperate efforts at doing
good seem pathetic. I agreed to return whenever I could, but no one
would promise to come and see the "Haven Home for Belgian Refugees."
They were all too busy working, by day; and at night it was a _duty_ to
go to a theatre or music hall, because the performance was given for the
benefit of some fund, or else somebody sang a patriotic song to
encourage recruiting.

We grew busier and busier at "The Haven" as the days went by. Refugees
poured in. There was hardly time to be sad or anxious in the daytime;
but at night always, always, my brain ceased to feel like a brain, and
became a battlefield, as before in Belgium. The horror and anguish of
war poured into my soul as water pours into a leaking ship. The most
dreadful thoughts could be warded off in the busy hours of the day; but
in the night stillness they found me without defence, and I surrendered.

Those were the hours when it seemed to me impossible that any of the men
I knew, and above all, Eagle March, could ever escape from the slaughter
alive. The Miss Splatchleys said that I looked pale and thin, with blue
shadows under my eyes, and begged me not to work so hard. But I could
have worked twice as hard without realizing that I was tired, if some
one who knew the future, as no crystal-gazer can know it, had told me
that Eagle would come out of the war unharmed.

Even when there was scarcely time for a decent meal, there was time to
read the war news. All night long I existed for the moment in the
morning when the two papers which the Miss Splatchleys took in should
arrive, and I could bolt the big headlines and secretly search for the
name of "Monsieur Mars." Then, whether I found it or not, the same
suspense had to be lived through till the afternoon, when the evening
editions came out; and after that again until the hour for the "Last War
Extra."

Often the name of Mars started up to my eyes from the closely printed
columns and set my heart beating and my blood flying to my head. No one
seemed to have identified him as Captain March, not even the British or
American war correspondents who occasionally reported his exploits. Or
if they did, they respected his wish to keep it secret.

"Mars, the Belgian Air Scout," he was generally called, for few
journalists appeared to know that he was a foreigner who had offered his
services to the brave little country. Wonderful, almost miraculous,
feats were attributed to him. Sometimes they were denied; but usually
they proved to be true.

One morning I read that he had made a daring flight of two hundred miles
over German territory, had dropped bombs on an ammunition train, had
been fired on, and returned to his base "somewhere in Flanders" with the
wings of his machine riddled by ninety-eight bullets. Again he and Sorel
(who had been at Liége when we were there) went reconnoitring over the
great German fortress of Metz, hoping to destroy the Zeppelin sheds.
Quickly they were detected, although nearly three thousand feet above
the forts. Up came shots from high-angle guns, spattering around them
like spray from a fountain; but they persevered, making for the
direction of the drill ground. Then suddenly Mars' motor ceased to work.
It seemed that all was over for him, and the task left for Sorel to
finish alone. But Mars, said the papers, resolved not to give his life
away for nothing. Sweeping down in a bold volplane he launched his bomb,
and had abandoned himself for lost when suddenly the motor started
again; whereupon he darted off defiantly, following Simon Sorel, who had
thrown his bomb also, and escaped.

If this had been all, I might have borne it somehow in my pride of
Eagle. But there was always something more. I read of his monoplane
being struck by a fragment of bursting shell over the enemy's lines, and
his volplaning with a disabled engine, to drop into safety and a French
stone quarry with important information to give concerning the
disposition of German forces. When Paris was threatened and almost
despairing, Mars flew over the sad city letting fall leaflets with the
inspiring message, "Prenez courage, tout va bien." Over Brussels also he
maneuvered, dropping his leaflets, and while angry German soldiers took
aim at him and his monoplane he "looped the loop" far above their noses.
His cool remark after this exploit was said to have been: "These Germans
do shoot badly!" He had more than one duel in the air with hostile war
planes, having vowed with the Belgian airmen to ram all enemy aircraft
whenever possible. There was a fearsome account to read, one morning, of
his bringing down an aeroplane which had dropped bombs on the heads of
French troops, helping out the wounded aviator and military observer,
and then setting fire to their machine. In this adventure the _Golden
Eagle_ was injured, and another monoplane was lent the airman while his
own was being put to rights. The "Elusive Mars," newspapers began to
name him, because in the face of almost certain destruction he
invariably escaped in the nick of time and within an inch of his life.
At last, however, one October day of good news for the Allies, there was
bad news for me. They had put it in big headlines on the most important
page:

     "Mars, the Belgian Airman, Caught at Last. While Reconnoitring His
     Machine is Disabled, and Falls in Enemy's Lines. He is Believed to
     be Wounded, and is Certainly a Prisoner."

I had no heart to rejoice in the tidings which made the rest of my world
happy that day. And for many days afterward--days each one of which
seemed a lifetime of suspense--there was no other news of Eagle March. I
felt as if the future were a very long, dim corridor, in whose chill
twilight I groped, my eyes straining toward the distance.

So a month dragged itself away, and then came news at last.


CHAPTER XXI


"Escape of the gallant Mars," were the words that seized my eyes as I
opened the front door of "The Haven" to snatch the morning papers. Rain
was pouring down, but I halted in the porch to read, oblivious of the
rivulet that streamed over my hair. "Mars, the elusive" had been true to
his name once more. It was an almost miraculous story, or would have
seemed so in less stirring times than these, which are teaching us that
brave men can do anything they set their minds to do. Mars, with a few
English prisoners, and some Russians from General Rennenkampf's force
captured in East Prussia, had been sent to work in the fields outside a
little German town in Alsace. Several of these, among them Mars, had
been wounded and in hospital together, but were turned out as cured the
moment they were strong enough to wield a scythe. Led by Mars, a young
Russian officer and a private in a Highland regiment had escaped from
the gang of prisoners by crawling for a long distance through tall ranks
of grain. They had hidden themselves among the stacks, and at night had
continued their progress in the direction--they hoped--of the French
frontier. Next morning they were given shelter by a farmer's wife whose
sympathies were with France. She provided them with disguises, but they
ventured to move only at night. At the end of four nights' travel they
came upon French soldiers advancing into Alsace, and made themselves
known, but not until they had been fired on as spies. Mars and the
Russian had both been wounded, and were in a French field hospital at
the time the newspaper account of their adventures went to press.
Neither were badly hurt, but they were extremely weak from lack of food
and loss of blood, to say nothing of old wounds scarcely healed when
they had started on their dash for freedom. The Russian officer (said to
be a nephew of Prince Sanzanow, Russia's ambassador to England)
considered that he owed his life to the aviator; and it was believed
that when the two were able to move they would be brought to a private
convalescent home in London, financed by the Russian ambassadress and
other great ladies.

I was so happy for the rest of the day that, as I could tell no one what
was in my heart, I sang to myself, under my breath, "It's a long, long
way to Tipperary." Eagle was alive and safe after all my black fears,
and I felt sure that if he came to England I should meet him. He could
not say now that he had done nothing "worth while." I thought, too, that
he would see the time had come at last to let the world know that
"Monsieur Mars" and Captain Eagleston March were one. I longed for the
day of revelation. It seemed to me that it would be a great day. I could
hardly wait for it to arrive; but a fortnight passed and the papers had
no more to say of "Mars, the elusive."

Meanwhile, the world had been busily making history for its future
generations, and momentous things had been happening to almost every one
I knew, except myself and my own immediate circle. Since I had first met
Milly at Diana's many weeks ago, and had been shown the letter from
Stefan, he had actually arrived in England from Archangel, whence gossip
said two hundred and fifty thousand other Russians had been mysteriously
shipped to north Britain. Alas for romance! those Russian hordes were
imaginary, but there was no doubt that Milly Dalziel's Russian had
appeared in flesh and blood--though with only enough of either to keep
body and soul together. They had been married a few days after Count
Stefan Stefanovitch had arrived--a picturesque wedding performed with
all formalities by a Russian priest, while the bridegroom lay propped up
in bed, in that suite at the Savoy of which Mrs. Dalziel had talked, no
guests present except the bride's mother and father (Tony Senior having
obediently dashed across the ocean) and the Russian ambassador with his
wife.

At the time I was not unselfish enough to interest myself profoundly in
Milly's marriage, for my mind was filled with thoughts of Eagle March,
and I could not forget how Milly, snubbed by him for her own good, had
let her supposed love for Eagle turn into bitter spite. I didn't believe
that a girl who had so lately cared for a man like Eagle March could
really have been caught in a rebound of heart by Stefan Stefanovitch. I
had seen Stefan no more than once or twice, when he was military attaché
at the Russian Embassy, but that was often enough for me to know some of
his limitations. In looks and manner he compared poorly with Eagle, to
my mind. I was inclined to think that without his counthood Milly would
have had no use for him, or he for her without her money. This spoilt
the romance of the affair in my eyes, and I had no premonition of what
Milly's Russian relationships were soon to mean for me.

When she had been married a little more than a fortnight and before any
further news had come out concerning the "Elusive Mars" and his
companion, I was told one day by Miss Jane that I was called for at the
telephone. I left a roomful of baby Belgians, for whom I was playing
nursemaid, to run to the 'phone, and was stabbed with disappointment to
hear Diana's voice. You see, every rap of the postman, every b-b-bur-r-r
of the telephone bell, _might_ mean the longed-for message from Eagle
which always I hoped for, even expected!

"Hello, Peggy!" said Di. "I've got a piece of good news for you."

My heart gave a silly leap and then sat down again; because she would be
the last person in the world to give me news of Eagle March.

"What is it?" I asked, without interest.

"Princess Sanzanow hasn't forgotten you, and sends you a special
message."

(Princess Sanzanow is the wife of the Russian ambassador.)

"She's giving quite an informal dinner," Di went on, "getting it up
almost on the spur of the moment, because the doctor says that Stefan is
well enough to go out, and the affair is really for him and Milly. I
don't think there'll be many there except ourselves, for the princess is
asking every one verbally. That's why she sends you a message instead of
a card. It is to say that she has always admired 'la petite Lady Peggy,'
and now more than ever. I happened to tell her about your Liége
experience, and your work for the Belgians. She particularly wants me to
bring you to dinner with her and the prince to-morrow night. You'll
come, of course?"

"Oh, I don't know if I can!" I hesitated. "There's so much to do here,
and, anyhow, I haven't a frock. Miss Jane and Miss Emma bought me lots
of nice things when they bought their own, for, of course, they lost
their luggage, too. But we never so much as thought of evening dresses.
I'd forgotten their existence!"

"But you _must_ go," Di persisted. "The trunk you stored at Norfolk
Street for Ballyconal has been brought here with Father's and Kitty's
things. Celestine can take the measurements of some frock or other
you've packed away there, and I'll go out and choose a pretty model
gown, ready to wear, for a present to you. Shoes and gloves you can get
yourself, I suppose? If you'll come here early to dress, Celestine can
take tucks and change hooks in next to no time, if necessary. I accepted
for you; and it will be horribly rude to the Princess if you refuse now,
for no reason at all."

       *       *       *       *       *

I could have found or invented a reason, if I hadn't remembered in a
sudden flash that Monsieur Mars' companion in flight was supposed to be
a nephew of Prince Sanzanow. If I went to the Embassy I might hear news.
I was willing to do almost anything for that hope, even to dressing at
Sidney Vandyke's house, and continuing the armed truce in his automobile
to our destination. But I drew the line at accepting a frock bought with
his money.

"Why, yes, I'd forgotten the trunk I packed up with winter things for
Ballyconal," I answered. "There's that white chiffon velvet gown, made
over from yours, which I wore in New York last spring before the weather
turned hot. Do you remember? It will do beautifully for to-morrow night.
I'm sure it's as good as ever, so you needn't buy me anything; many
thanks. And I'm so glad you spoke of the trunk. I'll have it brought up
here afterward. It's small and won't take up much room. There are lots
of things in it I can spare for our Belgian women."

"Very well, as you like," said Di. "That white velvet was quite nice,
and will be all right if it is not full of beggar's creases. You can
have the little trunk put on the luggage carrier of the car to-morrow
night when we send you back to Fitzjohn's Avenue. It will save the
trouble of getting Carter Paterson or some one else to call here for it.
And that reminds me: one of the things I wanted to say to you was this:
you were asking Bally if he had any old clothes to spare you for your
Belgian women's husbands. Well, Kitty has found a few, but there are a
whole heap of Sidney's things you can have if you want them. Masses of
luggage have just arrived from America: boxes of books and rugs, and
trunks full of clothing packed up and sent after him by his
soldier-servant when Sid definitely decided to resign and live over
here. All the clothes are a bit out of date now, or Sidney thinks so,
and there are some army things he never wants to see any more. Anyhow,
he has collected quantities of new clothes, and if you would like the
American things for your men protégés, you're welcome to them."

It went against the grain with me to accept even this favour from the
enemy; but I reflected hastily that I had no right to refuse what would
do good to others. After all, it was nothing to me, and Sidney could not
help realizing that, if he heard of the transaction. I thanked Di again,
and said I should be glad of anything she had to give, as the
destitution among the men of the Belgian refugees was as pitiful as
among the women. "We shall be thankful to get the collection out of the
house," answered Diana. "Sid's man unpacked the boxes and, of course,
was free to choose what he wanted for himself, but he's such a little
monkey, none of the clothes would fit him. I remembered you and your
poor people, which I _do_ think was rather sweet of me, as I have such
crowds of things to do every moment; so I told Sykes to spread the lot
out in that empty room we haven't furnished yet, directly over mine. I
mean to have it turned into a kind of 'den' for Sid, so the sooner we
can sweep away the boxes and mess generally, the better. Suppose you
look in after the dinner at the Embassy to-morrow night, and pick out
what you fancy. Sykes can dump everything into an empty trunk for you,
and it can be put with yours on the back of the Grayles-Grice for you to
cart off to Hampstead."

I knew that if I wished to make sure of the booty, I had better take Di
at her word, for as likely as not she would change her mind in a day or
two, and offer the things to somebody else. I replied that I thought her
plan a very good one, and I would carry it out exactly as she proposed.

The next evening I went early to Park Lane, in order to unearth the
white velvet frock from the old trunk packed for Ireland, and dress
myself in it when it was found. Talking to Kitty and Di delayed me for a
few minutes, however, so that I had no time to waste when I ran up to
the shuttered room where my little trunk, as well as Sidney's things
from America, were in temporary storage. No one could be spared to help
me, as Di's maid and Kitty's had already begun to lay out their
mistresses' things for dinner. But I have been used all my life to
looking after myself. I didn't in the least mind grubbing on my knees to
unlock the box, finding the dress I wanted, and unwrapping it from
layers of tissue paper. As I stood up to shake the frock, and examine
anxiously as to its condition by the light of the electric lamp, which I
had switched on for the purpose, I saw many suits of Sidney Vandyke's
clothes neatly folded by Sykes, his valet, and piled on tables and
boxes.

It was too late then to look at the things before dressing, but I cast
an appraising glance in their direction, and my eyes lit upon what
seemed to be a khaki uniform, bundled ignominiously between a suit of
evening clothes and a crimson dressing-gown.

"Fancy his not having sentiment enough to keep his army things!" I
thought scornfully. "But, of course, he was never a real soldier at
heart, or he wouldn't have resigned, at his age, to be lazy and please
Diana! How different from----" But I wouldn't let myself even _think_
Eagle's name in that connection.

Fortunately I had packed away the white chiffon velvet with unusual care
(for me), and there were few creases in the soft folds which wouldn't
disappear eventually when I had put the frock on. As I dressed in a far
corner of Di's room (well out of her way and that of her maid,
Celestine, and managing my toilet operations as best I could with a
small hand glass) my thoughts would fly back to that old khaki uniform
upstairs. I wondered if it were one Sidney had worn in camp in Texas
days when his jealous rage was piling up against Eagle. It seemed to me
that there must be an evil influence hanging about those clothes of his;
and I was still thinking this when Major Vandyke, Father, Diana, and
Kitty and I were bunched together, a rather silent party, in Di's big,
roomy town car, spinning from Park Lane to the Russian Embassy with
Kitchener's "night lights" fanning long white arms across the sky of
unnaturally darkened London.

As it was supposed to be a small, informal dinner, we arrived promptly
on the hour; and when Princess Sanzanow--a beautiful, tall woman, with
the mysterious, sad eyes of the Slav people--had greeted us, she said
that four of her guests had still to arrive: Count and Countess
Stefanovitch, and two others whose presence was to be the surprise of
the evening. "I will tell you only _this_," she laughed, in her pretty
English, when Di pretended to be wildly curious; "like Stefan they have
both come back from the front, and they are the most exciting heroes! I
won't dream of spoiling my great _coup_ by letting you guess their names
until they are announced; but this you shall know, dear Lady Diana: my
two 'surprises' are to have the honour of taking you and our bride in to
dinner. All the other women will be envying you both."

Di was pleased and interested. She realized that our hostess meant to
pay her, as well as Milly, a great compliment; for those "other women"
of whom the princess spoke were important socially, and charming in
themselves. What she had called a "small, informal dinner" would be made
up of twenty-two guests; and the informality would consist in the
innovation of having small tables.

The princess introduced me to a very young youth, her son, who had been
away at Eton when I had visited at the embassy before. He began at once
to air his grievance of lacking a year of the age when a man can be
allowed to serve his country; and I was sympathizing with him because he
was not fighting when Milly and her husband were announced. Here is
a second error; nor is there any third one, which can ever possibly
enter into our reasonings concerning actions. I ask, therefore, if a
man, in this situation, and guilty of these two errors, is to be
regarded as vicious and criminal, however unavoidable they might
have been?

Or if it be possible to imagine, that such errors are the sources of
all immorality?

And here it may be proper to observe, that if moral distinctions be
derived from the truth or falshood of those judgments, they must take
place wherever we form the judgments; nor will there be any difference,
whether the question be concerning an apple or a kingdom, or whether
the error be avoidable or unavoidable.

For as the very essence of morality is supposed to consist in an
agreement or disagreement to reason, the other circumstances are
entirely arbitrary, and can never either bestow on any action the
character of virtuous or vicious, or deprive it of that character.

To which we may add, that this agreement or disagreement, not
admitting of degrees, all virtues and vices would of course be
equal.

Should it be pretended, that though a mistake of fact be not criminal,
yet a mistake of right often is; and that this may be the source of
immorality: I would answer, that it is impossible such a mistake
can ever be the original source of immorality, since it supposes a
real right and wrong; that is, a real distinction in morals,
independent of these judgments. A mistake, therefore, of right may
become a species of immorality; but it is only a secondary one, and
is founded on some other, antecedent to it.

As to those judgments which are the effects of our actions, and
which, when false, give occasion to pronounce the actions contrary to
truth and reason; we may observe, that our actions never cause any
judgment, either true or false, in ourselves, and that it is only on
others they have such an influence.

It is certain, that an action, on many occasions, may give rise to false
conclusions in others; and that a person, who through a window sees
any lewd behaviour of mine with my neighbour's wife, may be so simple as
to imagine she is certainly my own. In this respect my action resembles
somewhat a lye or falshood; only with this difference, which is
material, that I perform not the action with any intention of giving rise
to a false judgment in another, but merely to satisfy my lust and passion.
It causes, however, a mistake and false judgment by accident; and
the falshood of its effects may be ascribed, by some odd figurative
way of speaking, to the action itself.

But still I can see no pretext of reason for asserting, that the tendency
to cause such an error is the first spring or original source of
all immorality.

[Footnote 12. One might think It were entirely superfluous to prove
this, if a late author [William Wollaston, THE RELIGION OF NATURE DELINEATED
(London 1722)], who has had the good fortune to obtain some reputation,
had not seriously affirmed, that such a falshood is the foundation
of all guilt and moral deformity. That we may discover the fallacy
of his hypothesis, we need only consider, that a false conclusion is
drawn from an action, only by means of an obscurity of natural
principles, which makes a cause be secretly interrupted In its
operation, by contrary causes, and renders the connexion betwixt
two objects uncertain and variable.

Now, as a like uncertainty and variety of causes take place, even
in natural objects, and produce a like error in our judgment, if that
tendency to produce error were the very essence of vice and immorality,
it should follow, that even inanimate objects might be vicious and
immoral.

One might think It were entirely superfluous to prove this, if a
late author [William Wollaston, THE RELIGION OF NATURE
DELINEATED (London 1722)], who has had the good fortune to obtain
some reputation, had not seriously affirmed, that such a falshood
is the foundation of all guilt and moral deformity.

That we may discover the fallacy of his hypothesis, we need only consider,
that a false conclusion is drawn from an action, only by means of an
obscurity of natural principles, which makes a cause be secretly interrupted
In its operation, by contrary causes, and renders the connexion
betwixt two objects uncertain and variable. Now, as a like
uncertainty and variety of causes take place, even in natural objects,
and produce a like error in our judgment, if that tendency to produce
error were the very essence of vice and immorality, it should follow,
that even inanimate objects might be vicious and immoral.

It is in vain to urge, that inanimate objects act without liberty and
choice.

For as liberty and choice are not necessary to make an action produce
in us an erroneous conclusion, they can be, in no respect, essential
to morality; and I do not readily perceive, upon this system, how they
can ever come to be regarded by it. If the tendency to cause error
be the origin of immorality, that tendency and immorality would in every
case be inseparable.

Add to this, that if I had used the precaution of shutting the windows,
while I indulged myself in those liberties with my neighbour's wife, I
should have been guilty of no immorality; and that because my action,
being perfectly concealed, would have had no tendency to produce any false
conclusion.

For the same reason, a thief, who steals In by a ladder at a window,
and takes all imaginable care to cause no disturbance, is in no respect
criminal. For either he will not be perceived, or if he be, it is
impossible he can produce any error, nor will any one, from these
circumstances, take him to be other than what he really is.

It is well known, that those who are squint-sighted, do very readily
cause mistakes in others, and that we Imagine they salute or are talking
to one person, while they address themselves to anther. Are they therefore,
upon that account, immoral?

Besides, we may easily observe, that in all those arguments there
is an evident reasoning in a circle. A person who takes possession of
another's goods, and uses them as his own, in a manner declares them
to be his own; and this falshood is the source of the immorality of
injustice. But is property, or right, or obligation, intelligible,
without an antecedent morality?

A man that is ungrateful to his benefactor, in a manner affirms, that
he never received any favours from him. But in what manner? Is it because
it is his duty to be grateful?

But this supposes, that there is some antecedent rule of duty and morals.
Is it because human nature is generally grateful, and makes us conclude,
that a man who does any harm never received any favour from the
person he harmed? But human nature is not so generally grateful, as
to justify such a conclusion. Or if it were, is an exception to a general
rule in every case criminal, for no other reason than because it is an
exception?

But what may suffice entirely to destroy this whimsical system is,
that it leaves us under the same difficulty to give a reason why
truth is virtuous and falshood vicious, as to account for the merit
or turpitude of any other action.

I shall allow, if you please, that all immorality is derived from
this supposed falshood in action, provided you can give me any
plausible reason, why such a falshood is immoral.

If you consider rightly of the matter, you will find yourself in the
same difficulty as at the beginning.

This last argument is very conclusive; because, if there be not an evident
merit or turpitude annexed to this species of truth or falahood, It can
never have any influence upon our actions. For, who ever thought of
forbearing any action, because others might possibly draw false conclusions
from it? Or, who ever performed any, that he might give rise to true
conclusions?]

Thus upon the whole, it is impossible, that the distinction betwixt moral
good and evil, can be made to reason; since that distinction has an
influence upon our actions, of which reason alone is incapable.
Reason and judgment may, indeed, be the mediate cause of an action, by
prompting, or by directing a passion: But it is not pretended, that a
judgment of this kind, either in its truth or falshood, is attended
with virtue or vice. And as to the judgments, which are caused by our
judgments, they can still less bestow those moral qualities on the actions,
which are their causes.

But to be more particular, and to shew, that those eternal immutable
fitnesses and unfitnesses of things cannot be defended by sound
philosophy, we may weigh the following considerations.

If the thought and understanding were alone capable of fixing the boundaries
of right and wrong, the character of virtuous and vicious either
must lie in some relations of objects, or must be a matter of fact,
which is discovered by our reasoning. This consequence is evident.
As the operations of human understanding divide themselves into two kinds,
the comparing of ideas, and the inferring of matter of fact; were
virtue discovered by the understanding; it must be an object of one
of these operations, nor is there any third operation of the
understanding.
which can discover it. There has been an opinion very industriously
propagated by certain philosophers, that morality is susceptible of
demonstration; and though no one has ever been able to advance a single
step in those demonstrations; yet it is taken for granted, that this
science may be brought to an equal certainty with geometry or
algebra.

Upon this supposition. vice and virtue must consist in some relations;
since it is allowed on all hands, that no matter of fact is capable
of being demonstrated. Let us, therefore, begin with examining this
hypothesis, and endeavour, if possible, to fix those moral qualities,
which have been so long the objects of our fruitless researches.
Point out distinctly the relations, which constitute morality or obligation,
that we may know wherein they consist, and after what manner we must
judge of them.

If you assert, that vice and virtue consist in relations susceptible
of certainty and demonstration, you must confine yourself to those
four relations, which alone admit of that degree of evidence; and in
that case you run into absurdities, from which you will never be able
to extricate yourself. For as you make the very essence of morality to
lie in the relations, and as there is no one of these relations
but what is applicable, not only to an irrational, but also to an inanimate
object; it follows, that even such objects must be susceptible of merit
or demerit. RESEMBLANCE, CONTRARIETY, DEGREES IN QUALITY, and PROPORTIONS
IN QUANTITY AND NUMBER; all these relations belong as properly to
matter, as to our actions, passions, and volitions. It is unquestionable,
therefore, that morality lies not in any of these relations, nor the
sense of it in their discovery.

[Footnote 13. As a proof, how confused our way of thinking on this
subject commonly is, we may observe, that those who assert, that
morality is demonstrable, do not say, that morality lies in the relations,
and that the relations are distinguishable by reason. They only say, that
reason can discover such an action, In such relations, to be virtuous,
and such another vicious. It seems they thought it sufficient, if they
could bring the word, Relation, into the proposition, without
troubling themselves whether it was to the purpose or not.

But here, I think, is plain argument. Demonstrative reason discovers only
relations. But that reason, according to this hypothesis, discovers
also vice and virtue. These moral qualities, therefore, must be
relations. When we blame any action, in any situation, the whole
complicated object, of action and situation, must form certain
relations, wherein the essence of vice consists. This hypothesis is
not otherwise intelligible. For what does reason discover, when it
pronounces any action vicious? Does it discover a relation or a matter
of fact?

These questions are decisive, and must not be eluded.]
Should it be asserted, that the sense of morality consists in the discovery
of some relation, distinct from these, and that our enumeration was
not compleat, when we comprehended all demonstrable relations under
four general heads: To this I know not what to reply, till some one be
so good as to point out to me this new relation. It is impossible to
refute a system, which has never yet been explained. In such a manner
of fighting in the dark, a man loses his blows in the air, and often
places them where the enemy is not present.

I must, therefore, on this occasion, rest contented with requiring the
two following conditions of any one that would undertake to clear up this
system. First, As moral good and evil belong only to the actions
of the mind, and are derived from our situation with regard to
external objects, the relations, from which these moral distinctions
arise, must lie only betwixt internal actions, and external objects, and
must not be applicable either to internal actions, compared among
themselves, or to external objects, when placed in opposition to
other external objects.

For as morality is supposed to attend certain relations, if these relations
coued belong to internal actions considered singly, it would follow,
that we might be guilty of crimes in ourselves, and independent of
our situation, with respect to the universe: And in like manner,
if these moral relations coued be applied to external objects, it
would follow, that even inanimate beings would be susceptible of
moral beauty and deformity.

Now it seems difficult to imagine, that any relation can be discovered
betwixt our passions, volitions and actions, compared to external
objects, which relation might not belong either to these passions
and volitions, or to these external objects, compared among themselves.

But it will be still more difficult to fulfil the second condition,
requisite to justify this system. According to the principles of
those who maintain an abstract rational difference betwixt moral good
and evil, and a natural fitness and unfitness of things, it is not
only supposed, that these relations, being eternal and immutable, are the
same, when considered by every rational creature, but their effects
are also supposed to be necessarily the same; and it is concluded they
have no less, or rather a greater, influence in directing the will of
the deity, than in governing the rational and virtuous of our own
species.

These two particulars are evidently distinct. It is one thing to
know virtue, and another to conform the will to it. In order, therefore,
to prove, that the measures of right and wrong are eternal laws,
obligatory on every rational mind, it is not sufficient to shew the
relations upon which they are founded: We must also point out the connexion
betwixt the relation and the will; and must prove that this connexion is
so necessary, that in every well-disposed mind, it must take place and
have its influence; though the difference betwixt these minds be
in other respects immense and infinite.

Now besides what I have already proved, that even in human nature no
relation can ever alone produce any action: besides this, I say, it
has been shewn, in treating of the understanding, that there is no
connexion of cause and effect, such as this is supposed to be, which
is discoverable otherwise than by experience, and of which we can
pretend to have any security by the simple consideration of the
objects.

All beings in the universe, considered in themselves, appear entirely
loose and independent of each other. It is only by experience we learn
their influence and connexion; and this influence we ought never to
extend beyond experience.

Thus it will be impossible to fulfil the first condition required to the
system of eternal measures of right and wrong; because it is impossible
to shew those relations, upon which such a distinction may be founded:
And it is as impossible to fulfil the second condition; because we
cannot prove A PRIORI, that these relations, if they really existed
and were perceived, would be universally forcible and obligatory.

But to make these general reflections more dear and convincing, we may
illustrate them by some particular instances, wherein this character
of moral good or evil is the most universally acknowledged.

Of all crimes that human creatures are capable of committing, the
most horrid and unnatural is ingratitude, especially when it is
committed against parents, and appears in the more flagrant instances
of wounds and death.

This is acknowledged by all mankind, philosophers as well as the people;
the question only arises among philosophers, whether the guilt or moral
deformity of this action be discovered by demonstrative reasoning,
or be felt by an internal sense, and by means of some sentiment,
which the reflecting on such an action naturally occasions.

This question will soon be decided against the former opinion, if we can
shew the same relations in other objects, without the notion of
any guilt or iniquity attending them.

Reason or science is nothing but the comparing of ideas, and the
discovery of their relations; and if the same relations have different
characters, it must evidently follow, that those characters are not
discovered merely by reason.

To put the affair, therefore, to this trial, let us chuse any inanimate
object, such as an oak or elm; and let us suppose, that by the
dropping of its seed, it produces a sapling below it, which springing
up by degrees, at last overtops and destroys the parent tree: I
ask, if in this instance there be wanting any relation, which is
discoverable in parricide or ingratitude?

Is not the one tree the cause of the other's existence; and the latter
the cause of the destruction of the former, in the same manner as when
a child murders his parent? It is not sufficient to reply, that a
choice or will is wanting.
For in the case of parricide, a will does not give rise to any DIFFERENT
relations, but is only the cause from which the action is derived; and
consequently produces the same relations, that in the oak or elm arise
from some other principles. It is a will or choice, that determines
a man to kill his parent; and they are the laws of matter and motion,
that determine a sapling to destroy the oak, from which it sprung. Here
then the same relations have different causes; but still the
relations are the same: And as their discovery is not in both cases
attended with a notion of immorality, it follows, that that notion
does not arise from such a discovery.

But to chuse an instance, still more resembling; I would fain ask any
one, why incest in the human species is criminal, and why the very same
action, and the same relations in animals have not the smallest moral
turpitude and deformity? If it be answered, that this action is innocent
in animals, because they have not reason sufficient to discover its
turpitude; but that man, being endowed with that faculty which
ought to restrain him to his duty, the same action instantly becomes
criminal to him; should this be said, I would reply, that this is
evidently arguing in a circle.

For before reason can perceive this turpitude, the turpitude must exist;
and consequently is independent of the decisions of our reason, and
is their object more properly than their effect. According to this system,
then, every animal, that has sense, and appetite, and will; that is,
every animal must be susceptible of all the same virtues and vices,
for which we ascribe praise and blame to human creatures. All the difference
is, that our superior reason may serve to discover the vice or virtue,
and by that means may augment the blame or praise: But still this
discovery supposes a separate being in these moral distinctions, and
a being, which depends only on the will and appetite, and which, both
in thought and reality, may be distinguished from the reason. Animals
are susceptible of the same relations, with respect to each other, as
the human species, and therefore would also be susceptible of the
same morality, if the essence of morality consisted in these
relations.

Their want of a sufficient degree of reason may hinder them from
perceiving the duties and obligations of morality, but can never
hinder these duties from existing; since they must antecedently
exist, in order to their being perceived.

Reason must find them, and can never produce them. This argument
deserves to be weighed, as being, in my opinion, entirely decisive.

Nor does this reasoning only prove, that morality consists not in any
relations, that are the objects of science; but if examined, will prove
with equal certainty, that it consists not in any matter of fact, which
can be discovered by the understanding. This is the second part of our
argument; and if it can be made evident, we may conclude, that morality
is not an object of reason. But can there be any difficulty in
proving, that vice and virtue are not matters of fact, whose
existence we can infer by reason?

Take any action allowed to be vicious: Wilful murder, for instance. Examine
it in all lights, and see if you can find that matter of fact, or
real existence, which you call vice. In which-ever way you take it,
you find only certain passions, motives, volitions and thoughts.

There is no other matter of fact in the case. The vice entirely escapes
you, as long as you consider the object. You never can find it, till
you turn your reflection into your own breast, and find a sentiment
of disapprobation, which arises in you, towards this action.
Here is a matter of fact; but it is the object of feeling, not of reason.
It lies in yourself, not in the object. So that when you pronounce
any action or character to be vicious, you mean nothing, but that from
the constitution of your nature you have a feeling or sentiment
of blame from the contemplation of it.

"I think so, too," I replied. "Don't be afraid. I shan't trouble either
of you after to-night. I'll not go in your motor, but I'll go to your
house and fetch my trunk. As for the things you were giving to the
refugees, I'll take them or not, as you like."

"I'd like to have the rubbish out of the way and see the last of it,"
said Diana; and looked as if she would gladly see the last of me.

I apologized prettily to the princess, explaining how early were the
hours of "The Haven," and how much there was to do there. She forgave me
with all her gracious charm, pressing my hand as if to show her
gratitude for a certain incident which could not be mentioned in words;
and five minutes later I was spinning alone in a taxi toward Park Lane.


CHAPTER XXIII


I had been offered the help of Celestine and Sidney's man to make up in
parcels such clothes as I wished to take for our refugees and their
menfolk; but now I determined to do all the work myself. The
bored-looking footman who opened the house-door showed no surprise or
interest on seeing her Ladyship's sister arrive in advance of the rest.
He listened respectfully but dully as I briefly explained my errand and
told him that I should need no help until I rang for my trunk and other
things to be carried downstairs. When I had made this clear, I ran up to
the room above Diana's and shut myself in, meaning to make such haste
with what I had to do as to escape with my booty, if possible, before Di
and her husband came home.

I was trembling still with excitement which clouded my mind and kept me
from thinking clearly; for I was furiously angry and desperately sad at
the same time. I said to myself that I didn't care if I never saw Diana
again; yet my heart was ready to break because we had come to the
parting of the ways. To-night, I thought, I was definitely giving up my
family, or my family were giving me up, it mattered very little which.
My father had never cared for me, therefore I had not cared for him as
most girls care for their fathers. Di had made use of me, but had never
loved me, and I had "seen through" her ever since I was a tiny child.
Lately we became almost as strangers; and yet the two had been the only
ones near to me. Breaking with them was like a small figure in a group
on a big canvas suddenly loosening itself and falling off its
background, a mere lonely bit of paint.

"What will become of me?" I wondered. "I can never go back to Ballyconal
now. Yet I can't spend the rest of my life with the Miss Splatchleys.
What shall I do when I'm not wanted there any more?"

Tears began to drop slowly from my eyes, then to rain fast over the
clothing I tried to sort. I knew it was silly to think of such things.
There would be plenty of time by and by to arrange the future. But I
could not concentrate my mind on the work in hand until, as I tossed the
neatly folded clothes about with a kind of stupid aimlessness, I came
once more upon Sidney Vandyke's khaki uniform.

"This I will not take, anyhow!" I decided. "It would be of no use, and I
do believe it might carry a curse with it, because of the evil thoughts
of the man who wore it last. I wish I could burn it up!"

That I could not do; but to show spite I wreaked such childish vengeance
as I could by dashing the uniform on to the floor and proceeding to
trample on the coat with my high-heeled white satin slippers.

As I kicked it away in loathing at last, one of the slippers flew off
and seemed spitefully to follow the coat as if to deal one final insult.
It turned a somersault on the way, as defiantly as the _Golden Eagle_
had "looped the loop" over German heads at Brussels, and then plumped
down on top of the fallen garment, landing with its pointed satin nose
poked under the flap of a slightly gaping breast-pocket.

I slipped my silk-clad foot into the shoe where it lay, and pushing the
point still further into the pocket, thus lifted the coat on my toe to
give it another disgustful toss. As I did this it seemed that something
crackled with the sound--or the feel, I could hardly tell which--of
stiff paper. Then a very strange thing happened to me: suddenly I saw
before my eyes, as clearly as though it were really there, the
khaki-coloured notebook I had given Eagle--the notebook out of which he
had torn a leaf with a message written on it for Major Vandyke.

I didn't know (I don't know now, and never shall) what painted this
picture on my brain: whether it was the high, mysterious Power which had
been leading me slowly but very surely to this minute, or whether it was
nothing more than a mental association between a khaki coat worn by
Eagle's enemy on that disastrous night and a faint crackle of paper
jarring tensely on strung nerves. I know which I _like_ to think; but in
either case the effect was the same.

I saw the notebook. I saw Eagle hastily scrawling his appeal for a
written order to fire the guns. I saw Major Vandyke wearing this coat,
read the message, crumple up the paper, and then--then--the vision
faded. But the question rang in my ears: what would he be likely to do
with the paper? What should _I_ have done had I been a man in his place?
Would I have torn the message into bits and trusted to the wind to
scatter it?...

No! If I meant to swear that no such document had ever reached me, I
should have been afraid to leave bits of khaki-coloured, blue-lined
paper lying about the ground. I should have crumpled the message deep
down in the bottom of a pocket, and burnt it later, when I was safe in
my own tent. Yes, that was what any man as quick-witted and unscrupulous
as Sidney Vandyke would have been likely to do. He could not possibly
have forgotten such a bit of evidence afterward, and left it in the
pocket of his coat instead of destroying it; such things could happen
only in the crudest melodramas, where the actors were mere puppets for
uncritical and ignorant audiences to applaud. It was wildly absurd to
dream that I might find any hidden treasure tucked away in a
breast-pocket of Sidney Vandyke's cast-off uniform; and I did not for a
moment believe it; yet the vision of the khaki-coloured paper had been
so clear that I dared not resist the impulse it prompted.

I picked up the coat, holding it away from me gingerly, by the collar,
as a small white cat might grip a large brown rat by the back of its
neck. Then, also gingerly, I dipped my fingers into one pocket after
another. All were empty: yet now quite distinctly I heard a crisp,
delicate crackling of paper.

It was like searching for a ghost and seeing no sign, but catching a
faint echo of invisible feet. Something was hidden there. I could not be
mistaken. Perhaps the thing when found would not be worth finding; but a
thousand times over, it was worth the pain of looking for.

I cleared a place on the large table which had been spread with
contributions for the refugees, and laid the coat out flat. All over the
two fronts I slowly, carefully, passed my fingers until, between the
cloth and lining, far down on the left side near the edge of the coat, I
touched the thing that crackled.

Whatever it was, this thing must have slipped down through a break in
one of the pockets. I explored again, and discovered a small rip not
more than two inches in length at the bottom of the inside
breast-pocket. But the lost bit of paper could not be got at through
this opening. The lining of the coat would have to be slit down before
the hidden thing could be reached, and I pulled the pocket wrong side
out, hoping with a quick jerk to tear it from the coat. More easily said
than done! The material was expensively tough, and resisted my frantic
tuggings, yet I wouldn't give up. I dared not go foraging downstairs for
a pair of scissors; neither did I wish to ring for a servant to bring me
them. I wanted desperately to be alone with this cast-off garment of
Sidney Vandyke's--alone with any secret I might force it to yield up.

The coat seemed to resist every effort and trick of mine, as if it still
served its old master and were stubbornly resolved to protect him
against a stranger's prying; but at last a sharp jerk made a stitch give
way. After that the rest was easy. I wrenched the pocket half out, and
that once done I was able with both hands to tear the lining down nearly
its whole length. Then I thrust my hand between it and the cloth, and
touched a crumpled piece of paper.

I dreaded while I longed to look at what I had discovered: for I
realized that in all human probability I was about to suffer a crushing
disappointment. This lost scrap of paper might prove to be part of some
torn, irrelevant letter of long ago; or it might be an American
greenback, or a forgotten memorandum. As I withdrew my hand--the paper
in it--involuntarily I shut my eyes, as if shrinking from a blow. But I
scolded myself for cowardly weakness, and opened my eyes again to see a
folded, refolded, and crumpled piece of khaki-coloured paper ruled with
blue lines. Then I knew that, from the first faint crackling which I had
felt rather than heard, I had been sure in my heart of finding this
thing: sure that I had always been meant by Fate to find it.

With cold and shaking fingers I cautiously unfolded the paper without
tearing it. Yes! It was a leaf torn from a notebook--the khaki notebook
I had given Eagle. One page was blank. The other was almost covered with
writing, scribbled with blue pencil, a pencil which must have been
rather blunt, because the marking was heavy, though it showed signs of
haste. No one familiar with Eagle March's hand could have failed to
recognize it as his, rough and hurried as was the scrawl.

At the top of the page was jotted down the date of that unforgettable
night at El Paso.

     "Have just received by your orderly verbal command to fire nos. one
     and two guns, aiming beyond Mexican end of bridge. I beg if this is
     correct that you repeat order in writing.

     "MARCH."

Here was the evidence which would have saved Eagle at his court-martial
and proved Major Vandyke a liar and blackguard. He had, no doubt,
crushed the incriminating paper into the deepest depths of his
breast-pocket, perhaps covering it up with other things lest it should
flutter away and betray him. There had been no time to destroy the paper
at that moment, and so he had put off disposing of it until after his
famous rush across the Rio Grande had been safely accomplished. When he
returned and could get back to his own tent, his first thought must have
been of the document whose existence he meant to deny. "The objection
will, of course, be raised that these continual changes of government
will involve a certain amount of disorder; that one system will
scarcely be working before it is superseded by another; that the
rapid alterations in the _personnel_ of the judicature, civil
service and police will be inconvenient; that everything, in fact,
will be in a muddle.

But by how much is not well-organised muddle to be preferred to unsystematic
anarchy? And as each type of government recurs in due course will it not
be found to work more simply and satisfactorily?

"To those who shrug their shoulders and say that a series of
kaleidoscopic changes in Irish administration would never be approved
by the good sense of the British electorate I can only urge that
it is precisely this attitude of intolerance towards and ignorance
of Irish psychology which has rendered our behaviour to Ireland for
so many centuries a by-word not only throughout Europe but the whole
civilised world and the United States of America.

"I am, Sir, yours, etc."
Through some accident or other, either because I have not followed exactly
the prescribed rules of the competition, such as writing on one side
of the paper only, or addressing it from the National Liberal Club,
or obtaining the signature of five witnesses, my solution has not
yet appeared in _The Times_ or in _The Westminster Gazette_ either.

Feeling it a pity, however, that any helpful suggestion should be
lost at a time when never in the annals of Irish misgovernment has
vacillation vacillated so vacillatingly as it does to-day, I have
repeated my strong but simple proposals here.

K.

* * * * *
"Clever forgeries of Fisher notes are in circulation in St.
Pancras.

Last night, during the busy period, a number of publications in the
Kentish Town district were victimised."--_Evening Paper_.

We had no idea that Kentish Town was such a literary centre.

* * * * *
"Even Paris seems willing this season to add a few inches to the length
of skirts, and six to eight inches is becoming the accepted length for
street wear.

This is an excellent length, not so long as to endanger the chic
of the costume, nor so short as to be unbecoming in either sense
of the word."

--_Fashion Paper_.

We refrain from any speculations as to the previous length of these
skirts before the "few inches" were added.

* * * * *
[Illustration: THE POLISH HUG.

BOLSHEVIST. "YOUR ATTITUDE CONVINCES ME, KAMERAD, THAT WE WERE MEANT TO
BE FRIENDS."]
* * * * *
[Illustration: _Willium_ (_having at critical stage in four-handed
game undertaken to spot the red_).

"'TIS ALL OVER, GEARGE--MY HAND BE STUCK IN THE POCKUT."]
* * * * *
ELIZABETH OUTWITTED.

"An' when I dies they give me fifteen pounds on the nail an' no waitin',"
said Elizabeth triumphantly, as she explained her latest insurance
scheme.

"On what nail?" I asked distrustfully. I could not understand why
Elizabeth felt justified in paying sixpence per week for a benefit fraught
with so little ultimate joy to herself.

But she is the sort of girl that can never resist the back-door tout. She
is constantly being persuaded to buy something for which she pays a small
weekly sum.

This is entered in a book, and the only conditions are that she must
continue paying that sum for the rest of her natural lifetime.

On these lines Elizabeth has "put in" for many articles in the
course of her chequered career.

She has had fleeting possession of a steel engraving of QUEEN VICTORIA,
a watch that never would go--until her payments ceased--a
sewing-machine (treadle), a set of vases and a marble timepiece. The
timepiece, she explained, was destined for "the bottom drawer," which
she had begun to furnish from the moment a young man first inquired
which was her night out.

As all these things were taken from her directly her payments fell
off, I thought I had better give her the benefit of my ripe judgment.
"I shouldn't buy anything on the instalment plan, if I were you," I
advised. "Some people seem to be made for the system, but you are not
one of them."
"But I 'aven't told you wot I'm buyin' now," she said excitedly,
putting a plate on the rack as she spoke.

I ought to say she meant to put it on the rack; that it fell two inches
short wasn't Elizabeth's fault.
"It was cracked afore," she murmured mechanically as she gathered
up the fragments. "Yes, I pays a shillin' a week an' I gets a
grammerfone." 
"A what?" I gasped.
"A grammerfone--to play, you know."
"Where will it play?" I asked feebly.
"'Ere," she said, waving a comprehensive hand; "an' it won't 'arf
liven the place up. My friend 'as 'ers goin' all day long."
I stifled a moan of horror, for I am one of the elect few who loathe
gramophones, even at their best and costliest.You've some
horrid idea in your head. I read that in your face the instant I saw you
here. You mean mischief. What's in your mind I don't know, but I _shall_
know! You'd better tell me!"

"I've told you all I have to tell," I said. "If I'm a wild-cat, you're a
tigress. What will the servants think if they come and see you like
this?"

"I don't care what they think. And besides, they won't come. I've
changed my mind about giving you that coat. I must ask Sidney first if
he wants to keep it for any reason. I'll let you know to-morrow."

"To-morrow will be too late. I've to see my man to-night."

"Why are you taking him the coat, and not the rest of the suit?" she
persisted.

"It's only the coat that will be of use to him." I had the answer ready.

Without warning she made another dive at the coat to catch me unawares.
She failed and my hold tightened; but the sudden wrench twisted the
thing partly wrong side out, to show the lining. The cry Diana gave, the
horror that flashed in lightning from her eyes, told me what she had
seen, what she must have guessed.

"My God, Peggy!" she gasped. "You believe _that_ of him? You were
seeking for--but you found nothing. Of course--of course you found
nothing!"

"There's nothing there now," I said, trying not to let my voice tremble.

Diana's eyes searched mine. They were dilated. Her face, and even her
lips--always coral red--were sickly pale. "What do you mean?" she asked
in a low, choked voice. "Do you mean that you did find--oh! I see
now--the whole disgraceful thing! You were taking this coat to Eagle
March. You traitor! I thank God I came in time."

She seized me by both shoulders. Her white hands, with their rose-pink
nails and little round dimples at the finger roots, felt hard and
remorseless as steel claws. She looked suddenly capable of anything. The
thought struck on my heart like a hammer-stroke that she would stop at
nothing to save Sidney's reputation. For the first time, I was afraid
for myself. I was afraid she would be too strong for me. She would push
me along the corridor and through the open door into her room. If I
screamed she would tell the servants I had gone mad. She would get the
coat away from me. She would find the paper, if she had to tear my
clothes off to do it. Once inside the room, she would have all the
advantage if she could turn the key and lock us in together. I, too, was
in a mood to stop at nothing. I was fighting for the man I loved. She
was fighting merely for a man with whom her fate was bound up; but in
strength of body I was no match for her. It was only in a battle of wits
that I might have a fair chance. But on the other side of her door it
would be too late to use my brains.

"It's now or never!" I thought.

Clutching the coat for dear life with one hand, with the other I
snatched at the pearls which were the "immediate jewels" of my sister's
soul. I gave the double rope a sharp jerk, and with a snap the string
yielded. Pearls spouted in all directions like a creamy spray, and with
a cry, involuntarily Diana loosened her hold on me to save them. That
was my chance! I ducked under her arms and dashed downstairs--like a
streak of lightning. Before Diana had run halfway down I was at the
door. For an instant I fumbled in an anguish of suspense at the catch.
Then it yielded. I slammed the door in Di's face, and bare-shouldered as
I was (I had taken off my wrap to do the packing) I ran like a rabbit
after a taxi I saw at a little distance.

"Taxi, taxi!" I called. And though my lips were dry and my voice seemed
to my own ears almost inaudible, as when one tries to scream in a
nightmare, the man heard and stopped. Luckily the taxi was empty. If it
had not been things might have ended differently; for as I scrambled in,
panting, "Quick, number 21a Whitehall Court!" I saw, with one corner of
my eye, that Diana stood in the doorway looking out.


CHAPTER XXIV


As the taxi sped away with me, the relief was so great that I lay back
on the seat, limp and half fainting. I let myself rest there, revelling
in safety after the strain of danger. Nothing could keep me now from
Eagle, I told myself, and nothing could stand between him and his
righteous revenge on Sidney Vandyke. If he were not at home when I got
to Whitehall Court I would wait until he came, even if I had to sit in
the taxi, within sight of his door, all night. But he _would_ be at
home! I felt that, when he left the Russian Embassy, he had been in no
mood to go anywhere else, unless for a lonely walk; and, even so, he
ought to have got back by this time. He had left before I had, and I
must have arrived at Diana's an hour ago.

It was only when the taxi drew up in Whitehall Court that I remembered
leaving my little gold bag--a present from Kitty--with my discarded
cloak in Park Lane. All the money I had was in the bag. I could not pay
the chauffeur; but, in any case, I meant to keep him till I learned
whether or no Eagle were at home.

To my chagrin, the man looked dubious. "How long, Miss, will you want me
to wait?" he inquired.

I explained that I could not tell yet. I must find out whether the
friend I had come to see were in. If not I might need to keep the taxi a
long time.

"Very sorry, Miss," the chauffeur replied, "but I have an appointment in
a quarter of an hour from now in Downing Street with an official
gentleman I serve pretty often. I was on the way there when you called
me; but when you said 'Whitehall Court', I took you up because you
seemed in a hurry and I thought there was plenty of time. I supposed you
was going to stop here, it bein' rather late in the night for a young
lady, but I can't possibly stay more'n five minutes longer. Tell you
what I can do, I'll ask another feller to come along and wait for you."

There was no help for it. I had to confess that I was penniless, having
forgotten my money. "But here's a bangle," I said, slipping my one bit
of jewellery off my arm. "You can have this for security. If you'll give
me your card I'll send the money to-morrow, and I'll trust you to send
back the bangle."

I held it out to him: a thin band of gold with a four-leaved shamrock
made of emeralds--a present from Tony, which he had implored me to keep
in memory of our "friendship".

The chauffeur hesitated, evidently asking himself whether or no I might
be trusted without the security. As he turned the bangle over in his
hand, and the question in his mind, I heard quick steps coming along the
dark street, and looking up, the taxi lights showed me Eagle March's
face. He was far more surprised than I was, because it had already
occurred to me that he might cool his brain with a solitary stroll in
the night.

"Oh, Eagle!" I exclaimed, giving him hardly time to be sure of
recognition. "How thankful I am that you appeared just at the right
minute. I've come to see you about something _very_ important, and I
haven't a penny."

No doubt Eagle was astonished that I should be arriving alone,
cloakless, at half-past eleven or later to call upon him; but after the
first look of amazement at sight of me, he concealed his feelings. For a
second--no longer--he hesitated. Then he said, smiling, "I have plenty
of pennies! Don't you think I'd better get into your taxi with you, and
drive round for a few minutes rather than you should--have the trouble
of coming into my place?"

"The driver has an engagement," I said. "And, anyhow, I _must_ come in.
It's really serious, Eagle."

He argued no more, though he looked somewhat troubled for my sake. I
understood very well his state of mind. He paid and tipped the
chauffeur, who handed back my bangle and darted off.

"Were you going to give the fellow that?" Eagle asked, nodding at the
gold band. "Then it must indeed be serious. I once heard you say at El
Paso that it was your most valued possession!"

"Fancy your remembering!" I said.

"I remember lots of things concerning you," he answered, as he guided me
into the big, dignified building whose lights were lowered like most of
London's illuminations in these Zeppelin-haunted times.

"Wish the bangle on for me," I said hastily, at the foot of the stairs,
which we were to ascend rather than expose my uncovered shoulders to the
scandalized eyes of the man in the lift.

"Would Dalziel approve?" he asked, smiling, as I thrust the bangle into
his hand. "You showed it to me in Texas as a 'filopena present' from
Tony."

"You remember that, too? This is the one thing I've kept to remind me of
poor Tony."

"Poor Tony, indeed, if you've sent him about his business."

Eagle slipped the bangle over my hand, looking straight at me, as though
wondering not only why I had come, but why I was so pale and strange.

"Wish that my errand here to-night may end in the greatest and most
glorious success," I prompted him.

He held my wrist for a second or two, wishing silently. Then he dropped
it rather abruptly, and we went upstairs to the first floor, where were
the chambers lent to Eagle by his friend. I felt somehow that, by asking
him for such a wish, I had impressed him with the real importance of my
night visit.

He unlocked the door of the flat with a latch-key and almost pushed me
in, as if fearing that I might be seen and perhaps recognized by some
passing occupant of the house. Switching on the electricity, the
vestibule was lit by a red-shaded light, cheerfully welcoming. Off it
opened two or three rooms, and Eagle ushered me into a large
oak-panelled study, lined with bookshelves and having long windows,
which, when uncurtained, would look out on the Embankment. Now they were
draped with crimson velvet, the sort of hangings that normal men with no
female belongings invariably choose. By the door stood a tall folding
screen, covered with red satin and oriental embroidery. There were
bronzes and a few marble busts on top of the low bookshelves; on the oak
panelling, here and there, hung a huge Chinese plate, here and there a
sporting picture. With one glance I took in the whole interior, and saw
that it was thoroughly masculine. In a large fireplace some logs of
wood, evidently not long ago ignited, were crackling. Suddenly aware
that I was very cold, I walked across the room and--shivering--held out
my hands to the blaze. But I still kept the khaki coat hanging over my
arm.

"Poor child, you look frozen!" said Eagle. "Why didn't you put on your
coat?"

'We shall never be able to see it all,' said Serge, smiling and waving
his hand.

'It would be very nice to sit down here, amongst all this perfume.'
Near them there was a large patch of heliotropes, whose vanilla-like
breath permeated the air with velvety softness.

They sat down upon one of the fallen columns, in the midst of a cluster
of magnificent lilies which had shot up there.

They had been walking for more than an hour.
They had wandered on through the flowers from the roses to the
lilies.

These offered them a calm, quiet haven after their lovers' ramble amid the
perfumed solicitations of luscious honeysuckle, musky violets, verbenas
that breathed out the warm scent of kisses, and tuberoses that
panted with voluptuous passion.

The lilies, with their tall slim stems, shot up round them like a white
pavilion and sheltered them with snowy cups, gleaming only with
the gold of their slender pistils.

And there they rested, like betrothed children in a tower of purity; an
impregnable ivory tower, where all their love was yet perfect
innocence.

Albine and Serge lingered amongst the lilies till evening. They felt so
happy there, and seemed to break out into a new life. Serge felt the
last trace of fever leave his hands, while Albine grew quite white,
with a milky whiteness untinted by any rosy hue. They were unconscious
that their arms and necks and shoulders were bare, and their straying
unconfined hair in nowise troubled them. They laughed merrily one at
the other, with frank open laughter.

The expression of their eyes retained the limpid calmness of clear
spring water. When they quitted the lilies, their feelings were but those
of children ten years old; it seemed to them that they had just met each
other in that garden so that they might be friends for ever and amuse
themselves with perpetual play. And as they returned through the
parterre, the very flowers bore themselves discreetly, as though
they were glad to see their childishness, and would do nothing that
might corrupt them. The forests of peonies, the masses of carnations,
the carpets of forget-me-nots, the curtains of clematis now steeped
in the atmosphere of evening, slumbering in childlike purity akin
to their own, no longer spread suggestions of voluptuousness around
them.

The pansies looked up at them with their little candid faces, like
playfellows; and the languid mignonette, as Albine's white skirt
brushed by it, seemed full of compassion, and held its breath
lest it should fan their love prematurely into life.

VIII

At dawn the next day it was Serge who called Albine.

She slept in a room on the upper floor. He looked up at her window and
saw her throw open the shutters just as she had sprung out of bed.

They laughed merrily as their eyes met.

'You must not go out to-day,' said Albine, when she came down. 'We must
stay indoors and rest. To-morrow I will take you a long, long way
off, to a spot where we can have a very jolly time.'

'But sha'n't we grow tired of stopping here?' muttered Serge.

'Oh, dear no! I will tell you stories.'
They passed a delightful day.

The windows were thrown wide open, and all the beauty of the Paradou
came in and rejoiced with them in the room.

Serge now really took possession of that delightful room, where he
imagined he had been born.

He insisted upon seeing everything, and upon having everything explained
to him.

To mention that,
I thought, might seem as if I were trying to boast of what I had done.
Then, when I had explained how I dashed out of the house, leaving
everything but the coat, which would be invaluable as proof, I hurried
on, lest he should ask questions I didn't wish to answer.

"What has become of the notebook?" I wanted to know. "I hope you've got
it?"

"Better than that," Eagle said. "If I'd had it in my possession all this
time I might have written this message whenever I chose, torn out the
leaf, and pretended that it had been done on the night of the gunfiring.
Luckily Dell, the friend who defended me in my trial, kept the book. It
was produced at the court-martial in my defence, and the torn edge
shown, with the marks on the next page made by pressing down heavily
with a blunt pencil. Vague traces of words could be seen, but even with
a magnifying glass they couldn't be read. There was no evidence that
amounted to anything, but my friend kept the book. He said it might be
of use some day. I had no such hope, but now--my God, Peggy, with that
coat and your story, the case against Vandyke seems to me complete!"

"How thankful I am to hear you say that!" I almost sobbed, moved by his
excitement to greater excitement of my own. "I felt it must be so; but
I'm only a girl. I didn't _know_. I couldn't be sure. Oh, Eagle! You'll
never understand what it is to me to think I've been able to help you,
even a little. If it hadn't been for me the dreadful thing would never
have happened. You'd still be just what you were before we met."

"You've not helped me a 'little'; you've given me new life," he said.
"Some time I'll tell you, maybe, why I'd rather have the gift from you
than any one else. But I can't understand what you mean by saying 'the
thing would never have happened' if it hadn't been for you."

"If I hadn't wanted a new dress, and if I hadn't gone to Wardour Street
to sell my lace and make money to buy the frock, we should never have
known each other. You wouldn't have seen Diana; we shouldn't have gone
to America, and if we hadn't gone to America, and met Major Vandyke,
those guns would never have been fired, and heaps of official bother
would have been saved. But far the best of all, _you_ would have been as
happy as ever!'"

"You might as well blame yourself for being born," said Eagle; "and on
my soul, I tell you, Peggy, that even without the new hope you've given
me to-night, I wouldn't go back if I could choose, and be without my
experience in Belgium, or--or without _you_ in my life."

He held out his hands for mine, and I gave them to a grasp that hurt.
Something he was about to say; but before he had time to speak there
came a long shrill peal of the electric bell.

Eagle dropped my hands instantly. "By Jove! It must be Jim. He's
forgotten his key! I don't want him to see you, Peggy. He's a very good
fellow, but a rattle-brain--tells everything he knows. Run behind that
red screen, and when I've got him into his own room, which I'll do
somehow in a few minutes, I'll take you to a taxi, and drive home with
you if it can be managed."

I whisked behind the screen, peeping out to whisper: "Better hide the
khaki coat if you don't want questions!"

Eagle took my advice, handing me the coat to keep for him as he passed
on his way to the door. There was plenty of room to stand behind the
screen without flattening myself against the wall. And without danger of
being seen I could look through the interstices between the leaves of
the screen into the brightly lighted room.

I heard Eagle's footsteps on the parquet floor of the vestibule. I heard
the click of the latch as he opened the door. After that, instead of a
loud, jolly greeting from his friend, there was dead silence for an
instant. Then a woman's voice spoke in a low tone of intense and
passionate eagerness. I had never heard it speak in that tone before.
But with a shock of surprise and fear, I recognized the voice: it was
Diana's.


CHAPTER XXV


My heart stood still. Thinking calmly, it seemed that Diana had no power
to harm Eagle March. I had the coat which betrayed Sidney. Eagle had the
written message, and his friend in America had the notebook out of which
it had been torn. The chain of our evidence was complete. It could not
be broken. Eagle had long ago seen through Diana and ceased to worship
her. Surely she could do nothing with him now, no matter how shamefully
she might humble herself. But I could not think calmly. And as I heard
her sweet, imploring voice, begging to come in, as I realized that Eagle
could not shut her out, a heavy presentiment of failure weighed upon me.
We must therefore endeavour to discover by experiments the particular
qualities, by which it is enabled to produce so extraordinary an
effect.

First then I observe, that the present impression has not this effect
by its own proper power and efficacy, and when considered alone, as a
single perception, limited to the present moment. I find, that
an impression, from which, on its first appearance, I can draw no conclusion,
may afterwards become the foundation of belief, when I have had experience
of its usual consequences.

We must in every case have observed the same impression in past
instances, and have found it to be constantly conjoined with some other
impression. This is confirmed by such a multitude of experiments, that
it admits not of the smallest doubt.

From a second observation I conclude, that the belief, which attends the
present impression, and is produced by a number of past impressions
and conjunctions; that this belief, I say, arises immediately,
without any new operation of the reason or imagination.

Of this I can be certain, because I never am conscious of any such
operation, and find nothing in the subject, on which it can be founded.
Now as we call every thing CUSTOM, which proceeds from a past repetition,
without any new reasoning or conclusion, we-may establish it as a
certain truth, that all the belief, which follows upon any present
impression, is derived solely from that origin.

When we are accustomed to see two impressions conjoined together, the
appearance or idea of the one immediately carries us to the idea of the
other.

Being fully satisfyed on this head, I make a third set of experiments,
in order to know, whether any thing be requisite, beside the
customary transition, towards the production of this phaenomenon
of belief.

I therefore change the first impression into an idea; and observe, that
though the customary transition to the correlative idea still
remains, yet there is in reality no belief nor perswasion.

"Really, I am not so very formidable, Lady Diana," said Eagle, with cool
scorn that showed in tone and manner. "But if I may ask--since you stand
in such dread of me, why do you come to beard the lion in his den?"

"Because the lion is brave and kingly I have ventured. I _had_ to come,
Eagle. There was no other way. I found out your address from your
Russian friend, Major Skobeleff. He happened to mention it, asking me if
I knew Jim White who'd lent the place to you. I didn't guess then how
thankful I'd soon be to know where you lived. Oh, Eagle! Don't look at
me so cruelly! I can't bear it. You hate me, but you mustn't judge. If
you knew everything, you'd see that you'd done me a wrong."

"I should be sorry to think that," said Eagle, as formally as if he
spoke to a stranger. "And you are mistaken if you really suppose I hate
you. I have gone through a good deal lately, Lady Diana, and learned to
see personal things in the right proportion. Let me assure you, my
feelings toward you are not in the least malevolent."

"You mean you don't care for me any more? I ought to be glad, for your
sake and mine, too. But I _did_ love you, Eagle. I truly did, only--I
was a coward. I was deceived, as other people were deceived. And I had
Father to think of as well as myself."

"Don't excuse yourself to me, I beg! All that is past and done with. You
didn't come here I'm sure to----"

"Ah! If the past could be done with! It can't, and that is why I have
come. I know Peggy has been with you. It's useless to tell me she has
not."

"I've no intention of telling you a lie, Lady Diana."

Di broke down, and cried without any effort to restrain herself. She did
not look quite her beautiful self when she cried, but she looked a
hundred times more pathetic. "You won't believe me, I suppose," she
sobbed, "but till to-night I never knew--knew that Sidney had deceived
me. I believed what he told me to believe. It is an awful blow! I
think--my heart is broken. But, oh, God, Eagle, if you ruin him before
the world it will be my death!"

To my astonishment Eagle answered with a laugh--a laugh of exceeding
bitterness.

"You seem to believe and disbelieve easily, Lady Diana Vandyke!" he
said. "Once you believed in me. Then you ceased to believe in me and
threw me over because another man--a richer man than I--told you and
everybody else that I was a liar. You believed in him instead--on his
mere word. You married him. May I ask if he has confessed to you, or do
you take his guilt for granted as you took mine, on circumstantial
evidence?"

"No, he has not confessed anything," Di answered. Yet there was
something in her tone and confused, anxious manner that made me sure she
was not telling the truth. The conviction swept over me that something
had happened at the house in Park Lane since I slammed the front door
and ran out. Diana might have thought twice before coming to grovel here
to Eagle, unless she had been sure that I was not jumping to
conclusions--sure that there could be no possible mistake about _what I
had found in Sidney's coat_. Suddenly I knew as well as if she had put
the story into words that Sidney had come home before she had made up
her mind what to do; that she had told him about the coat, and that I
had carried it off to Eagle March; that Sidney, knowing well what my
discovery must have been, had broken down and sent Diana to Eagle, in
the one last hope that her pleading might save him from his enemy's
revenge.

"I haven't seen Sidney," she hurried on. "But--instinct tells me some
things. I'm afraid--I know that his loving me so much made him cruel to
you. Oh, don't look at me like that. You turn me to ice. It's
true--'cruel' isn't a hard enough word for what he did. I don't try to
excuse him. But he sinned for my sake. The white flowers fell to pieces
as they passed, with a rain of snowy petals which was as refreshing
to their hands as the heavy drops of a thunder shower.

And the red ones grinned with apoplectical faces which perturbed them.

"I forgive you freely, Lady Diana," Eagle answered, "for any injury you
may have done me in the past, for I have lived it down. The injury
Vandyke did me, I thought--till to-night--I could never live down. But
thanks to the most loyal friend a man ever had I've been given my
chance."

