Produced by Stacy Brown, Barbara Tozier, Bill Tozier and
the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net


FREDRIKA BREMER'S WORKS.

THE HOME

OR, LIFE IN SWEDEN.


  TRANSLATED
  BY MARY HOWITT.

  LONDON:
  HENRY G. BOHN, YORK STREET, COVENT GARDEN.
  1853.


C. WHITING, BEAUFORT HOUSE.


THE HOME:

OR, LIFE IN SWEDEN.

PART I.

CHAPTER I.

MORNING DISPUTE AND EVENING CONTENTION.


"My sweet friend," said Judge Frank, in a tone of vexation, "it is not
worth while reading aloud to you if you keep yawning incessantly, and
looking about, first to the right and then to the left;" and with these
words he laid down a treatise of Jeremy Bentham, which he had been
reading, and rose from his seat.

"Ah, forgive me, dear friend!" returned his wife, "but really these good
things are all somewhat indigestible, and I was thinking about----Come
here, dear Brigitta!" said Mrs. Elise Frank, beckoning an old servant to
her, to whom she then spoke in an under tone.

Whilst this was going on, the Judge, a handsome strong-built man of
probably forty, walked up and down the room, and then suddenly pausing
as if in consideration, before one of the walls, he exclaimed to his
wife, who by this time had finished her conversation with the old
servant, "See, love, now if we were to have a door opened here--and it
could very easily be done, for it is only a lath-and-plaster wall--we
could then get so conveniently into our bedroom, without first going
through the sitting-room and the nursery--it would indeed be capital!"

"But then, where could the sofa stand?" answered Elise, with some
anxiety.

"The sofa?" returned her husband; "oh, the sofa could be wheeled a
little aside; there is more than room enough for it."

"But, my best friend," replied she, "there would come a very dangerous
draft from the door to every one who sat in the corner."

"Ah! always difficulties and impediments!" said the husband. "But cannot
you see, yourself, what a great advantage it would be if there were a
door here?"

"No, candidly speaking," said she, "I think it is better as it is."

"Yes, that is always the way with ladies," returned he; "they will have
nothing touched, nothing done, nothing changed, even to obtain
improvement and convenience; everything is good and excellent as it is,
till somebody makes the alteration for them, and then they can see at
once how much better it is; and then they exclaim, 'Ah, see now that is
charming!' Ladies, without doubt, belong to the stand-still party!"

"And the gentlemen," added she, "belong to the movement party; at least
wherever building and molestation-making comes across them!"

The conversation, which had hitherto appeared perfectly
good-humoured, seemed to assume a tone of bitterness from that word
"molestation-making;" and in return the voice of the Judge was somewhat
austere, as he replied to her taunt against the gentlemen. "Yes," said
he, "they are not afraid of a little trouble whenever a great advantage
is to be obtained. But----are we to have no breakfast to-day? It is
twenty-two minutes after nine! It really is shocking, dear Elise, that
you cannot teach your maids punctuality! There is nothing more
intolerable than to lose one's time in waiting; nothing more useless;
nothing more insupportable; nothing which more easily might be
prevented, if people would only resolutely set about it! Life is really
too short for one to be able to waste half of it in waiting!
Five-and-twenty minutes after nine! and the children--are they not ready
too? Dear Elise----"

"I'll go and see after them," said she; and went out quickly.

It was Sunday. The June sun shone into a large cheerful room, and upon a
snow-white damask tablecloth, which in soft silken folds was spread over
a long table, on which a handsome coffee-service was set out with
considerable elegance. The disturbed countenance with which the Judge
had approached the breakfast-table, cleared itself instantly as a
person, whom young ladies would unquestionably have called "horribly
ugly," but whom no reflective physiognomist could have observed without
interest, entered the room. This person was tall, extremely thin, and
somewhat inclining to the left side; the complexion was dark, and the
somewhat noble features wore a melancholy expression, which but seldom
gave place to a smile of unusual beauty. The forehead elevated itself,
with its deep lines, above the large brown extraordinary eyes, and above
this a wood of black-brown hair erected itself, under whose thick stiff
curls people said a multitude of ill-humours and paradoxes housed
themselves; so also, indeed, might they in all those deep furrows with
which his countenance was lined, not one of which certainly was without
its own signification. Still, there was not a sharp angle of that face;
there was nothing, either in word or voice, of the Assessor, Jeremias
Munter, however severe they might seem to be, which at the same time did
not conceal an expression of the deepest goodness of heart, and which
stamped itself upon his whole being, in the same way as the sap clothes
with green foliage the stiff resisting branches of the knotted oak.

"Good day, brother!" exclaimed the Judge, cordially offering him his
hand, "how are you?"

"Bad!" answered the melancholy man; "how can it be otherwise? What
weather we have! As cold as January! And what people we have in the
world too: it is both a sin and shame! I am so angry to-day that----Have
you read that malicious article against you in the----paper?"

"No, I don't take in that paper; but I have heard speak of the article,"
said Judge Frank. "It is directed against my writing on the condition of
the poor in the province, is it not?"

"Yes; or more properly no," replied the Assessor, "for the extraordinary
fact is, that it contains nothing about that affair. It is against
yourself that it is aimed--the lowest insinuations, the coarsest abuse!"

"So I have heard," said the Judge; "and on that very account I do not
trouble myself to read it."

"Have you heard who has written it?" asked the visitor.

"No," returned the other; "nor do I wish to know."

"But you should do so," argued the Assessor; "people ought to know who
are their enemies. It is Mr. N. I should like to give the fellow three
emetics, that he might know the taste of his own gall!"

"What!" exclaimed Judge Frank, at once interested in the Assessor's
news--"N., who lives nearly opposite to us, and who has so lately
received from the Cape his child, the poor little motherless girl?"

"The very same!" returned he; "but you must read this piece, if it be
only to give a relish to your coffee. See here; I have brought it with
me. I have learned that it would be sent to your wife to-day. Yes,
indeed, what pretty fellows there are in the world! But where is your
wife to-day? Ah! here she comes! Good morning, my lady Elise. So
charming in the early morning; but so pale! Eh, eh, eh; this is not as
it should be! What is it that I say and preach continually? Exercise,
fresh air--else nothing in the world avails anything. But who listens to
one's preaching? No--adieu my friends! Ah! where is my snuff-box? Under
the newspapers? The abominable newspapers; they must lay their hands on
everything; one can't keep even one's snuff-box in peace for them!
Adieu, Mrs. Elise! Adieu, Frank. Nay, see how he sits there and reads
coarse abuse of himself, just as if it mattered nothing to him. Now he
laughs into the bargain. Enjoy your breakfasts, my friends!"

"Will you not enjoy it with us?" asked the friendly voice of Mrs. Frank;
"we can offer you to-day quite fresh home-baked bread."

"No, I thank you," said the Assessor; "I am no friend to such home-made
things; good for nothing, however much they may be bragged of.
Home-baked, home-brewed, home-made. Heaven help us! It all sounds very
fine, but it's good for nothing."

"Try if to-day it really be good for nothing," urged she. "There, we
have now Madame Folette on the table; you must, at least, have a cup of
coffee from her."

"What do you mean?" asked the surprised Assessor; "what is it? What
horrid Madame is it that is to give me a cup of coffee? I never could
bear old women; and if they are now to come upon the coffee-table----"

"The round coffee-pot there," said Mrs. Frank, good-humouredly, "is
Madame Folette. Could you not bear that?"

"But why call it so?" asked he. "What foolery is that?"

"It is a fancy of the children," returned she. "An honest old woman of
this name, whom I once treated to a cup of coffee, exclaimed, at the
first sight of her favourite beverage, 'When I see a coffee-pot, it is
all the same to me as if I saw an angel from heaven!' The children heard
this, and insisted upon it that there was a great resemblance in figure
between Madame Folette and this coffee-pot; and so ever since it has
borne her name. The children are very fond of her, because she gives
them every Sunday morning their coffee."

"What business have children with coffee?" asked the Assessor. "Cannot
they be thin enough without it; and are they to be burnt up before their
time? There's Petrea, is she not lanky enough? I never was very fond of
her; and now, if she is to grow up into a coffee wife, why--"

"But, dear Munter," said Mrs. Frank, "you are not in a good humour
to-day."

"Good humour!" replied he: "no, Mrs. Elise, I am not in a good humour; I
don't know what there is in the world to make people good-humoured.
There now, your chair has torn a hole in my coat-lap! Is that pleasant?
That's home-made too! But now I'll go; that is, if your doors--are they
home-made too?--will let me pass."

"But will you not come back, and dine with us?" asked she.

"No, I thank you," replied he; "I am invited elsewhere; and that in this
house, too."

"To Mrs. Chamberlain W----?" asked Mrs. Frank.

"No, indeed!" answered the Assessor: "I cannot bear that woman. She
lectures me incessantly. Lectures me! I have a great wish to lecture
her, I have! And then, her blessed dog--Pyrrhus or Pirre; I had a great
mind to kill it. And then, she is so thin. I cannot bear thin people;
least of all, thin old women."

"No?" said Mrs. Frank. "Don't you know, then, what rumour says of you
and poor old Miss Rask?"

"That common person!" exclaimed Jeremias. "Well, and what says malice of
me and poor old Miss Rask?"

"That, not many days since," said Mrs. Frank, "you met this old lady on
your stairs as she was going up to her own room; and that she was
sighing, because of the long flight of stairs and her weak chest. Now
malice says, that, with the utmost politeness, you offered her your arm,
and conducted her up the stairs with the greatest possible care; nor
left her, till she had reached her own door; and further, after all,
that you sent her a pound of cough lozenges; and----"

"And do you believe," interrupted the Assessor, "that I did that for her
own sake? No, I thank you! I did it that the poor old skeleton might not
fall down dead upon my steps, and I be obliged to climb over her ugly
corpse. From no other cause in this world did I drag her up the stairs.
Yes, yes, that was it! I dine to-day with Miss Berndes. She is always a
very sensible person; and her little Miss Laura is very pretty. See,
here have we now all the herd of children! Your most devoted servant,
Sister Louise! So, indeed, little Miss Eva! she is not afraid of the
ugly old fellow, she--God bless her! there's some sugar-candy for her!
And the little one! it looks just like a little angel. Do I make her
cry? Then I must away; for I cannot endure children's crying. Oh, for
heaven's sake! It may make a part of the charm of home: that I can
believe;--perhaps it is home-music! Home-baked, home-made,
home-music----hu!"

The Assessor sprang through the door; the Judge laughed; and the little
one became silent at the sight of a kringla,[1] through which the
beautiful eye of her brother Henrik spied at her as through an
eye-glass; whilst the other children came bounding to the
breakfast-table.

"Nay, nay, nay, my little angels, keep yourselves a little quiet," said
the mother. "Wait a moment, dear Petrea; patience is a virtue. Eva dear,
don't behave in that way; you don't see me do so."

Thus gently moralised the mother; whilst, with the help of her eldest
daughter, the little prudent Louise, she cared for the other children.
The father went from one to another full of delight, patted their little
heads, and pulled them gently by the hair.

"I ought, yesterday, to have cut all your hair," said he. "Eva has quite
a wig; one can hardly see her face for it. Give your papa a kiss, my
little girl! I'll take your wig from you early to-morrow morning."

"And mine too, and mine too, papa!" exclaimed the others.

"Yes, yes," answered the father, "I'll shear every one of you."

All laughed but the little one; which, half frightened, hid its
sunny-haired little head on the mother's bosom: the father raised it
gently, and kissed, first it, and then the mother.

"Now put sugar in papa's cup," said she to the little one; "look! he
holds it to you."

The little one smiled, put sugar in the cup, and Madame Folette began
her joyful circuit.

But we will now leave Madame Folette, home-baked bread, the family
breakfast, and the morning sun, and seat ourselves at the evening lamp,
by the light of which Elise is writing.


TO CECILIA.

I must give you portraits of all my little flock of children; who now,
having enjoyed their evening meal, are laid to rest upon their soft
pillows. Ah! if I had only a really good portrait--I mean a painted
one--of my Henrik, my first-born, my summer child, as I call
him--because he was born on a Midsummer-day, in the summer hours both of
my life and my fortune; but only the pencil of a Correggio could
represent those beautiful, kind, blue eyes, those golden locks, that
loving mouth, and that countenance all so perfectly pure and beautiful!
Goodness and joyfulness beam out from his whole being; even although his
buoyant animal life, which seldom allows his arms or legs to be quiet,
often expresses itself in not the most graceful manner. My
eleven-years-old boy is, alas! very--his father says--very unmanageable.
Still, notwithstanding all this wildness, he is possessed of a deep and
restless fund of sentiment, which makes me often tremble for his future
happiness. God defend my darling, my summer child, my only son! Oh, how
dear he is to me! Ernst warns me often of too partial an affection for
this child; and on that very account will I now pass on from portrait
No. 1 to

No. 2.--Behold then the little Queen-bee, our eldest daughter, just
turned ten years; and you will see a grave, fair girl, not handsome, but
with a round, sensible face; from which I hope, by degrees, to remove a
certain ill-tempered expression. She is uncommonly industrious, silent
and orderly, and kind towards her younger sisters, although very much
disposed to lecture them; nor will she allow any opportunity to pass in
which her importance as "eldest sister" is not observed; on which
account the little ones give her the titles of "Your Majesty" and "Mrs.
Judge." The little Louise appears to me one of those who will always be
still and sure; and who, on this account, will go fortunately though the
world.

No. 3.--People say that my little nine-years-old Eva will be very like
her mother. I hope it will prove a really splendid fac-simile. See,
then, a little, soft, round-about figure, which, amid laughter and
merriment, rolls hither and thither lightly and nimbly, with an
ever-varying physiognomy, which is rather plain than handsome, although
lit up by a pair of beautiful, kind, dark-blue eyes. Quickly moved to
sorrow, quickly excited to joy; good-hearted, flattering,
confection-loving, pleased with new and handsome clothes, and with dolls
and play; greatly beloved too by brothers and sisters, as well as by all
the servants; the best friend and playfellow, too, of her brother. Such
is little Eva.

No. 4.--Nos. 3 and 4 ought not properly to come together. Poor Leonore
had a sickly childhood, and this rather, I believe, than nature, has
given to her an unsteady and violent temper, and has unhappily sown the
seeds of envy towards her more fortunate sisters. She is not deficient
in deep feeling, but the understanding is sluggish, and it is extremely
difficult for her to learn anything. All this promises no pleasure;
rather the very opposite. The expression of her mouth, even in the
uncomfortable time of teething, seemed to speak, "Let me be quiet!" It
is hardly possible that she can be other than plain, but, with God's
help, I hope to make her good and happy.

"My beloved, plain child!" say I sometimes to her as I clasp her
tenderly in my arms, for I would willingly reconcile her early to her
fate.

No. 5.--But whatever will fate do with the nose of my Petrea? This nose
is at present the most remarkable thing about her little person; and if
it were not so large, she really would be a pretty child. We hope,
however, that it will moderate itself in her growth.

Petrea is a little lively girl, with a turn for almost everything,
whether good or bad; curious and restless is she, and beyond measure
full of failings; she has a dangerous desire to make herself observed,
and to excite an interest. Her activity shows itself in destructiveness;
yet she is good-hearted and most generous. In every kind of foolery she
is a most willing ally with Henrik and Eva, whenever they will grant her
so much favour; and if these three be heard whispering together, one may
be quite sure that some roguery or other is on foot. There exists
already, however, so much unquiet in her, that I fear her whole life
will be such; but I will early teach her to turn herself to that which
can change unrest into rest.

No. 6.--And now to the pet child of the house--to the youngest, the
loveliest, the so-called "little one"--to her who with her white hands
puts the sugar into her father's and mother's cup--the coffee without
that would not taste good--to her whose little bed is not yet removed
from the chamber of the parents, and who, every morning, creeping out of
her own bed, lays her bright curly little head on her father's shoulder
and sleeps again.

Could you only see the little two-years-old Gabriele, with her large,
serious brown eyes; her refined, somewhat pale, but indescribably lovely
countenance; her bewitching little gestures; you would be just as much
taken with her as the rest are,--you would find it difficult, as we all
do, not to spoil her. She is a quiet little child, but very unlike her
eldest sister. A predominating characteristic of Gabriele is love of the
beautiful; she shows a decided aversion to what is ugly and
inconvenient, and as decided a love for what is attractive. A most
winning little gentility in appearance and manners, has occasioned the
brother and sisters to call her in sport "the little young lady," or
"the little princess." Henrik is really in love with his little sister,
kisses her small white hands with devotion, and in return she loves him
with her whole heart. Towards the others she is very often somewhat
ungracious; and our good friend the Assessor calls her frequently "the
little gracious one," and frequently also "the little ungracious one,"
but then he has for her especially so many names; my wish is that in the
end she may deserve the surname of "the amiable."

Peace be with my young ones! There is not one of them which is not
possessed of the material of peculiar virtue and excellence, and yet not
also at the same time of the seed of some dangerous vice, which may ruin
the good growth of God in them. May the endeavours both of their father
and me be blessed in training these plants of heaven aright! But ah! the
education of children is no easy thing, and all the many works on that
subject which I have studied appear to me, whether the fault be in me
or in them I cannot tell, but small helps. Ah! I often find no other
means than to clasp the child tenderly in my arms, and to weep bitterly
over it, or else to kiss it in the fulness of my joy; and it often has
appeared to me that such moments are not without their influence.

I endeavour as much as possible not to scold. I know how perpetually
scolding crushes the free spirit and the innocent joyousness of
childhood; and I sincerely believe that if one will only sedulously
cultivate what is good in character, and make in all instances what is
good visible and attractive, the bad will by degrees fall away of
itself.

I sing a great deal to my children. They are brought up with songs; for
I wished early, as it were, to bathe their souls in harmony. Several of
them, especially my first-born and Eva, are regular little enthusiasts
in music; and every evening, as soon as twilight comes on, the children
throng about me, and then I sit down to the piano, and either accompany
myself, or play to little songs which they themselves sing. It is my
Henrik's reward, when he has been very good for the whole day, that I
should sit by his bed, and sing to him till he sleeps. He says that he
then has such beautiful dreams. We often sit and talk for an hour
instead, and I delight myself sincerely in his active and pure soul.
When he lays out his great plans for his future life, he ends
thus:--"And when I am grown up a man, and have my own house, then,
mother, thou shalt come and live with me, and I will keep so many maids
to wait on thee, and thou shalt have so many flowers, and everything
that thou art fond of, and shalt live just like a queen; only of an
evening, when I go to bed, thou shalt sit beside me and sing me to
sleep; wilt thou not?" Often too, when in the midst of his plans for the
future and my songs, he has dropped asleep, I remain sitting still by
the bed with my heart full to overflowing with joy and pride in this
angel. Ernst declares that I spoil him. Ah, perhaps I do, but
nevertheless it is a fact that I earnestly endeavour not to do so. After
all, I can say of every one of my children what a friend of mine said of
hers, that they are tolerably good; that is to say, they are not good
enough for heaven.

This evening I am alone. Ernst is away at the District-Governor's. It
is my birthday to-day; but I have told no one, because I wished rather
to celebrate it in a quiet communion with my own thoughts.

How at this moment the long past years come in review before me! I see
myself once more in the house of my parents: in that good, joyful,
beloved home! I see myself once more by thy side, my beloved and only
sister, in that large, magnificent house, surrounded by meadows and
villages. How we looked down upon them from high windows, and yet
rejoiced that the sun streamed into the most lowly huts just as
pleasantly as into our large saloons--everything seemed to us so well
arranged.

Life then, Cecilia, was joyful and free from care. How we sate and wept
over "Des Voeux Téméraires," and over "Feodor and Maria,"--such were
our cares then. Our life was made up of song, and dance, and merriment,
with our so many cheerful neighbours; with the most accomplished of whom
we got up enthusiasms for music and literature. We considered ourselves
to be virtuous, because we loved those who loved us, and because we gave
of our superfluity to those who needed it. Friendship was our passion.
We were ready to die for friendship, but towards love we had hearts of
stone. How we jested over our lovers, and thought what fun it would be
to act the parts of austere romance-heroines! How unmerciful we were,
and--how easily our lovers consoled themselves! Then Ernst Frank came on
a visit to us. The rumour of a learned and strong-minded man preceded
him, and fixed our regards upon him, because women, whether
well-informed or not themselves, are attracted by such men. Do you not
remember how much he occupied our minds? how his noble person, his calm,
self-assured demeanour, his frank, decided, yet always polite behaviour
charmed us at first, and the awed us?

One could say of him, that morally as well as physically he stood
firmly. His deep mourning dress, together with an expression of quiet
manly grief, which at times shaded his countenance, combined to make him
interesting to us; nevertheless, you thought that he looked too stern,
and I very soon lost in his presence my accustomed gaiety. Whenever his
dark grave eyes were fixed upon me, I was conscious that they possessed
a half-bewitching, half-oppressive power over me; I felt myself happy
because of it, yet at the same time filled with anxiety; my very action
was constrained, my hands became cold and did everything blunderingly,
nor ever did I speak so stupidly as when I observed that he listened.
Aunt Lisette gave me one day this maxim: "My dear, remember what I now
tell thee: if a man thinks that thou art a fool, it does not injure thee
the least in his opinion; but if he once thinks that thou considerest
him a fool, then art thou lost for ever with him!" With the last it may
be just as it will--I have heard a clever young man declare that it
would operate upon him like salt on fire--however, this is certain, that
the first part of Aunt Lisette's maxim is correct, since my stupidity in
Ernst's presence did not injure me at all in his opinion, and when he
was kind and gentle, how inexpressibly agreeable he was!

His influence over me became greater each succeeding day: I seemed to
live continually under his eyes; when they beamed on me in kindness, it
was as if a spring breeze passed through my soul; and if his glance was
graver than common, I became still, and out of spirits. It seemed to me
at times--and it is so even to this very day--that if this clear and
wonderfully penetrating glance were only once, and with its full power,
riveted upon me, my very heart would cease to beat. Yet after all, I am
not sure whether I loved him. I hardly think I did; for when he was
absent I then seemed to breathe so freely, yet at the same time, I would
have saved his life by the sacrifice of my own.

In several respects we had no sympathies in common. He had no taste for
music, which I loved passionately; and in reading too our feelings were
so different. He yawned over my favourite romances, nay he even
sometimes would laugh when I was at the point of bursting into tears; I,
on the contrary, yawned over his useful and learned books, and found
them more tedious than I could express. The world of imagination in
which my thoughts delighted to exercise themselves, he valued not in the
least, whilst the burdensome actuality which he always was seeking for
in life, had no charm for me. Nevertheless there were many points in
which we accorded--these especially were questions of morals--and
whenever this was the case, it afforded both of us great pleasure.

And now came the time, Cecilia, in which you left me; when our fates
separated themselves, although our hearts did not.

One day there were many strangers with us; and in the afternoon I played
at shuttlecock with young cousin Emil, to whom we were so kind, and who
deserved our kindness so well. How it happened I cannot tell, but before
long Ernst took his place, and was my partner in the game. He looked
unusually animated, and I felt myself more at ease with him than common.
He threw the shuttlecock excellently, and with a firm hand, but always
let it fly a little way beyond me, so that I was obliged to step back a
few paces each time to catch it, and thus unconsciously to myself was I
driven, in the merry sport, through a long suite of rooms, till we came
at last to one where we were quite alone, and a long way from the
company. All at once then Ernst left off his play, and a change was
visible in his whole countenance. I augured something amiss, and would
gladly have sprung far, far away, but I felt powerless; and then Ernst
spoke so from his heart, so fervently, and with such deep tenderness,
that he took my heart at once to himself. I laid my hand, although
tremblingly, in his, and, almost without knowing what I did, consented
to go through life by his side.

I had just then passed my nineteenth year; and my beloved parents
sanctioned the union of their daughter with a man so respectable and so
universally esteemed, and one, moreover, whom everybody prophesied would
one day rise to the highest eminences of the state--and Ernst, whose
nature it was to accomplish everything rapidly which he undertook,
managed it so that in a very short time our marriage was celebrated.

At the same time some members of my family thought that by this union I
had descended a step. I thought not; on the contrary, the very reverse.
I was of high birth, had several not undistinguished family connexions,
and was brought up in a brilliant circle, in all the superficial
accomplishments of the day, amid superfluity and thoughtlessness. He was
a man who had shaped out his own course in life, who, by his own honest
endeavours, and through many self-denials, had raised his father's house
from its depressed condition, and had made the future prospects of his
mother and sister comfortable and secure: he was a man self-dependent,
upright, and good--yes, GOOD, and that I discover more and more the
deeper knowledge I obtain of his true character, even though the outward
manner may be somewhat severe--in truth, I feel myself very inferior
beside him.

The first year of our marriage we passed, at their desire, in the house
of my parents; and if I could only have been less conscious of his
superiority, and could only have been more certain that he was satisfied
with me, nothing would have been wanting to my happiness. Everybody
waited upon me; and perhaps it was on this account that Ernst, in
comparison, seemed somewhat cold; I was the petted child of my too kind
parents; I was thankless and peevish, and ah, some little of this still
remains! Nevertheless, it was during this very time that, under the
influence of my husband, the true beauty and reality of life became more
and more perceptible to my soul. Married life and family ties, one's
country and the world, revealed their true relationships, and their holy
signification to my mind. Ernst was my teacher; I looked up to him with
love, but not without fear.

Many were the projects which we formed in these summer days, and which
floated brightly before my romantic fancy. Among these was a journey on
foot through the beautiful country west of Sweden, and this was one of
the favourite schemes of my Ernst. His mother--from whom our little
Petrea has derived her somewhat singular name--was of Norway, and many a
beloved thought of her seemed to have interwoven itself with the valleys
and mountains, which, as in a wonderfully-beautiful fairy tale, she had
described to him in the stories she told. All these recollections are a
sort of romantic region in Ernst's soul, and thither he betakes himself
whenever he would refresh his spirit, or lay out something delightful
for the future. "Next year," he would then exclaim, "will we take a
journey!" And then we laid out together our route on the map, and I
determined on the dress which I would wear as his travelling-companion
when we would go and visit "that sea-engarlanded Norway." Ah! there soon
came for me other journeys.

It was during these days also that my first-born saw the light; my
beautiful boy! who so fettered both my love and my thoughts that Ernst
grew almost jealous. How often did I steal out of bed at night in order
to watch him while he slept! He was a lively, restless child, and it
therefore was a peculiar pleasure for me to see him at rest; besides
which, he was so angelically lovely in sleep! I could have spent whole
nights bending over his cradle.

So far, Cecilia, all went with us as in the romances with which we in
our youth nourished heart and soul. But far other times came. In the
first place, the sad change in the circumstances of my parents, which
operated so severely on our position in life; and then for me so many
children--cares without end, grief and sickness! My body and mind must
both have given way under their burden, had Ernst not been the man he
is.

It suited his character to struggle against the stream; it was a sort of
pleasure to him to combat with it, to meet difficulties, and to overcome
them. With each succeeding year he imposed more business upon himself,
and by degrees, through the most resolute industry, he was enabled to
bring back prosperity to his house. And then how unwearingly kind he was
to me! How tenderly sustaining in those very moments, when without him I
must have found myself so utterly miserable! How many a sleepless night
has he passed on my account! How often has he soothed to sleep a sickly
child in his arms! And then, too, every child which came, as it were
only to multiply his cares, and increase the necessity for his labour,
was to him a delight--was received as a gift of God's mercy--and its
birth made a festival in the house. How my heart has thanked him, and
how has his strength and assurance nerved me!

When little Gabriele was born I was very near death; and it is my firm
belief that, without Ernst's care for me, I must then have parted from
my little ones. During the time of great weakness which succeeded this,
my foot scarcely ever touched the ground. I was carried by Ernst himself
wherever I would. He was unwearied in goodness and patience towards the
sick mother. Should she not now, that she is again in health, dedicate
her life to him? Ah, yes, that should she, and that will she! Alas, were
but my ability as strong as my will!

Do you know one thing, Cecilia, which often occasions me great trouble?
It is that I am not a clever housewife; that I can neither take pleasure
in all the little cares and details which the well-being of a house
really requires, nor that I have memory for these things; more
especially is the daily caring for dinner irksome to me. I myself have
but little appetite; and it is so unpleasing to me to go to sleep at
night, and to get up in the morning with my head full of schemes for
cooking. By this means, it happens that sometimes my husband's domestic
comforts are not such as he has a right to demand. Hitherto my weak
health, the necessary care of the children, and our rather narrow
circumstances, have furnished me with sufficient excuses; but these now
will avail me no longer; my health is again established, and our greater
prosperity furnishes the means for better household management.

On this account, I now exert myself to perform all my duties well; but,
ah! how pleasant it will be when the little Louise is sufficiently grown
up, that I may lay part of the housekeeping burdens on her shoulders. I
fancy to myself that she will have peculiar pleasure in all these
things.

I am to-day two-and-thirty years old. It seems to me that I have entered
a new period of my life: my youth lies behind me, I am advanced into
middle age, and I well know what both this and my husband have a right
to demand from me. May a new and stronger being awake in me! May God
support me, and Ernst be gentle towards his erring wife!

Ernst should have married a more energetic woman. My nervous weakness
makes my temper irritable, and I am so easily annoyed. His activity of
mind often disturbs me more than it is reasonable or right that it
should; for instance, I get regularly into a state of excitement, if he
only steadfastly fixes his eyes on a wall, or on any other object. I
immediately begin to fancy that we are going instantly to have a new
door opened, or some other change brought about. And oh! I have such a
great necessity for rest and quiet!

One change which is about to take place in our house I cannot anticipate
without uneasiness. It is the arrival of a candidate of Philosophy,
Jacob Jacobi, as tutor for my children. He will this summer take my wild
boy under his charge, and instruct the sisters in writing, drawing, and
arithmetic; and in the autumn conduct my first-born from the maternal
home to a great educational institution. I dread this new member in our
domestic circle; he may, if he be not amiable, so easily prove so
annoying; yet, if he be amiable and good, he will be so heartily welcome
to me, especially as assistant in the wearisome writing lessons, with
their eternal "Henrik, sit still!"--"Hold the pen properly,
Louise!"--"Look at the copy, Leonore!"--"Don't forget the points and
strokes, Eva!"--"Little Petrea, don't wipe out the letters with your
nose!" Besides this, my first-born begins to have less and less esteem
for my Latin knowledge; and Ernst is sadly discontented with his wild
pranks. Jacobi will give him instruction, together with Nils Gabriel,
the son of the District-Governor, Stjernhök, a most industrious and
remarkably sensible boy, from whose influence on my Henrik I hope for
much good.

The Candidate is warmly recommended to us by a friend of my husband, the
excellent Bishop B.; yet, notwithstanding this, his actions at the
University did not particularly redound to his honour. Through credulity
and folly he has run through a nice little property which had been left
him by three old aunts, who had brought him up and spoiled him into the
bargain. Indeed, his career has hitherto not been quite a correct one.
Bishop B. conceals nothing of all this, but says that he is much
attached to the young man; praises his heart, and his excellent gifts as
a preceptor, and prays us to receive him cordially, with all parental
tenderness, into our family. We shall soon see whether he be deserving
of such hearty sympathy. For my part, I must confess that my motherly
tenderness for him is as yet fast asleep.

Yet, after all, this inmate does not terrify me half as much as a visit
with which I am shortly threatened. Of course you have heard of the lady
of the late Colonel S., the beautiful Emilie, my husband's "old flame,"
as I call her, out of a little malice for all the vexation her
perfections, which are so very opposite to mine, have occasioned me. She
has been now for several years a widow, has lived long abroad, and now
will pay us a visit on her return to her native land. Ernst and she have
always kept up the most friendly understanding with each other, although
she refused his hand; and it is a noble characteristic of my Ernst, and
one which, in his sex, is not often found, that this rejection did not
make him indifferent to the person who gave it. On the contrary, he
professes the most warm admiration of this Emilie, and has not ceased to
correspond with her; and I, for I read all their letters, cannot but
confess her extraordinary knowledge and acuteness. But to know all this
near is what I would indeed be very gladly excused, since I cannot help
thinking that my husband's "old flame" has something of cold-heartedness
in her, and my heart has no great inclination to become warm towards
her.

It strikes ten o'clock. Ernst will not come home before twelve. "I am
so," I replied.

At that moment Bedos entered, and whispered that Madame D'Anville was
in the anti-room.

"Good heavens!" said I, knowing her jealousy of disposition, "what is to
be done? Oblige me, Madame," seizing the unfortunate mistress of the
hotel, and opening the door to the back entrance--"There," said I,
"you can easily escape. Bon jour."
Hardly had I closed the door, and put the key in my pocket, before Madame
D'Anville entered.

"Do you generally order your servants to keep me waiting in your anti-
room?" said she haughtily.

"Not generally," I replied, endeavouring to make my peace; but all my
complaisance was in vain--she was jealous of my intimacy with the Duchesse
de Perpignan, and glad of any excuse to vent her pique. I am just the
sort of man to bear, but never to forgive a woman's ill temper, viz.--it
makes no impression on me at the time, but leaves a sore recollection
of something disagreeable, which I internally resolve never again to
experience. Madame D'Anville was going to the Luxembourg; and my only
chance of soothing her anger was to accompany her.

Down stairs, therefore, we went, and drove to the Luxembourg; I gave
Bedos, before my departure, various little commissions, and told him
he need not be at home till the evening.

Long before the expiration of an hour, Madame D'Anville's ill humour had
given me an excuse for affecting it myself.

Tired to death of her, and panting for release, I took a high
tone--complained of her ill temper, and her want of love--spoke rapidly--
waited for no reply, and leaving her at the Luxembourg, proceeded
forthwith to Galignani's, like a man just delivered from a strait
waistcoat.

Leave me now, for a few minutes, in the reading-room at Galignani's,
and return to the mistress of the hotel, whom I had so unceremoniously
thrust out of my salon. The passage into which she had been put
communicated by one door with my rooms, and by another with the staircase.
Now, it had so happened, that Bedos was in the habit of locking the
latter door, and keeping the key; the other egress, it will be remembered,
I myself had secured; so that the unfortunate mistress of the hotel was
no sooner turned into this passage than she found herself in a sort of
dungeon, ten feet by five, and surrounded, like Eve in Paradise, by a
whole creation-- not of birds, beasts, and fishes, but of brooms, brushes,
unclean linen, and a wood-basket. What she was to do in this dilemma was
utterly inconceivable; scream, indeed, she might, but then the shame
and ridicule of being discovered in so equivocal a situation, were
somewhat more than our discreet landlady could endure. Besides, such an
expose might be attended with a loss the good woman valued more
than reputation, viz.
lodgers; for the possessors of the two best floors were both Englishwomen
of a certain rank; and my landlady had heard such accounts of our national
virtue, that she feared an instantaneous emigration of such inveterate
prudes, if her screams and situation reached their ears.

Quietly then, and soberly, did the good lady sit, eyeing the brooms and
brushes as they grew darker and darker with the approach of the evening,
and consoling herself with the certainty that her release must
eventually take place.

Meanwhile, to return to myself--from which dear little person, I
very seldom, even in imagination, digress--I found Lord Vincent at
Galignani's, carefully looking over "Choice Extracts from the best
English Authors."

"Ah, my good fellow!" said he, "I am delighted to see you; I made
such a capital quotation just now: the young Benningtons were drowning
a poor devil of a puppy; the youngest (to whom the mother belonged)
looked on with a grave earnest face, till the last kick was over, and
then burst into tears. 'Why do you cry so?' said I. 'Because it was so
cruel in us to drown the poor puppy!' replied the juvenile
Philocunos. 'Pooh," said I, "'Quid juvat errores mersa jam puppe
fateri.'" Was it not good?--you remember it in Claudian, eh, Pelham?

Think of its being thrown away on those Latinless young lubbers! Have
you seen any thing of Mr.

Thornton lately?"

"No," said I, "I've not, but I am determined to have that pleasure soon."

"You will do as you please," said Vincent, "but you will be like
the child playing with edged tools."

"I am not a child," said I, "so the simile is not good. He must be the
devil himself, or a Scotchman at least, to take me in."
Vincent shook his head. "Come and dine with me at the Rocher," said he;
"we are a party of six--choice spirits all."

"Volontiers; but we can stroll in the Tuileries first, if you have no
other engagement."
"None," said Vincent, putting his arm in mine.

As we passed up the Rue de la Paix, we met Sir Henry Millington, mounted
on a bay horse, as stiff as himself, and cantering down the street
as if he and his steed had been cut out of pasteboard together.

"I wish," said Vincent, (to borrow Luttrel's quotation,) "that that
master of arts would 'cleanse his bosom of that perilous stuff.' I should
like to know in what recess of that immense mass now cantering round
the corner is the real body of Sir Henry Millington.

I could fancy the poor snug little thing shrinking within, like a guilty
conscience.

Ah, well says Juvenal,
"'Mors sola fatetur Quantula sint hominum corpuscula.'"
"He has a superb head, though," I replied. I like to allow that
other people are handsome now and then--it looks generous."

"Yes," said Vincent, "for a barber's block: but here comes Mrs. C--me,
and her beautiful daughter--those are people you ought to know,
if you wish to see human nature a little relieved from the frivolities
which make it in society so like a man milliner.

Mrs. C--has considerable genius, combined with great common sense."

"A rare union," said I.

"By no means," replied Vincent. "It is a cant antithesis in opinion to
oppose them to one another; but, so far as mere theoretical common
sense is concerned, I would much sooner apply to a great poet or a great
orator for advice on matter of business, than any dull plodder who
has passed his whole life in a counting-house.

Common sense is only a modification of talent--genius is an exaltation
of it: the difference is, therefore, in the degree, not nature. But
to return to Mrs. C--; she writes beautiful poetry--almost impromptu;
draws excellent caricatures; possesses a laugh for whatever is
ridiculous, but never loses a smile for whatever is good.

Placed in very peculiar situations, she has passed through each with a
grace and credit which make her best eulogium. If she possesses one quality
higher than intellect, it is her kindness of heart:
no wonder indeed, that she is so really clever--those trees which
are the soundest at the core produce the finest fruits, and the
most beautiful blossoms."
"Lord Vincent grows poetical," thought I--"how very different he really
is to that which he affects to be in the world; but so it is with
every one--we are all like the ancient actors: let our faces be ever
so beautiful, we must still wear a mask."
After an hour's walk, Vincent suddenly recollected that he had a
commission of a very important nature in the Rue J.

J. Rousseau. This was--to buy a monkey. "It is for Wormwood," said he,
"who has written me a long letter, describing its' qualities and
qualifications. I suppose he wants it for some practical joke--some
embodied bitterness--God forbid I should thwart him in so charitable a
design!"
"Amen," said I; and we proceeded together to the monkey-fancier. After
much deliberation we at last decided upon the most hideous animal I ever
beheld--it was of a--no, I will not attempt to describe it--it would be
quite impossible!

Vincent was so delighted with our choice that he insisted upon
carrying it away immediately.

"Is it quite quiet?"

I asked.

"Comme un oiseau," said the man.

We called a fiacre--paid for monsieur Jocko, and drove to Vincent's
apartments; there we found, however, that his valet had gone out and
taken the key.

"Hang it," said Vincent, "it does not signify! We'll carry le petit
monsieur with us to the Rocher."
Accordingly we all three once more entered the fiacre, and drove to the
celebrated restaurateur's of the Rue Mont Orgueil.

O, blissful recollections of that dinner! how at this moment you crowd
upon my delighted remembrance! Lonely and sorrowful as I now sit,
digesting with many a throe the iron thews of a British
beef-steak--more anglico-- immeasurably tough--I see the grateful
apparitions of Escallopes de Saumon and Laitances de Carps rise in a
gentle vapour before my eyes!
breathing a sweet and pleasant odour, and contrasting the dream-like
delicacies of their hue and aspect, with the dire and dure realities
which now weigh so heavily on the region below my heart!

And thou, most beautiful of all--thou evening star of entremets--thou
that delightest in truffles, and gloriest in a dark cloud of
sauces--exquisite foie-gras!-- Have I forgotten thee? Do I not, on the
contrary, see thee--smell thee-- taste thee--and almost die with rapture
of thy possession? What, though the goose, of which thou art a part,
has, indeed, been roasted alive by a slow fire, in order to increase
thy divine proportions--yet has not our Almanach--the Almanach des
Gourmands--truly declared that the goose rejoiced amid all her
tortures--because of the glory that awaited her?

Did she not, in prophetic vision, behold her enlarged and ennobled
foie dilate into pates and steam into sautees--the companion of
truffles--the glory of dishes--the delight--the treasure--the
transport of gourmands!

O, exalted among birds--apotheosised goose, did not thy heart exult even
when thy liver parched and swelled within thee, from that most agonizing
death; and didst thou not, like the Indian at the stake, triumph
in the very torments which alone could render thee illustrious?

After dinner we grew exceedingly merry. Vincent punned and quoted; we
laughed and applauded; and our Burgundy went round with an alacrity, to
which every new joke gave an additional impetus. Monsieur Jocko was by
no means the dullest in the party; he cracked his nuts with as
much grace as we did our jests, and grinned and chatted as facetiously
as the best of us. After coffee we were all so pleased with one another,
that we resolved not to separate, and accordingly we
adjourned to my rooms, Jocko and all, to find new revelries and grow
brilliant over Curacoa punch.

We entered my salon with a roar, and set Bedos to work at the punch
forthwith. Bedos, that Ganymede of a valet, had himself but just
arrived, and was unlocking the door as we entered. We soon blew up
a glorious fire, and our spirits brightened in proportion. Monsieur Jocko
sate on Vincent's knee--Ne monstrum, as he classically termed it. One of
our compotatores was playing with it. Jocko grew suddenly in earnest--a
grin- -a scratch and a bite, were the work of a moment.

"Ne quid nimis--now," said Vincent, gravely, instead of endeavouring to
soothe the afflicted party, who grew into a towering passion.

Nothing but Jocko's absolute disgrace could indeed have saved his life
from the vengeance of the sufferer.

"Where shall we banish him?" said Vincent.

"Oh," I replied, "put him out in that back passage; the outer door is
shut; he'll be quite safe;" and to the passage he was therefore
immediately consigned.

It was in this place, the reader will remember, that the hapless
Dame du Chateau was at that very instant in "durance vile." Bedos, who
took the condemned monkey, opened the door, thrust Jocko in, and closed
it again.
Meanwhile we resumed our merriment.

"Nunc est bibendum," said Vincent, as Bedos placed the punch on
the table. "Give us a toast, Dartmore."
Lord Dartmore was a young man, with tremendous spirits, which made up
for wit. He was just about to reply, when a loud shriek was heard from
Jocko's place of banishment: a sort of scramble ensued, and the next
moment the door was thrown violently open, and in rushed the
terrified landlady, screaming like a sea-gull, and bearing Jocko aloft
upon her shoulders, from which "bad eminence" he was grinning and chattering
with the fury of fifty devils. She ran twice round the room, and
then sunk on the floor in hysterics. We lost no time in hastening to her
assistance; but the warlike Jocko, still sitting upon her, refused
to permit one of us to approach.

There he sat, turning from side to side, showing his sharp, white teeth,
and uttering from time to time the most menacing and diabolical
sounds.

"What the deuce shall we do?" cried Dartmore.

"Do?"

said Vincent, who was convulsed with laughter, and yet endeavouring
to speak gravely; "why, watch like L. Opimius, 'ne quid respublica
detrimenti caperet.'"
"By Jove, Pelham, he will scratch out the lady's beaux yeux," cried
the good-natured Dartmore, endeavouring to seize the monkey by the
tail, for which he very narrowly escaped with an unmutilated
visage. But the man who had before suffered by Jocko's ferocity,
and whose breast was still swelling with revenge, was glad of so
favourable an opportunity and excuse for wreaking it. He seized the poker,
made three strides to Jocko, who set up an ineffable cry of defiance,
and with a single blow split the skull of the unhappy monkey in
twain.

It fell with one convulsion on the ground, and gave up the ghost.

We then raised the unfortunate landlady, placed her on the sofa, and
Dartmore administered a plentiful potation of the Curacoa punch.

By slow degrees she revived, gave three most doleful suspirations, and
then, starting up, gazed wildly around her. Half of us were still
laughing--my unfortunate self among the number; this the enraged
landlady no sooner perceived than she imagined herself the victim
of some preconcerted villainy.

Her lips trembled with passion--she uttered the most dreadful
imprecations; and had I not retired into a corner, and armed myself
with the dead body of Jocko, which I wielded with exceeding valour, she
might, with the simple weapons with which nature had provided her hands,
have for ever demolished the loves and graces that abide in the face
of Henry Pelham.

When at last she saw that nothing hostile was at present to be effected,
she drew herself up, and giving Bedos a tremendous box on the ear, as he
stood grinning beside her, marched out of the room.

We then again rallied around the table, more than ever disposed to be
brilliant, and kept up till day break a continued fire of jests upon
the heroine of the passage. "Cum qua (as Vincent observed)
clauditur adversis innoxia simia fatis!"

CHAPTER XXIII.

Show me not thy painted beauties, These impostures I defy.
--George Withers.

The cave of Falri smelt not more delicately--on every side appeared
the marks of drunkenness and gluttony. At the upper end of the cave
the sorcerer lay extended, etc.
--Mirglip the Persian, in the "Tales of the Genii."
I woke the next morning with an aching head and feverish frame. Ah, those
midnight carousals, how glorious they would be if there was no next
morning! I took my sauterne and sodawater in my dressing-room; and,
as indisposition always makes me meditative, I thought over all I had
done since my arrival at Paris. I had become (that, God knows, I soon
manage to do) rather a talked of and noted character. It is true that I
was every where abused--one found fault with my neckcloth--another with
my mind--the lank Mr. Aberton declared that I put my hair in papers, and
the stuffed Sir Henry Millington said I was a thread-paper myself. One
blamed my riding--a second my dancing--a third wondered how any woman
could like me, and a fourth said that no woman ever could.

On one point, however, all--friends and foes--were alike agreed; viz.
that I was a consummate puppy, and excessively well satisfied with myself.
A la verite, they were not much mistaken there. Why is it, by the by,
that to be pleased with one's-self is the surest way of offending every
body else?

If any one, male or female, an evident admirer of his or her own
perfections, enter a room, how perturbed, restless, and unhappy every
individual of the offender's sex instantly becomes: for them
not only enjoyment but tranquillity is over, and if they could annihilate
the unconscious victim of their spleen, I fully believe no Christian
toleration would come in the way of that last extreme of animosity.

For a coxcomb there is no mercy--for a coquet no pardon. They are, as
it were, the dissenters of society--no crime is too bad to be
imputed to them; they do not believe the religion of others--they
set up a deity of their own vanity--all the orthodox vanities of
others are offended.

Then comes the bigotry--the stake--the auto-da-fe of scandal.

What, alas! is so implacable as the rage of vanity? What so restless as
its persecution?

Take from a man his fortune, his house, his reputation, but flatter
his vanity in each, and he will forgive you.

Heap upon him benefits, fill him with blessings: but irritate his
self-love, and you have made the very best man an ingrat. He will sting
you if he can: you cannot blame him; you yourself have instilled
the venom.

This is one reason why you must not always reckon upon gratitude in
conferring an obligation. It is a very high mind to which
gratitude is not a painful sensation. If you wish to please, you
will find it wiser to receive--solicit even--favours, than accord
them; for the vanity of the obliger is always flattered--that of the
obligee rarely.

Well, this is an unforeseen digression: let me return! I had mixed,
of late, very little with the English. My mother's introductions had
procured me the entree of the best French houses; and to them,
therefore, my evenings were usually devoted. Alas! that was a happy
time, when my carriage used to await me at the door of the
Rocher de Cancale, and then whirl me to a succession of visits, varying
in their degree and nature as the whim prompted: now to the brilliant
soirees of Madame De--, or to the appartemens au troisieme of some less
celebrated daughter of dissipation and ecarte;--now to the literary
conversaziones of the Duchesse de D--s, or the Vicomte d'A--, and
then to the feverish excitement of the gambling house.

Passing from each with the appetite for amusement kept alive by
variety; finding in none a disappointment, and in every one a welcome;
full of the health which supports, and the youth which colours all excess
or excitation, I drained, with an unsparing lip, whatever that
enchanting metropolis could afford.

I have hitherto said but little of the Duchesse de Perpignan; I
think it necessary now to give some account of that personage.

Ever since the evening I had met her at the ambassador's, I had paid her
the most unceasing attentions. I soon discovered that she had a curious
sort of liaison with one of the attaches--a short, ill-made gentleman,
with high shoulders, and a pale face, who wore a blue coat and
buff waistcoat, wrote bad verses, and thought himself handsome.

All Paris said she was excessively enamoured of this youth.

As for me, I had not known her four days before I discovered that she could
not be excessively enamoured of any thing but an oyster pete and Lord
Byron's Corsair. Her mind was the most marvellous melange of sentiment
and its opposite. In her amours she was Lucretia herself; in her
epicurism, Apicius would have yielded to her. She was pleased with
sighs, but she adored suppers.

She would leave every thing for her lover, except her dinner. The
attache soon quarrelled with her, and I was installed into the
platonic honours of his office.

At first, I own that I was flattered by her choice, and though she was
terribly exigeante of my petits soins, I managed to keep up her affection,
and, what is still more wonderful, my own, for the better part of a
month. What then cooled me was the following occurrence:

I was in her boudoir one evening, when her femme de chambre came
to tell us that the duc was in the passage.

Notwithstanding the innocence of our attachment, the duchesse was in a
violent fright; a small door was at the left of the ottoman, on which we
were sitting. "Oh, no, no, not there," cried the lady; but I, who saw
no other refuge, entered it forthwith, and before she could ferret me
out, the duc was in the room.

In the meanwhile, I amused myself by examining the wonders of the new
world into which I had so abruptly immerged: on a small table before
me, was deposited a remarkably constructed night-cap; I examined
it as a curiosity: on each side was placed une petite cotelette de
veau cru, sewed on with green-coloured silk (I remember even the
smallest minutiae), a beautiful golden wig (the duchesse never liked
me to play with her hair) was on a block close by, and on another
table was a set of teeth, d'une blancheur eblouissante.

In this manufactory of a beauty I remained for a quarter of an hour;
at the end of that time, the abigail (the duchesse had the grace to
disappear) released me, and I flew down stairs like a spirit from
purgatory.

From that moment the duchesse honoured me with her most deadly abhorrence.
Equally silly and wicked, her schemes of revenge were as ludicrous
in their execution as remorseless in their design: at one time I
narrowly escaped poison in a cup of coffee--at another, she
endeavoured to stab me to the heart with a paper cutter.

Notwithstanding my preservation from these attacks, this new Messalina
had resolved on my destruction, and another means of attempting it
still remained, which the reader will yet have the pleasure of
learning.

Mr. Thornton had called upon me twice, and twice I had returned the visit,
but neither of us had been at home to benefit by these reciprocities of
politesse. His acquaintance with my mysterious hero of the gambling
house and the Jardin des Plantes, and the keen interest I took, in spite
of myself, in that unaccountable person, whom I was persuaded I had
seen before in some very different scene, and under very different
circumstances, made me desirous to increase a connoissance, which, from
Vincent's detail, I should otherwise have been anxious to avoid. I
therefore resolved to make another attempt to find him at home; and
my headache being somewhat better, I took my way to his apartments
in the Faubourg St. Germain.
I love that quartier--if ever I went to Paris again I should reside
there. It is quite a different world from the streets usually known
to, and tenanted by the English--there, indeed, you are among the
French, the fossilized remains of the old regime--the very houses
have an air of desolate, yet venerable grandeur--you never pass by
the white and modern mansion of a nouveau riche; all, even to the
ruggedness of the pave, breathes a haughty disdain of innovation--you
cross one of the numerous bridges, and you enter into another
time--you are inhaling the atmosphere of a past century; no flaunting
boutique, French in its trumpery, English in its prices, stares you
in the face; no stiff coats and unnatural gaits are seen anglicising
up the melancholy streets. Vast hotels, with their gloomy frontals,
and magnificent contempt of comfort; shops, such as shops might
have been in the aristocratic days of Louis Quatorze, ere British
vulgarities made them insolent and dear; public edifices, still
redolent of the superb charities of le grand monarque--carriages
with their huge bodies and ample decorations; horses, with their
Norman dimensions and undocked honours; men, on whose more high
though not less courteous demeanour, the revolution seems to have
wrought no democratic plebeianism--all strike on the mind with a
vague and nameless impression of antiquity; a something solemn even
in gaiety, and faded in pomp, appear to linger over all you behold;
there are the Great French people unadulterated by change, unsullied
with the commerce of the vagrant and various tribes that throng
their mighty mart of enjoyments.Often too, when, according to
old Swedish usage, he would take a glass of spirits, he found pure water
instead of Cognac in his mouth; and the little advocates of temperance
were always near enough to enjoy his astonishment, although sufficiently
distant, also, that not one drop of the shower which was then sent at
them should reach them, though it made them leap high enough for
delight. And really it was wonderful how often these little surprises
could be repeated, and how the Candidate let himself so constantly be
surprised. But he was too much occupied by his own thoughts (the
thoughts of course of a student of philosophy!) in order to be on his
guard against the tricks of these young merry-andrews. One day----

But before we proceed further we must observe, that although the
toilette of the Candidate seemed externally to be always so well
supplied, yet still it was, in fact, in but a very indifferent
condition. No wonder, therefore, was it, that though his hat outwardly
was always well brushed, and was apparently in good order, yet that it
had within a sadly tattered lining.

One day, therefore, as the Candidate had laid his hat in a corner of the
room, and was sitting near the sofa in a very earnest conversation,
Henrik, Petrea, and Eva gathered themselves about that symbol of freedom
with the most suspicious airs and gestures of conspiracy. Nobody paid
any attention to them, when after awhile the Candidate rose to leave the
room, and going through the door would have put on his hat--but, behold,
a very singular revolution had taken place within it, and a mass of tin
soldiers, stones, matches, and heaven knows what besides, came rattling
down upon his head; and even one little chimney-sweeper fell astride on
his nose. Nothing could compare with the immeasurable delight of the
children at the astonishment of the Candidate, and the comic grimaces
and head-shakings with which he received this their not very polite
jest.

No wonder was it, therefore, that the children loved the Candidate so
well.

The little Queen-bee, however, who more and more began to reckon herself
as one of the grown people, and only very rarely took part in the
conspiracies against the Candidate, shook her head at this prank of her
brother and sisters, and looked out a new piece of dark silk from her
drawer (Louise was a hoarder by nature), possessed herself secretly of
the Candidate's hat, and with some little help from her mother, had then
her secret pleasure also, and could laugh in her own sleeve at his
amazement when he discovered a bran new lining in his hat.

"Our little Queen-bee is a sensible little girl," said the Judge,
well-pleased, to his wife, who had made him a third in this plot; and
after that day she was called both by father and mother "our sensible
little Queen-bee."

Scarcely had Jacobi been three weeks in the family of the Franks,
before Elise felt herself disposed to give him a new title, that of
Disputer-General, so great was the ability he discovered to dispute on
every subject, from human free-will to rules for cookery; nay, even for
the eating of eggs.

On this subject Elise wrote thus to her sister Cecilia:--"But however
polite and agreeable the Candidate may be generally, still he is just as
wearisome and obstinate in disputation; and as there is nobody in the
house that makes any pretension to rival him in certain subtleties of
argument, he is in great danger of considering himself a miracle of
metaphysical light, which he is not, I am persuaded, by any means, since
he has much more skill in rending down than in building up, in
perplexing than in making clear. Ernst is no friend of metaphysical
hair-splitting, and when Jacobi begins to doubt the most perceptible and
most certain things--'what is perceptible, what is certain?' the
Candidate will inquire--he grows impatient, shrugs his shoulders, goes
to his writing-table, and leaves me to combat it out, although, for my
part, I would gladly have nothing to do with it. Should I, however, for
awhile carry on the contest boldly, the scholar then will overwhelm me
with learned words and arguments, and then I too flee, and leave him
_maître du champ de bataille_. He believes then that I am convinced, at
least of his power, which yet, however, is not the case; and if fortune
do not bestow upon me a powerful ally against him, he may imagine so.
Nevertheless, I am not without some curiosity to hear a system which he
has promised to explain to me this evening, and according to which
everything in the world ought to be so good and consistent. These
subjects have always an interest for me, and remind me of the time when
you and I, Cecilia, like two butterflies, went fluttering over the
earth, pausing about its flowers, and building up for ourselves pretty
theories on the origin of life and all things. Since then I had almost
forgotten them. Think only if the mythology of our youth should present
itself again in the system of the Candidate!"

Here Elise was interrupted by the entrance of the troop of children.

"Might we borrow Gabriele?" "Mother, lend us Gabriele!" besought several
coaxing little voices.

"Gabriele, wilt thou not come and play with us? Oh, yes, certainly thou
wilt!" and with these words Petrea held up a gingerbread heart, winch
so operated on the heart of the little one, that she yielded to the
wishes of brother and sisters.

"Ah, but you must take great care of her, my little angel!" said the
mother; "Louise, dear, take her under your charge; look after her, and
see that no harm befal her!"

"Yes, of course," said Louise, with a consequential countenance; and the
jubilant children carried off the borrowed treasure, and quickly was
their sport in full operation in the hall.

Elise took her work, and the Candidate, with a look of great importance,
seated himself before her, in order to initiate her into the mysteries
of his system. Just, however, at the moment when he had opened his mouth
to begin, after having hemmed a few times, a shrill little barking, and
the words "your most devoted servant," were heard at the door, and a
person entered curtseying with an air of conscious worth, said with a
little poodle in her arms--a person with whom we will have the honour to
commence a new chapter.

FOOTNOTES:

[2] Borrowing fire; a Swedish child's play.


CHAPTER III.

THE CHAMBERLAIN'S LADY.


Where is there not _haute volée_? Above the heavenly hosts are outspread
the wings of cherubim and seraphim; and in the poultry-yards of earth
the geese exalt their wings high over the other lesser feathered
creatures. It belongs to the ordination of the world.

The Chamberlain's lady, Gunilla W., belonged incontestibly to the
highest _haute volée_ in the excellent city of X., where we have had the
honour of making the acquaintance of the family of the Franks. She was
the sister of Governor Stjernhök, and inhabited the third story of the
house of which the Franks inhabited the second, and Evelina Berndes the
first.

This lady had spent her youth at court, and passed many a day of
wearisome constraint, and many a night in making those clothes which
were to conceal from the world how poor Miss Gunilla was; yet neither
night nor day did she complain either of constraint or of poverty, for
she possessed under a plain exterior a strong and quiet spirit.

An old aunt used to preach to her thus: "Eat, that thou mayst grow fat;
if thou art fat, thou wilt grow handsome; and if thou art handsome, thou
wilt get married."

Miss Gunilla, who never ate much, and who did not eat one mouthful more
for this warning, grew neither fat nor handsome; yet on account of her
excellent disposition she was beloved by every one, and especially by a
young rich Chamberlain of the court, who, through his own good qualities
and excellent heart, won her affections, and thus Miss Gunilla became
Mistress. After this, in the circle of her friends she was accustomed to
be called Mrs. Gunilla; which freedom we also shall sometimes take with
her here.

Shortly after her marriage, and in consequence of cold, her husband
became a sad invalid. For thirty years she lived separated from the
world, a faithful and lonely attendant of the sick man; and what she
bore and what she endured the world knew not, for she endured all in
silence. For several years her husband could not bear the light; she
learned, therefore, to work in darkness, and thus made a large
embroidered carpet. "Into this carpet," said she, as she once spoke
accidentally of herself, "have I worked many tears."

One of the many hypochondriacal fancies of her husband was, that he was
about to fall into a yawning abyss, and only could believe himself safe
so long as he held the hand of his wife. Thus for one month after
another she sate by his couch.

At length the grave opened for him; and thanking his wife for the
happiness he had enjoyed in the house of sickness on earth, he sank to
rest, in full belief of a land of restoration beyond. When he was gone,
it seemed to her as if she were as useless in the world as an old
almanack; but here also again her soul raised itself under its burden,
and she regulated her life with peace and decision. In course of years
she grew more cheerful, and the originality of her talents and
disposition which nature had given to her, and which, in her solitude,
had undisturbedly followed their own bent, brought a freshness with them
into social life, into which she entered at first rather from resolution
than from feeling at ease in it.

"The Lord ordains all things for the best;" that had always been, and
still remained, the firm anchorage of her soul. But it was not this
alone which gave to her the peace and gentleness which announced
themselves in her voice, and diffused a true grace over her aged and
not handsome countenance; they had yet another foundation: for even as
the sunken sun throws the loveliest light upon the earth which it has
left, so does the holy memory of a beloved but departed human being on
the remaining solitary friend. Mrs. Gunilla herself lived in such a
remembrance: she knew it not, but after the death of her husband the
dark pictures of his suffering vanished more and more, and his own form,
purified by patience and suffering, rose continually higher in its noble
glorification; it beamed into her soul, and her soul became brightened
thereby. Seldom mentioned she the name of her husband; but when she did
so, it was like a breath of summer air in voice and countenance.

She collected good people about her, and loved to promote their
happiness; and whenever there was a young couple whose narrow
circumstances, or whose fears for the future, filled them with anxiety,
or a young but indigent man who was about to fall into debt and
difficulty, Mrs. Gunilla was ever at hand, although in most cases behind
others. She had nevertheless her faults; and these, as we proceed, we
shall become acquainted with.

We now hastily sketch her portrait the size of life. Age between fifty
and sixty; figure tall, stiff, well-made, not too thin--beside Jeremias
Muntor she might be called stout--complexion, pale yellow; the nose and
chin coming together, the mouth fallen in; the eyes grey and small,
forehead smooth, and agreeably shaded by silver hair; the hands still
handsome, and between the thumb and delicate tip of the forefinger a
pinch of snuff, which was commonly held in certain perspective towards
the nose, whilst with an elbow resting on the arm of sofa or easy-chair
she gave little lectures, or read aloud, for it was one of her
weaknesses to suppose that she knew everything.

During her long hermit-life she had been accustomed wholly to neglect
her toilet, and this neglect she found it difficult afterwards to
overcome; and her old silk gown, from which the wadding peeped out from
many a hole, especially at the elbows; her often-mended collar, and her
drooping cap, the ribbons of which were flecked with many a stain of
snuff, were always a trouble to Elise's love of order and purity.
Notwithstanding all this, there was a certain air about Mrs. Gunilla
which carried off all; and with her character, rank, property, and
consideration, she was _haute volée_, spite of torn gown and
snuff-beflecked ribbons, and had great influence among the best society
of the city.

She considered herself somewhat related to Elise, was very fond of her,
and used very often to impart to her opinions on education (N. B.--Mrs.
Gunilla never had children), on which account many people in the city
accused Elise of weakness towards the _haute volée_, and the
postmistress Bask and the general-shopkeeper Suur considered it quite as
much a crime as a failing.

There was in Mrs. Gunilla's voice, manners, and bearing, a something
very imposing; her curtsey was usually very stately and low, and this
brings us again to her entrance into Elise's room. Elise, the moment she
entered, quickly rose and welcomed her, introducing Jacobi at the same
time.

At the first glance Jacobi uttered an exclamation of joyful surprise,
approached her with an appearance of the greatest cordiality, seized her
hand, which he kissed reverentially, and felicitated himself on the
happiness of seeing her again.

The little eyes of the Chamberlain's lady twinkled, and she exclaimed,
"Oh, heavens! my heart's dearest! Nay, that is very pleasant! He, he,
he, he!"

"How!" exclaimed Elise, in astonishment, "Mr. Jacobi, do you
know----Aunt W., do you know Mr. Jacobi?"

The Candidate appeared about to give an explanation of the acquaintance,
but this Mrs. Gunilla, with a faint crimson overspreading the pale
yellow cheek, and a twitch of the eyebrow, prevented, and with a quick
voice she said, "We once lived in the same house."

She then desired that the conversation which her entrance had
interrupted, and which appeared to have been very important, might
proceed. "At least," added she, with a penetrating glance on Elise and
the Candidate, "if I should not disturb you."

"Certainly not!"

The Candidate needed only the sixteenth of a hint to rush armed with
full fervour into the mysteries of his system. Mrs. Gunilla took up a
packet of old gold thread, which she set herself to unravel, whilst the
Candidate coughed and prepared himself.


CHAPTER IV.

MONADS AND NOMADS.


"All beings," commenced the Candidate, "have, as their most intrinsic
foundation and substance, a simple unity, a soul, a--in one word, a
monad."

"A--a what?" asked the Chamberlain's lady, fixing her eyes upon him.

"A monad, or a simple unity," continued he. "The monads have a common
resemblance in substance one with another; but in respect of qualities,
of power, and size, they are substantially unlike. There are the monads
of people; there are human monads, animal monads, vegetable monads; in
short, the world is full of monads--they compose the world----"

"Heart's dearest!" interrupted the old lady, in a tone of displeasure,
"I don't understand one word of all this! What stuff it is! What are
monads?--fill the world, do they?--I see no monads!"

"But you see me, dear lady," said Jacobi, "and yourself. You are
yourself a monad."

"I a monad!" exclaimed she, in disgust.

"Yes, certainly," replied he, "your Honour, just the same as any other
living creature----"

"But," interrupted she, "I must tell you, dear friend, that I am neither
a monad nor a creature, but a human being--a sinful human being it is
true--but one that God, in any case, created in his own image."

"Yes, certainly, certainly," acceded the Candidate. "I acknowledge a
principal monad, from which all other monads emanate----"

"What!" exclaimed she, "is our Lord God to be a monad also?"

"He may be so designated," said the Candidate, "on account of oneness,
and also to preserve uniformity as to name. For the rest, I believe that
the monads, from the beginning, are gifted with a self-sustaining
strength, through which they are generated into the corporeal world;
that is to say, take a bodily shape, live, act, nay even strive--that is
to say, would remove themselves from one body into another without the
immediate influence of the Principal Monad. The monads are in perpetual
motion--perpetual change, and always place and arrange themselves
according to their power and will. If, now, we regard the world from
this point of view, it presents itself to us in the clearest and most
excellent manner. In all spheres of life we see how the principal monad
assembles all the subject monads around itself as organs and members.
Thus are nations and states, arts and sciences, fashioned; thus every
man creates his own world, and governs it according to his ability; for
there is no such thing as free-will, as people commonly imagine, but the
monad in man directs what he shall become, and what in regard to----"

"That I don't believe," interrupted Mrs. Gunilla; "since, if my soul, or
monad, as you would call it, had guided me according to its pleasure, it
would have led me to do many wicked things; and if our Lord God had not
chastised me, and in his mercy directed me to something that was
good--be so good as to let alone my cotton-balls--it would have gone mad
enough with my nomadic soul--that I can tell you."

"But, your Honour," said Jacobi, "I don't deny at all the influence of a
principal monad; on the contrary, I acknowledge that; and it is
precisely this influence upon your monad which----"

"And I assert," exclaimed she, warming, and again interrupting him,
"that we should do nothing that was right if you could establish your
nomadic government, instead of the government of our Lord God. What good
could I get from your nomads?"

"Monads," said the Candidate, correcting her.

"And supposing your monads," continued Mrs. Gunilla, "do keep in such
perpetual movement, and do arrange themselves so properly, what good
will that do me in moments of temptation and need? Put in a fresh saucepan,
rub together two heaping teaspoonfuls of butter and an even teaspoonful
of cornstarch and stir into the soup. Let it come to the boiling point
and remove from the fire, adding at the last moment a quarter of
a cupful of whipped cream.

Serve with or without fried croutons.

CREAM OF MUSHROOMS.

Wash one pound of mushrooms, skin and stem them. Put the skins and
stems in a saucepan with a cup of boiling water and boil ten
minutes, strain and add to this water the mushroom flaps chopped
very fine, and cook until tender, then press through a fine sieve.
Melt two large heaping tablespoonfuls of butter in a saucepan, and
stir into it two heaping tablespoonfuls of flour, and when smooth
add a quart of rich milk, a whole clove of garlic, salt and pepper
to taste.And why
are things so bad here? Why, precisely for this very reason, because you
good people fancy yourselves such powerful monads, and think so much of
your own strength, without being willing to know that you are altogether
poor sinners, who ought to beseech our Lord God to govern their poor
nomadic souls, in order that they might become a little better. It is
precisely such nomadic notions as these that we have to thank for all
kind of rapscallion pranks, for all uproars and broken windows. If you
had only less of nomads, and more of sensible men in you, one should
live in better peace on the earth."

The Candidate was quite confounded; he had never been used to argument
like this, and stared at Mrs. Gunilla with open mouth; whilst little
Pyrrhus, excited by the warmth of his mistress, leapt upon the table,
and barking shrilly seemed disposed to spring at the Candidate's nose.
All this appeared so comic, that Elise could no longer keep back the
merriment which she had felt during the former part of the dispute, and
Jacobi himself accompanied her hearty laugh. Mrs. Gunilla, however,
looked very bitter; and the Candidate, nothing daunted, began again.

"But, in the name of all the world," said he, "your Honour will not
understand me: we speak only of a mode of observing the world--a mode by
which its phenomena can be clearly expounded. Monadology, rightly
understood, does not oppose the ideas of the Christian religion, as I
will demonstrate immediately. Objective revelation proves to us exactly
that the subject-objective and object-subjective, which----"

"Ah!" said Mrs. Gunilla, throwing herself back, "talk what nonsense you
will for me, I know what I know. Nomads may be just what they please for
me: but I call a man, a man; I call a cat, a cat, and a flower, a
flower; and our Lord God remains to me our Lord God, and no nomad!"

"Monad, monad!" cried the Candidate, in a sort of half-comic despair;
"and as for that word, philosophy has as good a right as any other
science to make use of certain words to express certain ideas."

During the last several minutes suspicious movements had been heard at
the parlour door, the cause of which now became evident; the children
had stolen in behind the Candidate, and now cast beseeching glances
towards their mother that she should let all go on unobserved. Petrea
and Eva stole in first, carrying between them a heavy pincushion,
weighted with lead, five pounds in weight at least. The Candidate was
standing; and at the very moment when he was doing his best to defend
the rights of philosophy, the leaden cushion was dropped down into his
coat-pocket. A motion backwards was perceptible through his whole body,
and his coat was tightly pulled down behind. A powerful twitching showed
itself at the corners of his mouth, and a certain stammering might be
noticed in his speech, although he stood perfectly still, and appeared
to observe nothing; while the little rascals, who had expected a
terrible explosion from their well-laid train, stole off to a distance;
but oh, wonder! the Candidate stood stock-still, and seemed not at all
aware that anything was going on in his coat-laps.

All this while, however, there was in him such a powerful inclination to
laugh that he hastened to relate an anecdote which should give him the
opportunity of doing so. And whether it was the nomads of Mrs. Gunilla
which diverted him from his system, or the visit of the little herd of
nomads to his pockets, true it is there was an end of his philosophy for
that evening. Beyond this, he appeared now to wish by cheerful discourse
to entertain Mrs. Gunilla, in which he perfectly succeeded; and so mild
and indulgent was he towards her, that Elise began to question with
herself whether Mrs. Gunilla's mode of argument were not the best and
the most successful.

The children stood not far off, and observed all the actions of Jacobi.
"If he goes out, he will feel the cushion," said they. "He will fetch a
book! Now he comes--ah!"

The Candidate really went out for a book from his room, but he stepped
with the most stoical repose, though with a miserably backward-pulled
coat, through the astonished troop of children, and left the room.

When he returned, the coat sate quite correctly; the cushion evidently
was not there. The astonishment of the children rose to the highest
pitch, and there was no end to their conjectures. The Queen-bee imagined
that there must be a hole in his pocket, through which the pincushion
had fallen on the stairs. Petrea, in whose suggestion the joke
originated, was quite dismayed about the fate of the cushion.

Never once did it enter into the innocent heads of the children that the
Candidate had done all this in order to turn their intended surprise on
him into a surprise on themselves.

"How came you to be acquainted with Mrs. Gunilla W.?" asked Elise from
Jacobi when the lady was gone.

"When I was studying in----," replied he, "I routed a small room on the
ground-floor of the same house where she lived. As I at that time was in
very narrow circumstances, I had my dinner from an eating-house near,
where all was supplied at the lowest price; but it often was so
intolerably bad, that I was obliged to send it back untasted, and
endeavour, by a walk in the fresh air instead, to appease my hunger. I
had lived thus for some time, and was, as may be imagined, become meagre
enough, when Mrs. W., with whom I was not personally acquainted,
proposed to me, through her housekeeper, that she should provide me with
a dinner at the same low charge as the eating-house. I was astonished,
but extremely delighted, and thankfully accepted the proposal. I soon
discovered, however, that she wished in this way to become my benefactor
without its appearing so, and without my thanks being necessary. From
this day I lived in actual plenty. But her goodness did not end here.
During a severely cold winter, in which I went out in a very thin
great-coat, I received quite unexpectedly one trimmed with fur. From
whom it came I could not for some time discover, till chance gave me a
clue which led me to the Chamberlain's lady. But could I thank her for
it? No; she became regularly angry and scolded me if I spoke of the
gratitude which I felt and always shall feel for her kindness."

Tears filled the eyes of Jacobi as he told this, and both Elise's eyes
and those of her husband beamed with delight at this relation.

"It is," said Judge Prank, "a proof how much goodness there is in the
world, although at a superficial glance one is so disposed to doubt it.
That which is bad usually noises itself abroad, is echoed back from
side to side, and newspapers and social circles find so much to say
about it; whilst that which is good likes best to go--like
sunshine--quietly through the world."


CHAPTER V.

DISAGREEABLE NEWS.


The "skirmish"--as Mrs. Gunilla called the little strift she had with
the Candidate, about monads and nomads--appeared to have displeased
neither of them, but rather, on the contrary, to have excited in them a
desire for others of the same kind; and as Elise, who had no great
inclination to spend her evenings alone with him, used frequently to
invite Mrs. Gunilla to drink tea with them, it was not long before she
and the Candidate were again in full disputation together. If the
Assessor happened also to come in, there was a terrible noise. The
Candidate screamed, and leapt about almost beside himself, but was
fairly out-talked, because his voice was weak, and because Mrs. Gunilla
and the Assessor, who between them two selves never were agreed, leagued
themselves nevertheless against him. Jacobi, notwithstanding this, had
often the right side of an argument, and bore his overthrow with the
best temper in the world. Perhaps he might have lost his courage,
however, as well as his voice in this unequal contest--he himself
declared he should--had he not suddenly abandoned the field. He vanished
almost entirely from the little evening circle.

"What has become of our Candidate?" sometimes asked Mrs. Gunilla. "I
shall be much surprised if his monad or nomad has not carried him off to
the land of the nomads! He, he, he, he!"

Judge Frank and wife also began to question with some anxiety, "What has
become of our Candidate?"

Our Candidate belonged to that class of persons who easily win many
friends. His cheerful easy temper, his talents, and good social
qualifications, made him much beloved and sought after, especially in
smaller circles. It was here, therefore, as it had been in the
University--he was drawn into a jovial little company of good fellows,
where, in a variety of ways, they could amuse themselves, and where the
cheerful spirit and talents of Jacobi were highly prized. He allowed
himself, partly out of good-nature and partly out of his own folly, to
be led on by them, and to take part in a variety of pranks, which,
through the influence of some members of the Club, went on from little
to more, and our Candidate found himself, before he was aware of what he
was about, drawn into a regular carouse--all which operated most
disadvantageously upon his affairs--kept him out late at night, and only
permitted him to rise late in the morning, and then with headache and
disinclination to business.

There was, of course, no lack of good friends to bring these tidings to
Judge Frank. He was angry, and Elise was seriously distressed, for she
had begun to like Jacobi, and had hoped for so much from his connexion
with the children.

"It won't do, it won't do," grumbled Judge Frank. "There shall very soon
be an end to this! A pretty story indeed! I shall tell him--I, if
he----But, my sweet friend, you yourself are to blame in this affair;
you should concern yourself a little about him; you are so _fière_ and
distant to him; and what amusement do you provide for him here of an
evening? The little quarrels between Mrs. Gunilla and Munter cannot be
particularly amusing to him, especially when he is always out-talked by
them. It would be a thousand times better for the young man if you would
allow him to read aloud to you; yes, if it were romances, or whatever in
the world you would. You should stimulate his talent for music; it would
give yourself pleasure, and between whiles you could talk a little sound
reason with him, instead of disputing about things which neither he nor
you understand! If you had only begun in that way at first, he would
perhaps never have been such a swashbuckler as he is, and now to get
order and good manners back into the house one must have scenes. I'll
not allow such goings on!--he shall hear about it to-morrow morning!
I'll give that pretty youth something which he shall remember!"

"Ah!" said Elise, "don't be too severe, Ernst! Jacobi is good; and if
you talk seriously yet kindly to him, I am persuaded it will have the
best effect."

Judge Frank made no reply, but walked up and down the room in very ill
humour.

"Would you like to hear some news of your neighbour the
pasquinade-writer?" asked Assessor Munter, who just then entered with a
dark countenance. "He is sick, sick to death of a galloping
consumption--he will not write any more pasquinades."

"Who looks after his little girl?" asked Elise; "I see her sometimes
running about the street like a wild cat."

"Yes, there's a pretty prospect for her," snorted out the Assessor.
"There is a person in the house--a person they call her, she ought to be
called reptile, or rather devil--who is said to look after the
housekeeping, but robs him, and ruins that child. Would you believe it?
she and two tall churls of sons that she has about her amuse themselves
with terrifying that little girl by dressing themselves up whimsically,
and acting the goblins in the twilight. It is more than a miracle if
they do not drive her mad!"

"Poor wretch!" exclaimed Judge Frank, in rage and abhorrence. "Good
heavens! how much destruction of character there is, how much crime,
which the arm of the law cannot reach! And that child's father, can he
bear that it is so treated?"

"He is wholly governed by that creature--that woman," said Munter;
"besides, sick in bed as he now is, he knows but little of what goes on
in the house."

"And if he die," asked the Judge, "is there nobody who will look after
that girl? Has he a relation or friend?"

"Nobody in this world," returned Jeremias. "I have inquired
particularly. The bird in the wood is not more defenceless than that
child. Poverty there will be in the house; and what little there is,
that monster of a housekeeper will soon run through."

"What can one do?" asked the Judge, in real anxiety. "Do you know
anything, Munter, that one could do?"

"Nothing as yet," returned he; "at present things must take their own
course. I counsel nobody to interfere; for he is possessed of the woman,
and she is possessed of the devil: and as for the girl, he will have her
constantly with him, and lets her give way to all her petulances. But
this cannot long endure. In a month, perhaps, he will be dead; and he
who sees the falling sparrow will, without doubt, take care of the poor
child. At present nobody can save her from the hands of these harpies.
Now, good night! But I could not help coming to tell you this little
history, because it lay burning at my heart; and people have the very
polite custom of throwing their burdens upon others, in order to lighten
themselves. Adieu!"

The Judge was very much disturbed this evening. "What he had just heard
weighed heavily on his heart.

"It is singular," said he, "how often Mr. N.'s course and mine have
clashed. He has really talent, but bad moral character; on that account
I have opposed his endeavours to get into office, and thus operated
against his success. It was natural that he should become my enemy, and
I never troubled myself about it! but now I wish--the unhappy man, how
miserably he lies there! and that poor, poor child! Ström," said he,
calling to his servant, "is the Candidate at home? No? and it is nearly
eleven! The thousand! To-morrow he shall find out where he is at home!"


CHAPTER VI.

HERO-DEEDS.


On the following morning, as Judge Frank drew aside his window-curtains,
the sun--the sun, so powerful in its beams and its silence--shone into
his chamber, lighting it with its glorious splendour. Those sunbeams
went directly to his heart.

"Dear Elise," said he, when his wife was awake, "I have a great deal to
do to-day. Perhaps it would be better if you would speak with Jacobi,
and give him his lecture. Ladies, in such circumstances, have more
influence on men than we men can have. Besides this, what can be bent
must not be broken. I--in short, I fancy you will manage the affair
best. It is so beautiful to-day! Could you not take the children a long
walk? It would do both them and you good, and upon the way you would
have an excellent opportunity for an explanation. Should this be of no
avail, then I will--but I would gladly avoid being angry with him; one
has things enough to vex one without that."

The Judge was not the only person in the house whom the sun inspired
with thoughts of rambling. The Candidate had promised the children on
some "very fine day" to take them to a wood, where there were plenty of
hazel-bushes, and where they would gather a rich harvest of nuts.
Children have an incomparable memory for all such promises; and the
little Franks thought that no day could by any possibility be more
beautiful or more suitable for a great expedition than the present, and
therefore, as soon as they discovered that the Candidate and their
parents thought the same, their joy rose actually as high as the roof.
Brigitta had not hands enough for Petrea and Eva, so did they skip about
when she wished to dress them.

Immediately after noon the procession set forth; Henrik and the
Queen-bee marched first, next came Eva and Leonore, between whom was
Petrea, each one carrying a little basket containing a piece of cake, as
provision for their journey. Behind the column of children came the
mother, and near her the Candidate, drawing a little wicker-carriage, in
which sate little Gabriele, looking gravely about with her large brown
eyes.

"Little Africa"--so the children called their little dark-eyed neighbour
from the Cape--stood at her door as the little Franks tripped forth from
theirs. Petrea, with an irresistible desire to make her acquaintance,
rushed across the street and offered her the piece of cake which she had
in her basket. The little wild creature snatched the piece of cake with
violence, showed her row of white teeth, and vanished in the doorway,
whilst Elise seized Petrea's hand, in order to keep her restless spirit
in check.

As soon as they had passed the gate of the city the children were
permitted full freedom, and they were not much more composed in their
demeanour than a set of young calves turned out for the first time into
a green meadow. We must even acknowledge that the little Queen-bee fell
into a few excesses, such as jumping over ditches where they were the
broadest, and clapping her hands and shouting to frighten away
phlegmatical crows. It was not long, however, before she gave up these
outbreaks, and turned her mind to a much sedater course; and then,
whenever a stiff-necked millifolium or gaudy hip came in her way, she
carefully broke it off, and preserved it in her apron, for the use of
the family. Henrik ran back every now and then to the wicker-carriage,
in order to kiss "the baby," and give her the very least flowers he
could find. Petrea often stumbled and fell, but always sprang up
quickly, and then unaffrightedly continued her leaping and springing.

The Queen would never have consented to this step but to save the King
and her innocent children. She would have preferred death to the
humiliation of being under obligations to her sworn enemies; but she
was overcome by the King declaring, with tears in his eyes, that he
would not quit the palace without her. The Princesses Elizabeth and
de Lamballe fell at her feet, implored Her Majesty to obey the King, and
assured her there was no alternative between instant death and
refuge from it in the Assembly.

"Well," said the Queen, "if our lot be death, let us away to receive
it with the national sanction."
I need not expatiate on the succession of horrors which now overwhelmed
the royal sufferers. Their confinement at the Feuillans, and their
subsequent transfer to the Temple, are all topics sufficiently enlarged
upon by many who were actors in the scenes to which they led. The
Princesse de Lamballe was, while it was permitted, the companion of
their captivity. But the consolation of her society was considered too
great to be continued. Her fate had no doubt been predetermined;
and, unwilling to await the slow proceedings of a trial, which it was
thought politic should precede the murder of her royal mistress,
it was found necessary to detach her from the wretched inmates of
the Temple, in order to have her more completely within the control
of the miscreants, who hated her for her virtues.

The expedient was resorted to of casting suspicion upon the correspondence
which Her Highness kept up with the exterior of the prison, for the
purpose of obtaining such necessaries as were required, in consequence
of the utter destitution in which the Royal Family retired from
the Tuileries.

Two men, of the names of Devine and Priquet, were bribed to create
a suspicion, by their informations against the Queen's female
attendant.

The first declared that on the 18th of August, while he was on duty
near the cell of the King, he saw a woman about eleven o'clock in
the day come from a room in the centre, holding in one hand three
letters, and with the other cautiously opening the door of the
right-hand chamber, whence she presently came back without the
letters and returned into the centre chamber.

He further asserted that twice, when this woman opened the door, he
distinctly saw a letter half-written, and every evidence of an eagerness
to hide it from observation. The second informant, Priquet, swore
that, while on duty as morning sentinel on the gallery between the
two towers, he saw, through the window of the central chamber, a woman
writing with great earnestness and alarm during the whole time he
was on guard.

All the ladies were immediately summoned before the authorities.
The hour of the separation between the Princess and her royal
friend accorded with the solemnity of the circumstance. It was nearly
midnight when they were torn asunder, and they never met again.

The examinations were all separate. That of the Princesse de Lamballe
was as follows
Q. Your name?

A. Marie-Therese-Louise de Savoy, Bourbon Lamballe.

Q. What do you know of the events which occurred on the 10th of August?

A. Nothing.

Q. Where did you pass that day?

A. As a relative I followed the King to the National Assembly.

Q. Were you in bed on the nights of the 9th and 10th?

A. No.

Q. Where were you then?

A. In my apartments, at the chateau.

Q. Did you not go to the apartments of the King in the course of that
night?

A. Finding there was a likelihood of a commotion, went thither towards one
in the morning.

Q. You were aware, then, that the people had arisen?

A. I learnt it from hearing the tocsin.

Q. Did you see the Swiss and National Guards, who passed the night on
the terrace?

A. I was at the window, but saw neither.

Q. Was the King in his apartment when you went thither?

A. There were a great number of persons in the room, but
not the King.

Q. Did you know of the Mayor of Paris being at the Tuileries?

A. I heard he was there.

Q. At what hour did the King go to the National Assembly?

A. Seven.

Q. Did he not, before he went, review the troops? Do you know the
oath he made them swear?

A. I never heard of any oath.

Q. Have you any knowledge of cannon being mounted and pointed in the
apartments?

A. No.

Q. Have you ever seen Messrs. Mandat and d'Affry in the chateau?

A. No.

Q. Do you know the secret doors of the Tuileries?

A. I know of no such doors.

Q. Have you not, since you have been in the Temple, received and written
letters, which you sought to send away secretly?

A. I have never received or written any letters, excepting such as have
been delivered to the municipal officer.

Q. Do you know anything of an article of furniture which is making for
Madame Elizabeth?

A. No.

Q. Have you not recently received some devotional books?

A. No.

Q. What are the books which you have at the Temple?

A. I have none.

Q. Do you know anything of a barred staircase?

A. No.

Q. What general officers did you see at the Tuileries, on the nights
of the 9th and 10th?

A. I saw no general officers, I only saw M. Roederer.

For thirteen hours was Her Highness, with her female companions in misfortune,
exposed to these absurd forms, and to the gaze of insulting and
malignant curiosity. At length, about the middle of the day, they were
told that it was decreed that they should be detained till further
orders, leaving them the choice of prisons, between that of la Force and
of la Salpetriere.

Her Highness immediately decided on the former. It was at first determined
that she should be separated from Madame de Tourzel, but humanity so
far prevailed as to permit the consolation of her society, with that of
others of her friends and fellow-sufferers, and for a moment the Princess
enjoyed the only comfort left to her, that of exchanging sympathy with
her partners in affliction. But the cell to which she was doomed proved
her last habitation upon earth.

On the 1st of September the Marseillois began their murderous operations.

Three hundred persons in two days massacred upwards of a thousand defence
less prisoners, confined under the pretext of malpractices against
the State, or rather devotedness to the royal cause.

The spirit which produced the massacres of the prisons at Paris extended
them through the principal towns and cities all over France.

Even the universal interest felt for the Princesse de Lamballe was of no
avail against this frenzy. I remember once (as if it were from a presentiment
of what was to occur) the King observing to her, "I never knew any
but fools and sycophants who could keep themselves clear from
the lash of public censure.

How is it, then, that you, my dear Princess, who are neither, contrive to
steer your bark on this dangerous coast without running against the rocks
on which so many good vessels like your own have been dashed to pieces?"
"Oh, Sire," replied Her Highness, "my time is not yet come--I am not dead
yet!" Too soon, and too horribly, her hour did come!

The butchery of the prisons was now commenced. The Duc de Penthievre set
every engine in operation to save his beloved daughter-in-law. He sent
for Manuel, who was then Procureur of Paris. The Duke declared that
half his fortune should be Manuel's if he could but save the Princesse
de Lamballe and the ladies who were in the same prison with her from
the general massacre. Manuel promised the Duke that he would instantly
set about removing them all from the reach of the blood-hunters. He began
with those whose removal was least likely to attract attention,
leaving the Princesse de Lamballe, from motives of policy, to the
last.

Meanwhile, other messengers had been dispatched to different quarters
for fear of failure with Manuel.

It was discovered by one of these that the atrocious tribunal,--[Thibaudeau,
Hebert, Simonier, etc.]--who sat in mock judgment upon the tenants of
these gloomy abodes, after satiating themselves with every studied
insult they could devise, were to pronounce the word "libre!" It was
naturally presumed that the predestined victims, on hearing this tempting
sound, and seeing the doors at the same moment set open by the clerks
of the infamous court, would dart off in exultation, and, fancying
themselves liberated, rush upon the knives of the barbarians, who
were outside, in waiting for their blood!

Hundreds were thus slaughtered.

To save the Princess from such a sacrifice, it was projected to prevent
her from appearing before the tribunal, and a belief was encouraged
that means would be devised to elude the necessity. The person who
interested himself for her safety contrived to convey a letter
containing these words: "Let what will happen, for God's sake do not
quit your cell. You will be spared. Adieu."
Manuel, however, who knew not of this cross arrangement, was better
informed than its projector.

He was aware it would be impossible for Her Highness to
escape from appearing before the tribunal. He had already removed her
companions.
The Princesse de Tarente, the Marquise de Tourzel, her daughter, and
others, were in safety. But when, true to his promise, he went to the
Princesse de Lamballe, she would not be prevailed upon to quit her
cell.
There was no time for parley. The letter prevailed, and her fate was
inevitable.

The massacre had begun at daybreak. The fiends had been some hours busy
in the work of death.

The piercing shrieks of the dying victims brought the Princess and her
remaining companion upon their knees, in fervent prayer for the souls
of the departed. The messengers of the tribunal now appeared. The Princess
was compelled to attend the summons. She went, accompanied by her
faithful female attendant.

A glance at the seas of blood, of which she caught a glimpse upon
her way to the Court, had nearly shocked her even to sudden death.

Would it had!
She staggered, but was sustained by her companion. Her courage
triumphed. She appeared before the gore-stained tribunes.

After some questions of mere form, Her Highness was commanded to swear
to be faithful to the new order of government, and to hate the King,
the Queen, and royalty.

"To the first," replied Her Highness, "I willingly submit.

To the second, how can I accede? There is nothing of which I can accuse
the Royal Family. To hate them is against my nature. They are my
Sovereigns. They are my friends and relations. I have served them for
many years, and never have I found reason for the slightest complaint."

The Princess could no longer articulate. She fell into the arms of
her attendant.

The fatal signal was pronounced. She recovered, and, crossing the court
of the prison, which was bathed with the blood of mutilated victims,
involuntarily exclaimed, "Gracious Heaven! What a sight is this!"
and fell into a fit.

Nearest to her in the mob stood a mulatto, whom she had caused
to be baptized, educated, and maintained; but whom, for ill-conduct, she
had latterly excluded from her presence. This miscreant struck at her
with his halbert. The blow removed her cap. Her luxuriant hair (as
if to hide her angelic beauty from the sight of the murderers,
pressing tiger-like around to pollute that form, the virtues of
which equalled its physical perfection)--her luxuriant hair fell
around and veiled her a moment from view. An individual, to whom I
was nearly allied, seeing the miscreants somewhat staggered, sprang
forward to the rescue; but the mulatto wounded him. The Princess
was lost to all feeling from the moment the monster first struck
at her. But the demons would not quit their prey. She expired gashed
with wounds.
Scarcely was the breath out of her body, when the murderers cut off
her head. One party of them fixed it, like that of the vilest
traitor, on an immense pole, and bore it in triumph all over Paris;
while another division of the outrageous cannibals were occupied
in tearing her clothes piecemeal from her mangled corpse. The beauty
of that form, though headless, mutilated and reeking with the hot
blood of their foul crime--how shall I describe it?--excited that
atrocious excess of lust, which impelled these hordes of assassins
to satiate their demoniac passions upon the remains of this virtuous
angel.
This incredible crime being perpetrated, the wretches fastened ropes
round the body, arms, and legs, and dragged it naked through the
streets of Paris, till no vestige remained by which it could be
distinguished as belonging to the human species; and then left it
among the hundreds of innocent victims of that awful day, who were
heaped up to putrefy in one confused and disgusting mass.
The head was reserved for other purposes of cruelty and horror. It
was first borne to the Temple, beneath the windows of the royal
prisoners.
The wretches who were hired daily to insult them in their dens of
misery, by proclaiming all the horrors vomited from the national
Vesuvius, were commissioned to redouble their howls of what had
befallen the Princesse de Lamballe.
[These horrid circumstances I had from the Chevalier Clery, who was
the only attendant allowed to assist Louis XVI. and his unhappy
family, during their last captivity; but who was banished from the
Temple as soon as his royal master was beheaded, and never permitted
to return. Clery told me all this when I met him at Pyrmont, in
Germany. He was then in attendance upon the late Comtesse de Lisle,
wife of Louie XVIII., at whose musical parties I had often the
honour of assisting, when on a visit to the beautiful Duchesse de
Guiche. On returning to Paris from Germany, on my way back into
Italy, I met the wife of Clery, and her friend M. Beaumont, both
old friends of mine, who confirmed Clery's statement, and assured
me they were all for two years in hourly expectation of being sent
to the Place de Greve for execution. The death of Robespierre saved
their lives.
Madame Clery taught Marie Antoinette to play upon the harp. Madame
Beaumont was a natural daughter of Louis XV. I had often occasion
to be in their agreeable society; and, as might be expected, their
minds were stored with the most authentic anecdotes and information
upon the topics of the day.]
The Queen sprang up at the name of her friend. She heard subjoined
to, it, "la voila en triomphe," and then came shouts and laughter.
She looked out. At a distance she perceived something like a
Bacchanalian procession, and thought, as she hoped, that the Princess
was coming to her in triumph from her prison, and her heart rejoiced
in the anticipation of once more being, blessed with her society.
But the King, who had seen and heard more distinctly from his
apartment, flew to that of the Queen. That the horrid object might
not escape observation, the monsters had mounted upon each other's
shoulders so as to lift the bleeding head quite up to the prison
bars. The King came just in time to snatch Her Majesty from the,
spot, and thus she was prevented from seeing it. He took her up in
his arms and carried her to a distant part of the Temple, but the
mob pursued her in her retreat, and howled the fatal truth even at
her, very door, adding that her head would be the next, the nation
would require. Her Majesty fell into violent hysterics. The butchers
of human flesh continued in the interior of the Temple, parading
the triumph of their assassination, until the shrieks of the Princesse
Elizabeth at the state in which she saw the Queen, and serious fears
for the safety of the royal prisoners, aroused the commandant to
treble the national guards and chase the barbarians to the outside,
where they remained for hours.

SECTION XIX.
It now remains for me to complete my record by a few facts and
observations relating to the illustrious victims who a short time
survived the Princesse de Lamballe. I shall add to this painful
narrative some details which have been mentioned to me concerning
their remorseless persecutors, who were not long left unpursued by
just and awful retribution."For heaven's sake," said he, fervently, and pale as death, "be still;
nothing perhaps is amiss; but it is the poisonous snake of our
woods--the aspic! An incautious movement, and both you and Petrea may be
lost! No, you must not; your life is too precious--but I--promise me to
be still, and----"

Elise was scarcely conscious of what she did. "Away! away!" she said,
and strove to put Jacobi aside with her weak hands; she herself would
have gone, but her knees supported her no longer--she staggered, and
fell to the ground.

In that same moment the Candidate was beside Petrea, and seizing the
snake by the neck with as much boldness as dexterity, he slung it to a
distance. By this motion awakened, Petrea shuddered, opened her
sleep-drunken eyes, and looking around her, exclaimed, "Ah, ah, father!
I have seen the Wood-god!"

"God bless thee and thy Wood-god!" cried the delighted Candidate,
rejoicing over this indisputable token of life and health; and then
clasping her to his breast he bore her to her mother. But the mother
neither heard nor saw anything; she lay in a deep swoon, and was first
recalled to consciousness by Henrik's kisses and tears. For a while she
looked about her with anguishful and bewildered looks.

"Is she dead?" whispered she.

"No, no! she lives--she is unhurt!" returned Jacobi, who had thrown
himself on his knees beside her; whilst the little Petrea, kneeling
likewise, and holding forth the bunch of raspberries, sobbed aloud, and
besought her, "Forgive! oh, mamma, forgive me!"

Light returned to the eyes of the mother; she started up, and, with a
cry of inexpressible joy, clasped the recovered child to her breast.

"God be praised and blessed!" cried she, raising her folded hands to
heaven; and then silently giving her hand to Jacobi, she looked at him
with tears, which expressed what was beyond the power of words.

"Thank God! thank God!" said Jacobi, with deep emotion, pressing Elise's
hand to his lips and to his breast. He felt himself happy beyond words.

They now hastened to remove from the dangerous neighbourhood of the
snake, after Jacobi and Henrik had given up, at the desire of the
mother, the probably ineffectual design of seeking out the poisonous but
blameless animal, and killing it on the spot.

All this time the little Queen-bee had sate alone by the grotto,
endeavouring to comfort her sisters, whilst she herself wept bitter
tears over Petrea, whom she never expected to see again: on that very
account her joy was all the greater and louder, when she saw her carried
in the arms of the Candidate; and no sooner did she learn from her
mother how he had rescued her from the fangs of death, than she threw
her arms round his neck in inexpressible gratitude. All this Petrea
heard and saw with the astonishment and curiosity of one who meets with
something unheard of; and then, thus seeing the distress which her
inconsiderateness had occasioned, she herself melted into such
despairing tears, that her mother was obliged to console and cheer her.
Of her fall into the thicket Petrea knew no more than that her head had
felt confused, that she could not get up again, had slept, and then
dreamed of the Wood-god.

In the mean time it had become so late, that the harvest of nuts was not
to be thought of, and as much on the mother's as on Petrea's account, it
was necessary to hasten home. The other children probably would have
grieved more over the unfortunate pleasure journey, had they not felt an
extraordinary desire to relate at home the remarkable occurrences of the
day. New difficulties arose on the return. Petrea--who, besides that she
was weary, was bruised and sadly dirtied by her fall--could not walk,
and therefore it was determined that she must ride in the little
carriage, while the Candidate carried Gabriele. When, however, the
little one saw that Jacobi was without gloves, she would neither allow
him to carry her nor to take hold of her, and set up the most pitiable
cry. Spite of her crying, however, he took up the "little mother," as he
called her; and what neither his nor the mother's persuasion could
effect, was brought about by Henrik's leaps and springs, and
caresses--she was diverted: the tears remained standing half-way down
her cheeks, in the dimples which were suddenly made by her hearty
laughter.

Petrea, after the paroxysm of sorrow and penitence was in measure
abated, began to think herself and her adventures particularly
interesting, and sate in her little carriage a very important personage,
surrounded by her sisters, who could not sufficiently listen to her
relation, and who emulated each other in drawing the little equipage.
As for Jacobi, he drew the carriage; he carried the baby, which soon
fell asleep on his shoulder; he sang songs; told stories, in order to
entertain Elise, who remained a long time pale and depressed, from the
danger which had threatened her, and the anxiety which she had endured.

At length they reached home. They poured forth their adventures:
Brigitta shed tears over her "Little angel-sweet Mamselle Petrea;" and
the father, from the impulse of his feelings, pressed Jacobi to his
heart.

After Petrea's scratches and bruises had been washed with Riga-balsam,
the mother permitted the children to have a supper of pancakes and
raspberry-cream, in order to console them for the unfortunate
expedition. Hereupon the children danced for joy about the table; and
Petrea, who, on account of her misfortunes, received a Benjamin's
portion, regarded it as certain that they always eat such cream in
heaven, wherefore she proposed that it should be called "Angels' food."
This proposition met with the highest approbation, and from this day
"Angels' food" became a well-known dish in the Frank family.

Yet Petrea wept some bitter tears on the breast of her father over the
gentle admonition she received from him; but spite of tears, she soon
slept sweetly in his arms.

And the lecture of the Candidate?

"Stay at home with us this evening," said Elise to him, with a kind,
beseeching glance.

The Candidate stayed with them.


CHAPTER VII.

BREAKERS.


"Stay at home with us this evening," prayed Elise the next day, and for
several other days, and the Candidate stayed.

Never before had he seen Elise so kind, so cordial towards him; never
before had she shown him so much attention as now; and this attention,
this cordiality from a lady who, in her intercourse with men, was
generally only polite and indifferent, flattered his vanity, at the same
time that it penetrated his good heart. All occasion for explanation
and lectures vanished, for the Candidate had entirely renounced his
dissipated friends and companions, and now nobody could talk more
edifying than he on the subject. He agreed so cordially with Elise, that
the fleeting champagne of the orgies foamed only for the moment, leaving
nothing but emptiness and flatness behind. "For once, nay, for a few
times," he was of opinion, "such excesses might be harmless, perhaps
even refreshing; but often repeated--ah! that would be prejudicial, and
demoralising in the highest degree!"

All this seemed to the little Queen-bee, who had heard it, remarkably
well expressed.

Nobody seemed now better pleased at home than Jacobi; he felt himself so
well in the regular course of life which he led, and there seemed so
much that was genuine and fresh in the occupations and pleasures of
those quiet days at home.

In the mean time, the fresh life of the Candidate began to develop its
weak side. Gratitude had, in the first instance, warmed Elise's heart
towards him, and then his own real amiability made it so easy to gratify
the wish of her husband respecting her behaviour towards him, and thus
it soon happened that her intercourse with Jacobi enlivened her own
existence. In many respects their tastes were similar, especially in
their love of music and polite literature, whilst his youthful
enthusiasm gave to their common occupations a higher life and interest.
Discussion lost all character of dispute, and became merely an agreeable
interchange of thought: it was no longer now of any importance to him to
be always right; there was a peculiar kind of pleasure in giving up his
opinion to hers. He knew more out of books than she did, but she knew
more of life--the mother of books, than he; and on this account she, on
her part, proceeded as the older and guiding friend. He felt himself
happy from the influence and gentle guidance of an agreeable woman, and
became more and more devoted to her from his soul.

Still there was a quietness and a charm about this connexion that made
him never forbode danger in it. He loved to be treated as a child by
Elise, and he gave, therefore, free play to his naturally
unsophisticated feelings. Her gentle reproofs were a sort of luxury to
him; he had a delight in sinning, in order to deserve them; and then,
whilst listening to them, how gladly would he have pressed her dress,
or her white and beautiful hand to his lips; there was even a sort of
painfully agreeable sensation to him in his not daring to do so.
Whenever she approached, and he heard her light footsteps, or when he
perceived the soft rose-odour which always accompanied her, it seemed to
become infinitely warm around his heart. But that which, above all the
rest, was the strongest bond between Jacobi and Elise, was her
sufferings. Whenever nervous pain, or domestic unpleasantness, depressed
her spirits; when she bore the not unfrequent ill-humour of her husband
with patience, the heart of Jacobi melted in tenderness towards her, and
he did all that lay in his power to amuse and divert her thoughts, and
even to anticipate her slightest wishes. She could not be insensible to
all this--perhaps also it flattered her vanity to observe the power she
had over this young man--perhaps even she might willingly deceive
herself as to the nature of his sentiments, because she would not
disturb the connexion which lent a sweet charm to her life.

"He loves the children and their mother," said she; "he is their friend
and mine! May he only continue such!"

And certain it is that the children had never been better conducted,
never had learned better, never been happier, than they were now, whilst
Jacobi himself developed a more and more happy ability to teach and
guide.

Adverse fate barricades the shore which the vessel is on the point of
approaching, by dangerous breakers, and interrupts the bond between the
dearest friends, which is just about to be cemented eternally. It was
this fate which, at the very time when Jacobi was exhibiting his
character in the fairest point of view, occasioned the Judge to exhibit
the darker side of his.

Judge Frank belonged to that class of persons who are always in the best
humour the more they have to do, and the more active is the life they
lead. And just now there had occurred a pause in an undertaking for the
country's good, which lay much at the Judge's heart; and delay,
occasioned by a number of little circumstances which he willingly would,
but could not, dissipate, put him into an ill humour. At home he was
often exacting and quarrelsome, particularly towards his wife; thus
placing himself, beside the kind and cheerful Jacobi, in a very
disadvantageous light. He felt this, and was displeased with himself,
and displeased with his wife too, because she seemed to pay but little
regard to his grumbling; occupying herself instead by her
singing-practice with Jacobi. This very singing-practice, too, of which
he himself had been the occasion, began to appear to him too much of a
thing. He seemed to think scolding more agreeable for the ear; in fact,
he was in that edifying state of mind which excites and angers itself
about that which a few good words alone would easily put an end to.

The reading, likewise, which at first he had so zealously recommended,
became now to him another cause of vexation. Precisely at this very time
he wished to have more of the society of his wife of an evening, and
wished her to take more interest in his undertakings and his annoyances;
but whenever he came into the parlour he found them reading, or occupied
by music; and if these ceased at his entrance, there was still an
evident damp on the spirits of all--the entertainment could not proceed;
and if, on the contrary, he said, "Go on with your music (or reading),
go on," and they did so, he was still dissatisfied; and if he did not
very soon return to his own room, he walked up and down like a
snowstorm.

It was precisely this fate, of which we have just now spoken, which
managed it so, that one evening as Judge Frank, the prey of ill humour,
was walking up and down the room, a letter was put into his hand, at
sight of which he burst into an exclamation of joyful surprise. "Nay,
that is indeed delightful," said he, in a very cheerful voice, as soon
as he had read the letter. "Elise! Mrs. S----, Emelie, is here. She is
only just this evening arrived; I must hasten to her directly. Sweet
Elise, will you not come with me? It would be polite."

"Oh, it is so late!" said Elise, much less pleased than her husband;
"and I fancy it rains. Cannot you go alone to-night? to-morrow morning I
will----"

"Well, well, then," said the Judge, suddenly breaking off; and somewhat
offended at her refusal, hastening away.

It was rather late when he returned from his visit, but he was in high
spirits. "She is a most interesting lady," said he; "my best Elise, it
certainly would give you great pleasure to know her intimately."

"Ah! I question that," thought Elise.

"She talks," continued he, "of locating herself here in the city. I hope
we shall decide her to do so."

"I hope not," thought Elise.

"We will do all that we possibly can," said he, "to make her residence
here agreeable. I have invited her to dinner to-morrow."

"To-morrow!" exclaimed Elise, half terrified.

"Yes, to-morrow," answered her husband, peremptorily. "I told her that
to-morrow morning you would pay her a visit, but she insists on first
coming to you. You need not trouble yourself much about the dinner
to-morrow. Emelie will not expect much from an improvised dinner. At all
events, it may be just as good as there is any need for, if people will
only give themselves a little trouble. I hope Emelie will often come and
take up with our simple way of living."

Elise went to rest that night with a depressed heart, and with an
indefinite but most unpleasant feeling, thought of the next day's
dinner, and then dreamed that her husband's "old flame" had set the
house on fire, and robbed the whole family of its shelter.


CHAPTER VIII.

THE IMPROVISED DINNER.


You housewives who know the important meaning of a roast, who know the
difficulties which sometimes overwhelm you, especially when you must
improvise a dinner; you who know that notwithstanding all inspiration,
both of understanding and inclination--yet inspiration is necessary to
all improvisation--one cannot inspire either chickens or heath-cocks to
come flying into the important dish, when the crust is ready to put on
it;--you housewives who have spent many a long morning in thoughts of
cookery and in anguish, without daring to pray the Lord for help,
although continually tempted to do so; you can sympathise in Elise's
troubles, as she, on the morning of this important dinner, saw the
finger of the clock approach twelve without having been able to
improvise a roast.

It is true that an improvised dinner might do without a roast: this we
grant as a general law; but in the case of this particular dinner, we
deny it altogether, in proof of which we might easily give the
arrangement of the whole dinner, did we not flatter ourselves that we
are believed on our bare word. Beyond this, the Judge was a declared
lover of a roast, and of all kinds of animal food, which circumstance
increased still more Elise's difficulty; and as if to make difficulty
still greater, Elise, on this very day, was remarkably in want of
assistants, for her husband had sent out, on his own business, those
servants who, on extraordinary occasions, Elise found very good help.
The cook, too, was confused to-day in a remarkable manner; the children
were in a fermentation; Eva and Leonore quarrelled; Petrea tore a hole
in her new frock; Henrik broke a water-bottle and six glasses; the baby
cried and screamed for nothing; the clock was on the stroke of twelve,
and no roast would come!

Elise was just on the point of falling into despair over roasts, cooks,
the dinner, the child, nay, over the whole world, when the door opened,
and the words, "your most devoted servant," were spoken out shrilly and
joyously, and the widow of the Court Chamberlain--to Elise she seemed an
angel of light from heaven--stood in the room, with her beaming friendly
countenance, took out of her monstrous reticule one chicken after
another, and laid them upon the table, fixing her eye on Elise, and
making with each one a little curtsey to her, upon which she laughed
heartily. Enraptured by the sight, Elise embraced first the lady
Chamberlain, then the chickens, with which she hastily sprang into the
kitchen, and returning, poured forth her thanks and all her cares to
this friend in need.

"Well, well, patience!" exhorted Mrs. Gunilla, kindly and full of
cordial sympathy, and somewhat touched by Elise's communication.
"Best-beloved, one should not take it so much to heart--such troubles as
these soon pass away--yes, indeed, they soon pass. Now listen, and I'll
tell you something, 'when need is greatest, help is nearest.' Yes, yes,
remember that! As for the chickens, I saw them in a peasant's cart, as I
crossed the market, and as I knew what was going on here, I lost no time
in buying them and bringing them, under my cloak, and I have nearly run
myself out of breath, in my haste. He, he, he! And so now I must go,
for the dear lady must dress herself nicely, and so must I too. Adieu,
dear Elise; I wish you the happiness of getting both the dinner and the
young folks in order. He, he, he!"

Gunilla went, dinner-time came, and with it the guests and the Judge,
who had spent the whole morning in the business of his own office, out
of the house.

Emelie, the Colonel's widow, was elegant in the highest degree; looked
handsome, and distinguished, and almost outdid herself in politeness;
but still Elise, spite even of herself, felt stiff and stupid by the
side of her husband's "old flame." Beyond this, she had now a great
distraction.

"Oh, that the chickens may be nicely done!" was the incessant
master-thought of Elise's soul; and it prevailed over the Pope, the
Church of St. Peter's, Thorwaldsen and Pasta, and over every subject on
which they talked.

The hour of dinner was come, and yet the dinner kept the company
waiting. The Judge, who expected from everybody else the punctuality
which he himself practised, began to suffer from what Elise called his
"dinner-fever," and threw uneasy glances first at the dining-room door,
and then at his wife, whose situation, it must be confessed, was not a
very enviable one. She endeavoured to look quite calm, but often
whispered something to the little Louise, which sent her very
importantly in and out of the room. Elise's entertainment, both that
part which was audible, and that which was inaudible, was probably at
the moment carried on something after the following fashion:

"It must be inexpressibly pleasant to know," (ah, how unbearably long it
is!) "it must be very interesting." (I wish Ernst would fire again on
his "old flame," and forget dinner.) "Yes, indeed, that was very
remarkable." (Now are those chickens not roasted!) "Poor Spain!" (Now,
thank goodness, dinner is ready at last--if the chickens are only well
done!)

And now to dinner! A word which brightens all countenances, and enlivens
all tempers. Elise began to esteem the Colonel's widow very highly,
because she kept up such a lively conversation, and she hoped this would
divert attention from any of the dishes which were not particularly
successful. The Judge was a polite and agreeable host, and he was
particularly fond of dinner-time, when he would willingly have made all
men partakers of his good appetite, good humour, and even of his good
eating--N. B. if this really was good--but if the contrary happened to
be the case, his temper could not well sustain it.

During the dinner Elise saw now and then little clouds come over her
husband's brow, but he himself appeared anxious to disperse them, and
all went on tolerably till the chickens came. As the Judge, who adhered
to all old customs, was cutting them up, he evidently found them tough,
whereupon a glance was sent across the table to his wife which went to
her heart like the stab of a knife; but no sooner was the first pang
over than this reproachful glance aroused a degree of indignation in her
which determined her to steel herself against a misfortune which in no
case was her fault; she, therefore, grew quite lively and talkative, and
never once turned her eyes to her husband, who, angry and silent, sate
there with a very hot brow, and the knife sticking still in the fowls.

But, after all, she felt as if she could again breathe freely when the
dinner was over, and on that very account longed just to speak one word
of reconciliation with her husband; but he now seemed to have only eyes
and ears for Emelie; nor was it long before the two fell into a lively
and most interesting conversation, which certainly would have given
Elise pleasure, and in which she might have taken part, had not a
feeling of depression stolen over her, as she fancied she perceived a
something cold and depreciating in the manners of her husband towards
her. She grew stiller and paler; all gathered themselves round the
brilliant Emelie; even the children seemed enchanted by her. Henrik
presented her with a beautiful flower, which he had obtained from Louise
by flattery. Petrea seemed to have got up a passion for her father's
"old flame," took a footstool and sat near her, and kissed her hand as
soon as she could possess herself of it.

The lady devoted herself exclusively to her old worshipper, cast the
beams of her beautiful eyes upon him, and smiled bewitchingly.

"This is a great delight!" thought Elise, as she wiped away a traitorous
tear; "but I will keep a good face on it!"

The Candidate, who perceived all this, quickly withdrew from the lady's
enchanted circle, in which he also had been involved, and taking "the
baby" on his knee, began to relate a story which was calculated as much
to interest the mother as the child. The children were soon around him:
Petrea herself forsook her new flame to listen, and even Elise for the
moment was so amused by it that she forgot everything else. That was
precisely what Jacobi wanted, but it was not that which pleased the
Judge. He rose for a moment, in order to hear what it was which had so
riveted the attention of his wife.

"I cannot conceive," said he to her in a half-whisper, "how you can take
delight in such absurdity; nor do I think it good for the children that
they should be crammed with such nonsense!"

At length Emelie rose to take her leave, overwhelming Elise with a flood
of polite speeches, which she was obliged to answer as well as she
could, and the Judge, who had promised to show her the lions of the
place, accompanied her; on which the rest of the guests dispersed
themselves. The elder children accompanied the Candidate to the
school-room to spend an hour in drawing; the younger went to play;
Petrea wished to borrow Gabriele, who at the sight of a gingerbread
heart could not resist, and as a reward received a bit of it; Elise
retired to her own chamber.

Poor Elise! I took advantage of it. "I think," said I, "I have seen you
once or twice with a tall, handsome man, in a loose great coat of very
singular colour. Pray, if not impertinent, who is he?
I am sure I have seen him before in England."
I looked full upon Thornton as I said this; he changed colour, and answered
my gaze with a quick glance from his small, glittering eye, before he
replied. "I scarcely know who you mean, my acquaintance is so large
and miscellaneous at Paris. It might have been Johnson, or Smith, or
Howard, or any body, in short."
"It is a man nearly six feet high," said I, "thin, and remarkably well
made, of a pale complexion, light eyes, and very black hair,
mustachios and whiskers.

I saw him with you once in the Bois de Boulogne, and once in a hell in
the Palais Royal. Surely, now you will recollect who he is?"
Thornton was evidently disconcerted. "Oh!" said he, after a short
pause, and another of his peculiarly quick, sly glances--"Oh, that
man; I have known him a very short time. What is his name? let me see!"
and Mr.
Thornton affected to look down in a complete reverie of dim remembrances.

I saw, however, that, from time to time, his eye glanced up to me, with
a restless, inquisitive expression, and as instantly retired.

"Ah," said I, carelessly, "I think I know who he is!"
"Who!" cried Thornton, eagerly, and utterly off his guard.

"And yet," I pursued, without noticing the interruption, "it scarcely
can be--the colour of the hair is so very different."

Thornton again appeared to relapse into his recollections. "War--Warbur--
ah, I have it now!" cried he, "Warburton--that's it--that's the name--is
it the one you supposed, Mr. Pelham?"
"No," said I, apparently perfectly satisfied. "I was quite mistaken.
Good morning, I did not think it was so late. On Sunday, then, Mr.
Thornton-- au plaisir!"

"A d--d cunning dog!" said I to myself, as I left the apartments.
"However, on peut-etre trop fin.

I shall have him yet."
The surest way to make a dupe is to let you victim suppose you are his

CHAPTER XXIV.

Voila de l'erudition.
--Les Femmes Savantes.

I found, on my return, covered with blood, and foaming with passion, my
inestimable valet--Bedos!

"What's the matter?" said I.

"Matter!" repeated Bedos, in a tone almost inarticulate with rage; and
then, rejoicing at the opportunity of unbosoming his wrath, he
poured out a vast volley of ivrognes and carognes, against our Dame
du Chateau, of monkey reminiscence.

With great difficulty, I gathered, at last, from his vituperations, that
the enraged landlady, determined to wreak her vengeance on some one, had
sent for him into her appartement, accosted him with a smile, bade him
sit down, regaled him with cold vol-au-vent, and a glass of Curacoa,
and, while he was felicitating himself on his good fortune, slipped
out of the room: presently, three tall fellows entered with sticks.

"We'll teach you," said the biggest of them--"we'll teach you to
lock up ladies, for the indulgence of your vulgar amusement;" and,
without one other word, they fell upon Bedos, with incredible zeal
and vigour.

The valiant valet defended himself, tooth and nail, for some time, for
which he only got the more soundly belaboured.

In the meanwhile the landlady entered, and, with the same gentle smile
as before, begged him to make no ceremony, to proceed with his present
amusement, and when he was tired with the exercise, hoped he would
refresh himself with another glass of Curacoa.

"It was this," said Bedos, with a whimper, "which hurt me the most,
to think she should serve me so cruelly, after I had eaten so plentifully
of the vol-au-vent; envy and injustice I can bear, but treachery stabs
me to the heart."

When these threshers of men were tired, the lady satisfied, and Bedos
half dead, they suffered the unhappy valet to withdraw; the mistress
of the hotel giving him a note, which she desired, with great civility,
that he would transmit to me on my return. This, I found, inclosed my
bill, and informed me that my month being out on the morrow, she was
unwilling to continue me any longer, and begged I would, therefore,
have the bonte to choose another apartment.

"Carry my luggage forthwith," said I, "to the Hotel de Mirabeau:" and
that very evening I changed my abode.

I am happy in the opportunity this incident affords me of especially
recommending the Hotel de Mirabeau, Rue de la Paix, to any of my
countrymen who are really gentlemen, and will not disgrace my
recommendation. It is certainly the best caravansera in the English
quartier.

I was engaged that day to a literary dinner at the Marquis D'Al--; and
as I knew I should meet Vincent, I felt some pleasure in repairing
to my entertainer's hotel. They were just going to dinner as I entered.
A good many English were of the party. The good natured (in all senses
of the word) Lady--, who always affected to pet me, cried aloud, "Pelham,
mon joli petit mignon, I have not seen you for an age--do give me
your arm."
Madame D'Anville was just before me, and, as I looked at her, I saw that
her eyes were full of tears; my heart smote me for my late inattention,
and going up to her, I only nodded to Lady--, and said, in reply
to her invitation, "Non, perfide, it is my turn to be cruel now.

Remember your flirtation with Mr. Howard de Howard."
"Pooh!" said Lady--, taking Lord Vincent's arm, "your jealousy does
indeed rest upon 'a trifle light as air.'"
"Do you forgive me?" whispered I to Madame D'Anville, as I handed her
to the salle a manger.

"Does not love forgive every thing?" was her answer.

"At least," thought I, "it never talks in those pretty phrases."

The conversation soon turned upon books. As for me, I never at that time
took a share in those discussions; indeed, I have long laid it down
as a rule, that a man never gains by talking to more than one person
at a time. If you don't shine, you are a fool--if you do, you are a
bore. You must become either ridiculous or unpopular--either
hurt your own self- love by stupidity, or that of others by wit. I
therefore sat in silence, looking exceedingly edified, and now and
then muttering "good!" "true!" Thank heaven, however, the suspension
of one faculty only increases the vivacity of the others; my eyes and
ears always watch like sentinels over the repose of my lips.

Careless and indifferent as I seem to all things, nothing ever escapes
me: the minutest erreur in a dish or a domestic, the most trifling
peculiarity in a criticism or a coat, my glance detects in an instant,
and transmits for ever to my recollection.

"You have seen Jouy's 'Hermite de la Chaussee D'Antin?'" said our host to
Lord Vincent.

"I have, and think meanly of it.

There is a perpetual aim at something pointed, which as perpetually
merges into something dull. He is like a bad swimmer, strikes out with
great force, makes a confounded splash, and never gets a yard the further
for it. It is a great effort not to sink.
Indeed, Monsieur D'A--, your literature is at a very reduced ebb;
bombastic in the drama--shallow in philosophy--mawkish in poetry,
your writers of the present day seem to think, with Boileau--
"'Souvent de tous nos maux la raison est le pire.'"

"Surely," cried Madame D'Anville, "you will allow De la Martine's
poetry to be beautiful?"

"I allow it," said he, "to be among the best you have; and I know very
few lines in your language equal to the two first stanzas in his 'Meditation
on Napoleon,' or to those exquisite verses called 'Le Lac;' but
you will allow also that he wants originality and nerve.

His thoughts are pathetic, but not deep; he whines, but sheds no tears.
He has, in his imitation of Lord Byron, reversed the great miracle;
instead of turning water into wine, he has turned wine into water.

Besides, he is so unpardonably obscure. He thinks, with Bacchus--(you
remember, D'A--, the line in Euripides, which I will not quote), that
'there is something august in the shades;' but he has applied this
thought wrongly--in his obscurity there is nothing sublime--it is the
back ground of a Dutch picture. It is only a red herring, or an old
hat, which he has invested with such pomposity of shadow and darkness."

"But his verses are so smooth," said Lady--.

"Ah!" answered Vincent.

"'Quand la rime enfin se trouve au bout des vers, Qu'importe que
le reste y soit mis des travers.'"
"Helas" said the Viscount D'A--t, an author of no small celebrity himself;
"I agree with you--we shall never again see a Voltaire or a
Rousseau."

"There is but little justice in those complaints, often as they are made,"
replied Vincent. "You may not, it is true, see a Voltaire or a Rousseau,
but you will see their equals.

Genius can never be exhausted by one individual. In our country, the poets
after Chaucer in the fifteenth century complained of the decay of
their art--they did not anticipate Shakspeare.

In Hayley's time, who ever dreamt of the ascension of Byron?
Yet Shakspeare and Byron came like the bridegroom 'in the dead of
night;' and you have the same probability of producing--not, indeed,
another Rousseau, but a writer to do equal honour to your literature."

"I think," said Lady--, "that Rousseau's 'Julie' is over-rated.

I had heard so much of 'La Nouvelle Heloise' when I was a girl, and
been so often told that it was destruction to read it, that I
bought the book the very day after I was married.

I own to you that I could not get through it."
"I am not surprised at it," answered Vincent; "but Rousseau is not
the less a genius for all that: there is no story to bear out the
style, and he himself is right when he says 'ce livre convient a
tres peu de lecteurs.'

One letter would delight every one--four volumes of them are a surfeit--it
is the toujours perdrix. But the chief beauty of that wonderful conception
of an empassioned and meditative mind is to be found in the
inimitable manner in which the thoughts are embodied, and in the
tenderness, the truth, the profundity of the thoughts themselves:
when Lord Edouard says, 'c'est le chemin des passions qui m'a conduit
a la philosophie,' he inculcates, in one simple phrase, a profound
and unanswerable truth.

It is in these remarks that nature is chiefly found in the writings of
Rousseau: too much engrossed in himself to be deeply skilled in
the characters of others, that very self-study had yet given him a
knowledge of the more hidden recesses of the heart.

He could perceive at once the motive and the cause of actions, but he
wanted the patience to trace the elaborate and winding progress of
their effects.

He saw the passions in their home, but he could not follow them
abroad.

He knew mankind in the general, but not men in the detail.

Thus, when he makes an aphorism or reflection, it comes home at once
to you as true; but when he would analyze that reflection, when he
argues, reasons, and attempts to prove, you reject him as unnatural,
or you refute him as false.

It is then that he partakes of that manie commune which he imputes to
other philosophers, 'de nier ce qui est, et d'expliquer ce qui n'est
pas.'"

There was a short pause. "I think," said Madame D'Anville, "that it is
in those pensees which you admire so much in Rousseau, that our authors
in general excel."
"You are right," said Vincent, "and for this reason--with you les gens de
letters are always les gens du monde.

Hence their quick perceptions are devoted to men as well as to books. They
make observations acutely, and embody them with grace; but it is worth
remarking, that the same cause which produced the aphorism, frequently
prevents its being profound.
These literary gens du monde have the tact to observe, but not the patience,
perhaps not the time, to investigate. They make the maxim, but they
never explain to you the train of reasoning which led to it.
Hence they are more brilliant than true.

An English writer would not dare to make a maxim, involving, perhaps,
in two lines, one of the most important of moral truths, without
bringing pages to support his dictum. A French essayist leaves it wholly
to itself.

He tells you neither how he came by his reasons, nor their conclusion,
'le plus fou souvent est le plus satisfait.'

Consequently, if less tedious than the English, your reasoners are more
dangerous, and ought rather to be considered as models of terseness
than of reflection.

A man might learn to think sooner from your writers, but he will learn
to think justly sooner from ours. Many observations of La Bruyere and
Rochefoucault--the latter especially--have obtained credit for truth
solely from their point. They possess exactly the same merit as the
very sensible--permit me to add--very French line in Corneille:--
"'Ma plus douce esperance est de perdre l'espoir.'"
The Maquis took advantage of the silence which followed Vincent's
criticism to rise from table. We all (except Vincent, who took
leave) adjourned to the salon. "Qui est cet homme la?" said one, "comme
il est epris de lui-meme." "How silly he is," cried another--"how
ugly," said a third. What a taste in literature--such a talker--such
shallowness, and such assurance--not worth the answering--could not slip
in a word-- disagreeable, revolting, awkward, slovenly, were the
most complimentary opinions bestowed upon the unfortunate Vincent.

The women called him un horreur, and the men un bete. The old railed at
his mauvais gout, and the young at his mauvais coeur, for the former
always attribute whatever does not correspond with their sentiments,
to a perversion of taste, and the latter whatever does not come
up to their enthusiasm, to a depravity of heart.

As for me, I went home, enriched with two new observations; first, that
one may not speak of any thing relative to a foreign country, as one
would if one was a native. National censures become
particular affronts.

Secondly, that those who know mankind in theory, seldom know it in
practice; the very wisdom that conceives a rule, is accompanied with
the abstraction, or the vanity, which destroys it.

I mean that the philosopher of the cabinet is often too diffident to
put into action his observations, or too eager for display to conceal
their design. Lord Vincent values himself upon his science du monde.
He has read much upon men, he has reflected more; he lays down
aphorisms to govern or to please them. He goes into society; he is cheated
by the one half, and the other half he offends.

       The sage in the cabinet is but a fool in the salon; and the most
consummate men of the world are those who have considered the least
on it.

CHAPTER XXV.

Falstaff. What money is in my purse?
Page. Seven groats and two-pence.
--Second Part of Henry IV.

En iterum Crispinus.

       The next day a note was brought me, which had been sent to my former
lodgings in the Hotel de Paris: it was from Thornton.

"My dear Sir," (it began)
"I am very sorry that particular business will prevent me the pleasure
of seeing you at my rooms on Sunday. I hope to be more fortunate
some other day.

       I should like much to introduce you, the first opportunity, to my
friends in the Rue Gretry, for I like obliging my countrymen.

I am sure, if you were to go there, you would cut and come again--one
shoulder of mutton drives down another.

"I beg you to accept my repeated excuses, and remain,
"Dear Sir, "Your very obedient servant, "Thomas Thornton.

"Rue St. Dominique,
"Friday Morning."

This letter produced in me many and manifold cogitations.

What could possibly have induced Mr. Tom Thornton, rogue as he was, to
postpone thus of his own accord, the plucking of a pigeon, which he had
such good reason to believe he had entrapped? There was evidently no
longer the same avidity to cultivate my acquaintance as before; in
putting off our appointment with so little ceremony, he did not even
fix a day for another. What had altered his original designs towards me?
for if Vincent's account was true, it was natural to suppose that
he wished to profit by any acquaintance he might form with
me, and therefore such an acquaintance his own interests would
induce him to continue and confirm.

Either, then, he no longer had the same necessity for a dupe, or he no
longer imagined I should become one. Yet neither of these suppositions
was probable. It was not likely that he should grow suddenly honest,
or suddenly rich: nor had I, on the other hand, given him any
reason to suppose I was a jot more wary than any other individual
he might have imposed upon.

On the contrary, I had appeared to seek his acquaintance with an
eagerness which said but little for my knowledge of the world.

The more I reflected, the more I should have been puzzled, had I not
connected his present backwardness with his acquaintance with the stranger,
whom he termed Warburton. It is true, that I had no reason to suppose
so: it was a conjecture wholly unsupported, and, indeed, against my
better sense; yet, from some unanalysed associations, I could not divest
myself of the supposition.

"I will soon see," thought I; and wrapping myself in my cloak, for the
day was bitterly cold, I bent my way to Thornton's lodgings. I could not
explain to myself the deep interest I took in whatever was
connected with (the so-called) Warburton, or whatever promised to
discover more clearly any particulars respecting him. His behaviour in
the gambling house; his conversation with the woman in the Jardin des
Plantes; and the singular circumstance, that a man of so very aristocratic
an appearance, should be connected with Thornton, and only seen in
such low scenes, and with such low society, would not have been
sufficient so strongly to occupy my mind, had it not been for certain dim
recollections, and undefinable associations, that his appearance when
present, and my thoughts of him when absent, perpetually recalled.

As, engrossed with meditations of this nature, I was passing over
the Pont Neuf, I perceived the man Warburton had so earnestly watched
in the gambling house, and whom I identified with the "Tyrrell," who
had formed the subject of conversation in the Jardin des Plantes,
pass slowly before me. There was an appearance of great exhaustion
in his swarthy and strongly marked countenance. He walked carelessly
on, neither looking to the right nor the left, with that air of thought
and abstraction which I have remarked as common to all men in the habit
of indulging any engrossing and exciting passion.

We were just on the other side of the Seine, when I perceived the
woman of the Jardin des Plantes approach. Tyrrell (for that, I
afterwards discovered, was really his name) started as she came
near, and asked her, in a tone of some asperity, where she had been?
As I was but a few paces behind, I had a clear, full view of the
woman's countenance. She was about twenty-eight or thirty years of
age. Her features were decidedly handsome, though somewhat too sharp
and aquiline for my individual taste.
Her eyes were light and rather sunken; and her complexion bespoke
somewhat of the paleness and languor of ill-health. On the whole,
the expression of her face, though decided, was not unpleasing, and
when she returned Tyrrell's rather rude salutation, it was with a
smile, which made her, for the moment, absolutely beautiful.
"Where have I been to?"Every form of life
carries in itself decay and dissolution--a poisonous snake-king[3] gnaws
even at the root of the world's tree."

Several of the listeners, and among them the Candidate, had laughed
loudly at Emelie's descriptions; but the Judge had not once moved his
lips, and replied, when she had done, with an earnestness that
confounded even her satire.

"If all this were true, Emelie," said he, "then were life, even in the
best point of view, good for nothing; and with justice might it indeed
be called an illusion. But it is not so; and you have only described
marriage in its lowest, and not either in its best or its truest sense.
I do not deny the difficulties which exist in this as in every other
circumstance of life; but I am confident that they may and must be
overcome; and this will be done if the married pair bring only right
intentions into the house. Then want and care, disturbing, nay even
bitter hours, may come, but they will also go; and the bonds of love and
truth will be consolation, nay, even will give strength. You have
spoken, Emelie, of death and separation as the end of the drama of life;
you have forgotten the awaking again, and the second youth, of which
the ancient northern Vala sings. Married life, like all life, has such a
second youth; yes, indeed, a progressive one, because it has its
foundation in the life which is eternal; and every contest won, every
danger passed through, every pain endured, change themselves into
blessings on home and on the married pair, who have thus obtained better
knowledge, and who are thus more closely united."

He spoke with unusual warmth, and not without emotion, and his
expressive glance sought and dwelt upon his wife, who had approached
unobserved, and who had listened to Emelie's bitter satire with stinging
pain, because she knew that there was a degree of truth in it.

But as her husband spoke, she felt that he perceived the full truth, and
her heart beat freer and stronger, and all at once a clearness was in
her soul. With her head bent forward, she gazed on him with a glance
full of tenderness and confidence, forgetting herself, and listening
with fervour to every word which he uttered. In this very moment their
eyes met, and there was much, inexpressibly much, in their glance; a
clear crimson of delight flushed her cheek, and made her beautiful. The
gentle happiness which now animated her being, together with her lovely
figure, her graceful movements, and the purity of her brow, made her far
more fascinating than her lovely rival. Her husband followed her with
his eyes, as kindly and attentively she busied herself among her guests,
or with the little Gabriele in her arms mingled in the children's dance,
for which Evelina's foster-daughters were playing a four-handed piece.
He had suddenly cooled towards his "old flame," nor was he at all warmed
again by the sharp tone with which the little caressing Petrea was
reproved for being too obtrusive.

"Our little Louise in time will dance very well," remarked the Judge to
his wife, as he noticed with great pleasure the little _brisées_ and
_chassées_ of his daughter whom the twelve-years-old Nils Gabriel
Stjernhök twirled round, and with whom he conversed with great gravity,
and a certain knightly politeness.

In the mean time Mrs. Gunilla was instructing Emelie on the manners and
character of the French; and Emelie, whose countenance since the
discussion of the marriage question had worn a bitter expression,
endeavoured with a tolerably sharp tone to make her superior
information felt, and in return was mown down, as it were, at one stroke
by Mrs. Gunilla, who--had never been in France.

The Candidate followed Elise everywhere with glances of devotion, and
appeared this evening perfectly enchanted by her amiability.

"Fie, for shame!--to take all the confections to yourself!" moralised
the little Queen-bee to the little S----ne,--a fat, quiet boy, who took
the confections and the reproof with the same stoical indifference.
Louise cast a look of high indignation upon him, and then gave her share
of sweetmeats to a little girl, who complained that she had had none.

Supper came, and Emelie, whose eyes flashed unusual fire, seemed to wish
fervently to win back that regard which she, perhaps, feared to have
lost already, and with her playful and witty conversation electrified
the whole company. Jacobi, who was excited in no ordinary manner, drank
one glass of wine after another, talked and laughed very loud, and
looked between whiles upon Elise with glances which expressed his
sentiments in no doubtful manner. These glances were not the first of
the kind which the quick eye of Elise's rival observed.

"That young man," said she, in a low but significant whisper to the
Judge, and with a glance on Jacobi, "seems to be very charming; he has
really remarkably attractive talents--is he nearly related to Elise?"

"No," returned he, looking at her rather surprised; "but he has been for
nearly three months a member of our family."

"Indeed!" said she, in a significant and grave manner; "I should have
thought--but as for that," added she, in an apparently careless
tone--"Elise is really so kind and so amiable, that for him who is with
her daily, it must be very difficult not to love her."

The Judge felt the sting of the viper, and with a glance which flashed a
noble indignation, he replied to his beautiful neighbour, "You are
right, Emelie; I know no woman who deserves more love or esteem than
she!"

Emelie bit her lip and grew pale; and she would assuredly have grown yet
paler, could she only have understood the sentiment which she had
awakened in the breast of her former admirer.

Ernst Frank had a keen sense of moral meanness, and when this displayed
itself no gifts of genius or of nature had power to conceal it. He
clearly understood her intentions, and despised her for them. In his
eyes, at this moment, she was hateful. In the mean time his composure
was destroyed. He looked on Jacobi, and observed his glances and his
feelings; he looked on Elise, and saw that she was uneasy, and avoided
his eye.

A horrible spasmodic feeling thrilled through his soul; in order to
conceal what he felt he became more than usually animated, yet there was
a something hostile, a something sternly sarcastic in his words, which
still, on account of the general gaiety, remained unobserved by most.

Never before was Assessor Munter so cheerful, so comically cross with
all mankind. Mrs. Gunilla and he shouted as if desperate against each
other. The company rose from the supper-table in full strife, and
adjourned to the dancing-room.

"Music, in heaven's name! music!" exclaimed the Assessor with a gesture
of despair, and Elise and the Colonel's widow hastened to the piano. It
was a pleasant thought, after the screaming of that rough voice had been
heard, to play one of Blangini's beautiful night-pieces, which seem to
have been inspired by the Italian heaven, and which awaken in the soul
of the hearer a vision of those summer nights, with their flowery
meadows, of their love, of their music, and of all their unspeakable
delights.

"_Un' eterna constanza in amor!_" were the words which, repeated several
times with the most bewitching modulations, concluded the song.

"_Un' eterna constanza in amor!_" repeated the Candidate, softly and
passionately pressing his hand to his heart, as he followed Elise to a
window, whither she had gone to gather a rose for her rival. As Elise's
hand touched the rose, the lips of Jacobi touched her hand.

Emelie sang another song, which delighted the company extremely; but
Ernst Frank stood silent and gloomy the while. Words had been spoken
this evening which aroused his slumbering perception; and with the look
he cast upon Jacobi and his wife, he felt as if the earth were trembling
under his feet. He saw that which passed at the window, and gasped for
breath. A tempest was aroused in his breast; and at the same moment
turning his eyes, he encountered, those of another person, which were
riveted upon him with a questioning, penetrating expression. They were
those of the Assessor. Such a glance as that from any other person had
been poison to the mind of Frank, but from Jeremias Munter it operated
quite otherwise; and as shortly afterwards he saw his friend writing
something on a strip of paper, he went to him, and looking over his
shoulder, read these words:

"Why regardest thou the mote in thy brother's eye, yet seest not the
beam in thine own eye?"

"Is this meant for me?" asked he, in a low but excited voice.

"Yes," was the direct reply.

The Judge took the paper, and concealed it in his breast.

He was pale and silent, and began to examine himself. The company broke
up; he had promised Emelie to accompany her home; but now, while she,
full of animation, jested with several gentlemen, and while her servant
drew on her fur-shoes, he stood silent and cold beside his "old flame"
as a pillar of ice. Mrs. Gunilla and the Assessor quarrelled till the
last moment. Whilst all this was going on, Elise went quietly to Jacobi,
who stood somewhat apart, and said to him in a low voice, "I wish to
speak with you, and will wait for you in the parlour, when they are all
gone." Jacobi bowed; a burning crimson flashed to his cheek; the Judge
threw a penetrating glance upon them, and passed his hand over his pale
countenance.

"It gives me great pleasure," cried Mrs. Gunilla, speaking shrilly and
_staccato_--"it gives me great pleasure to see my fellow-creatures, and
it gives me great pleasure if they will see me. If they are not always
agreeable, why I am not always agreeable myself! Heart's-dearest! in
this world one must have patience one with another, and not be
everlastingly requiring and demanding from others. Heaven help me! I am
satisfied with the world, and with my own fellow-creatures, as our Lord
has been pleased to make them. I cannot endure that people should be
perpetually blaming, and criticising, and mocking, and making sour faces
at everything, and saying 'I will not have this!' and 'I will not have
that!' and 'I will not have it so! It is folly; it is unbearable; it is
wearisome; it is stupid!' precisely as if they themselves only were
endurable, agreeable, and clever! No, I have learned better manners than
that. It is true that I have no genius, nor learning, nor talents, as so
many people in our day lay claim to, but I have learned to govern
myself!"

During this moral lecture, and endeavouring all the time to overpower
it, the Assessor exclaimed, "And can you derive the least pleasure from
your blessed social life? No, that you cannot! What is social life, but
a strift to get into the world in order to discover that the world is
unbearable? but a scheming and labouring to get invited, to be offended
and put out of sorts if not invited; and if invited, then to complain of
weariness and vexation, and thus utter their lamentations. Thus people
bring a mass of folks together, and wish them--at Jericho! and all this
strift only to get poorer, more out of humour, more out of health; in
one word, to obtain the perfectly false position, _vis-à-vis_, of
happiness! See there! Adieu, adieu! When the ladies take leave, they
never have done."

"There is not one single word of truth in all that you have said," was
the last but laughing salutation of Mrs. Gunilla to the Assessor, as,
accompanied by the Candidate, she left the door. The Judge, too, was
gone; and Elise, left alone, betook herself to the parlour.

Suddenly quick steps were heard behind her--she thought "Jacobi"--turned
round, and saw her husband; but never before had she seen him looking as
then; there was an excitement, an agitation, in his countenance that
terrified her. He threw his arm violently round her waist, riveted his
eyes upon her with a glance that seemed as if it would penetrate into
her inmost soul.

"Ernst, Ernst, be calm!" whispered she, deeply moved by his state of
mind, the cause of which she imagined. He seized her hand and pressed it
to his forehead--it was damp and cold; the next moment he was gone.

We will now return to the Candidate.

Wine and love, and excited expectation, had so inflamed the imagination
of the young man, that he hardly knew what he did--whether he walked, or
whether he flew; and more than once, in descending the stairs, had he
nearly precipitated Mrs. Gunilla, who exclaimed with kindness, but some
little astonishment, "The Cross preserve me! I cannot imagine,
heart's-dearest, how either you or I go to-night! I think we are all
about to--see, now again, all's going mad.--No, I thank you, I'll take
care of my nose, crooked as it is. I think I can go safer by myself. I
can hold by----"

"A thousand thousand times pardon," interrupted the Candidate, whilst he
pressed Mrs. Gunilla's arm tightly; "it is all my fault. But now we will
go safely and magnificently; I was a little dizzy!"

"Dizzy!" repeated she. "Heart's-dearest, we should take care on that
very account; one should take care of one's head as well as one's heart;
one should take care of that, or it may go still more awry than it now
is with us! He, he, he, he--but listen to me, my friend," said Mrs.
Gunilla, suddenly becoming very grave: "I will tell you one thing, and
that is----"

"Your most gracious Honour, pardon me," interrupted he, "but I think--I
feel rather unwell--I--there, now we are at your door! Pardon me!" and
the Candidate tumbled up-stairs again.

In the hall of the Franks' dwelling he drew breath. The thought of the
mysterious meeting with Elise filled him at the same time with joy and
uneasiness. He could not collect his bewildered thoughts, and with a
wildly-beating heart went into the room where Elise awaited him.

As soon as he saw her white lovely figure standing in the magical
lamplight his soul became intoxicated, and he was just about to throw
himself at her feet, when Elise, hastily, and with dignity, drew back a
few paces.

"Listen to me, Jacobi," said she, with trembling but earnest voice.

"Listen to you!" said he, passionately--"oh, that I might listen to you
for ever!--oh, that I----"

"Silence!" interrupted Elise, with a severity very unusual to her; "not
one word more of this kind, or our conversation is at an end, and we are
separated for ever!"

"Good heavens!" exclaimed Jacobi, "what have----"

"I beseech you, listen to me!" continued Elise; "tell me, Jacobi, have I
given you occasion to think thus lightly of me?"

Jacobi started. "What a question!" said he, stammering, and pale.

"Nevertheless," continued Elise, with emotion, "I must have done so;
your behaviour to me this evening has proved it. Could you think,
Jacobi, that I, a wife, the mother of many children, could permit the
sentiment which you have been so thoughtless as to avow this evening?
Could you imagine that it would not occasion me great uneasiness and
pain? Indeed, it is so, Jacobi; I fear that you have gone sadly wrong;
and if I myself, through any want of circumspection in my conduct, have
assisted thereto, may God forgive me! You have punished me for it,
Jacobi--have punished me for the regard I have felt for you and shown to
you; and if I now must break a connexion which I hoped would gladden my
life, it is your own fault. Only one more such glance--one more such
declaration, as you have made this evening, and you must remove from
this house."

The crimson of shame and indignation burned on Jacobi's cheek. "In
truth," said he, "I have not deserved such severity."

"Ah! examine yourself, Jacobi," said she, "and you will judge yourself
more severely than I have done. You say that you love me, Jacobi, and
you do not dread to destroy the peace and happiness of my life. Already,
perhaps, are poisonous tongues in activity against me. I have seen this
evening glances directed upon me and upon you, which were not mild; and
thoughts and feelings are awakened in my husband's soul, which never
ought to have been awakened there. You have disturbed the peace of a
house, into which you were received with friendship and confidence. But
I know," continued she, mildly, "that you have not intended anything
criminal!--no bad intentions have guided your behaviour; folly only has
led you to treat so lightly that relationship which is the holiest on
earth. You have not reflected on your life, on your duty, and your
situation, in this family, with seriousness."

Jacobi covered his face with his hands, and a strong emotion agitated
him.

"And seriousness," again began Elise, with warmth and deep
earnestness--"seriousness! how it clothes--how it dignifies the
man!--Jacobi, the saviour of my child--my young friend! I would not have
spoken thus to you if I had not had great faith on your better--your
nobler self;--if I had not hoped to have won a friend in you--a friend
for my whole life, for myself and my Ernst. Oh, Jacobi, listen to my
prayer!--you are thrown among people who are willing from their very
hearts to be your friends! Act so that we may love and highly esteem
you; and do not change into grief that hearty goodwill which we both
feel for you! Combat against, nay, banish from your heart, every foolish
sentiment which you, for a moment, have cherished for me. Consider me as
a sister, as a mother! Yes," continued she, pausing over this word, and
half prophetically, "perhaps you may even yet call me mother; and if you
will show me love and faith, Jacobi, as you have said, I will accept
it--from my son! Oh, Jacobi! if you would deserve my blessing, and my
eternal gratitude, be a faithful friend, a good instructor of my boy--my
Henrik! Your talents as a teacher are of no common kind. Your heart is
good--your understanding is capable of the noblest cultivation--your
path is open before you to all that which makes man most estimable and
most amiable. Oh, turn not away from it, Jacobi--tread this path with
seriousness----"

"Say not another word!" exclaimed Jacobi. "Oh, I see all! forgive me,
angelic Elise! I will do all, everything, in order to deserve hereafter
your esteem and your friendship. You have penetrated my heart--you have
changed it. I shall become a better man. But tell me that you forgive
me--that you can be my friend, and that you will!"

Jacobi, in the height of his excitement, had thrown himself on his knee
before her; Elise also was deeply affected; tears streamed from her
eyes, whilst she extended her hand to him, and bending over him said,
from the very depths of her heart, "Your friend, for ever!"

Calmly, and with cheerful countenances, both raised themselves; but an
involuntary shudder passed through both as they saw the Judge standing
in the room, with a pale and stern countenance.

Jacobi went towards him: "Judge Frank," said he, with a firm but humble
voice, "you behold here a----"

"Silence, Jacobi!" interrupted Elise, quickly; "you need not blush on
account of your bended knee, nor is any explanation needful. It is not,
is it, Ernst?" continued she, with the undaunted freshness of innocence:
"you desire no explanation; you believe me when I say that Jacobi now,
more than ever, deserves your friendship. A bond is formed between us
three, which, as I hope before God, nothing will disturb, and no
poisonous tongues censure. You believe me, Ernst?"

"Yes," said he, giving her his hand; "if I could not, then----" he did
not finish his sentence, but fixed his eyes with a stern expression
immovably on her. "I will speak with you," said he, after a moment, and
in a calmer voice. "Good night, Mr. Jacobi."

Jacobi bowed, withdrew a few steps, and then returned. "Judge Frank,"
said he, in a voice which showed the excitement of his feelings, "give
me your hand; I will deserve your friendship."

The outstretched hand was grasped firmly and powerfully, and Jacobi left
the room in haste.

"Come here, Elise," said the Judge, with warmth, leading his wife to the
sofa, and enclosing her in his arms. "Speak to me! Tell me, has anything
in my behaviour of late turned your heart from me!"

Elise's head sunk upon the breast of her husband, and she was silent.
"Ah, Ernst!" said she at length, with a painful sigh, "I also am
dissatisfied with myself. But, oh!" added she more cheerfully, "when I
lean myself on you thus, when I hear your heart beating, and know what
is within that heart, then, Ernst, I feel how I love you--how I believe
on you! Then I reproach myself with being so weak, so unthankful, so
ready to take offence, then--oh, Ernst! love me! Look on me always as
now, then life will be bright to me; then shall I have strength to
overcome all--even my own weakness; then I shall feel that only a cloud,
only a shadow of mist, and no reality can come between us. But now all
is vanished. Now I can lay open to you all the innermost loopholes of my
heart--can tell you all my weaknesses----"

"Be still, be still now," said the Judge, with a bright and affectionate
look, and laying his hand on her mouth. "I have more failings than you;
but I am awake now. Weep not, Elise; let me kiss away your tears! Do you
not feel, as I do now, that all is right? Do we not believe in the
Eternal Good, and do we not believe in each other? Let us forgive and
forget, and have peace together. Hereafter, when the error of this time
has in some measure passed from our remembrance, we will talk it over,
and wonder how it ever came between us. Now, all is so bright between
us, and we both of us see our way clearly. Our errors will serve us for
warnings. Wherefore do we live in the world, unless to become better?
Look at me, Elise. Are you friendly towards me? Can you have confidence
in me?"

"I can! I have!" said she; "there is not a grain of dust any longer
between us."

"Then we are one!" said he, with a joyful voice. "Let us, then, in God's
name, go thus together through life. What He has united, let no man, no
accident, nothing in this world, separate!"

Night came; but light had arisen in the breast both of husband and wife.

       *       *       *       *       *

The furrow of disunion bears commonly thorns and thistles, but it may
likewise bear seed for the granary of heaven.

FOOTNOTES:

[3] According to the Northern mythology, Nidhögg, the snake-king, lives
in Niflhem, the nether world.


CHAPTER XI.

JACOBI.


When Jacobi entered his room, he found a letter lying on the table near
his bed. He recognised the handwriting as that of Judge Frank, and
quickly opened it. A bank-note of considerable value fell out; and the
letter contained the following words:

      "You are indebted to several persons in the city, Jacobi, with
      whom I wish, for your own sake, that you should have as little to
      do as possible. Within, you will find the means of satisfying
      their demands. Receive it as from a paternal friend, who sincerely
      wishes you to regard him as such, and who embraces with pleasure
      an opportunity of making an acknowledgment to the friend and
      instructor of his children. To the preserver of my child I shall
      always remain indebted; but should you desire anything, or need
      anything, do not apply to any other than

                              "Your friend, E. Frank."

"He! and he, too!" exclaimed Jacobi, deeply agitated. "Oh, the kind,
noble, excellent man! And I--I shall, I will become worthy of him! From
this day I am a new man!"

He pressed the letter to his breast, and looked up to the star-lighted
heaven with silent but fervent vows.


CHAPTER XII.

TIME GOES.


Life has its moments of strength and bloom; its bright moments of
inspiration, in which the human artist (the painter of earthly life)
seizes on, and utters the supremely pure, the supremely beautiful, the
divine. If, in such moments, everything in human life were executed; if
then sacrifices were made, work accomplished, victories won, there would
be but little difficulty in life. But the difficult part is to preserve,
through a long course of years, the flame which has been kindled by
inspiration! to preserve it while the storms come and go, while the
everlasting dust-rain of the moments falls and falls; to preserve it
still and uniform, amidst the uniform changing of uniform days and
nights. To do this, strength from above is required; repeated draughts
from the fountain of inspiration; both for the great and the small--for
all labourers on earth.

It was the good fortune of Ernst and Elise that they knew this; and knew
also how to avail themselves of it. On this account they succeeded more
and more in conquering their natural failings; on this account they came
nearer to each other by every little step, which in itself is so
unobservable, but which yet, at the same time, twines so firmly and
lovingly together the human heart and life, and which may be contained
in the rubric--_regard for mutual inclinations, interest for mutual
interests_.

Through this new-born intimacy of heart, this strengthening and pure
affection, Elise assumed a secure and noble standing with regard to
Jacobi. Her heart was vanquished by no weakness, even when she saw
suffering expressed in his youthful countenance; nay, she remained firm,
even when she saw that his health was giving way, and only besought her
husband to name an earlier day for his and Henrik's departure. This was
also her husband's wish. Like a good angel, at once gentle, yet strong,
he stood at this time by her side. No wonder was it, therefore, that,
with his support, Elise went forward successfully; no wonder was it,
therefore, that from the firm conduct of her husband, and from the
contemplation of the good understanding which existed between the
married pair, the whispered blame, which had already begun to get
abroad at their expense, died of itself, like a flame wanting
nourishment.

Of Judge Frank's "old flame," which Elise had feared so much, we must
relate how that she found herself so wounded, and so cooled likewise, by
the ice-cold behaviour of her former adorer, that she quickly left the
town, which was too monotonous for her, and abandoned all thoughts of
settling there.

"Life there would be too uniform for me, would possess too little
interest," said she, yawning, to the Judge, who was warmly counselling
her return either to France or Italy.

"In our good North," added he, "we must find that which can give
interest and enjoyment to life in ourselves and our own means,--from our
families, from our own breasts."

"She is, nevertheless, extremely beautiful and interesting," said Elise,
with a kindly feeling towards her when she was gone. The Judge made no
reply; he never was heard to speak again of his former beloved one.

Days went by. The Judge had much to do. Elise occupied herself with her
little girls, and the Candidate with Henrik and his own studies.

The children grew like asparagus in June, and the father rejoiced over
them. "The Queen-bee will grow over all our heads," prophesied he many a
time; and when he heard Eva playing "Marlbrough s'en va-t-en guerre," on
the piano, his musical sense awoke, and he said, "what a deal of feeling
there is already in her music!--is there not, Elise?"

The evenings, on which all the members of the family assembled, assumed
constantly a livelier and more comfortable character for every one;
often they played and danced with the children.

The children! What a world of pleasure and pain do they not bring with
them into a house! Of a truth all is not of as rosy a hue as their
cheeks. Elise discovered that in her children which was not always
exactly good. "Do not to others what thou wouldst not that they should
do to thee." "People should think of what they do." "Patience is a good
root." "You do not see that your father and mother do so; look at me,
and do as I do." These standing and going speeches, which have travelled
through the world from the time when "Adam delved and Eve span," down to
the present day, and which to the very end of time will be ever in
use--together with assurances to the children, whenever they were
punished, or when they must learn their lessons yet more--that all this
was done for their benefit, and that the time would come when they would
be thankful for it--which the children very seldom, if ever
believed--this citizen-of-the-world, patriarchal household-fare, which
was dealt out in the family of the Franks, as in every other worthy
family, did not always produce its proper effect.

Perhaps Elise troubled herself too much sometimes about the perpetual
recurrence of the same fault in her children--perhaps she calculated too
little on the invisible but sun-like and powerful influence of paternal
love on the little human-plants. True it is that she often was in great
anxiety on their account, and that the development and future prospects
of her daughters awoke in her soul much disquiet and trouble.

One day, when such thoughts had troubled her more than usual, she felt
the necessity of a prudent, and, in this respect, experienced female
friend, to whom she could open her mind.

"Ernst," said she, as her husband prepared himself to go out immediately
after dinner, "I shall go below for a few minutes to Evelina, but I will
be back again by the time you return."

"Don't trouble yourself about that, dear Elise," said he; "remain as
long as you like; I'll fetch you. Take my arm, and let us go down
together, that I may see exactly where you go, and whence I must fetch
you."


CHAPTER XIII.

A LITTLE EDUCATION AND COFFEE COMMITTEE.


As Elise entered Evelina's room, Pyrrhus sprang, barking, towards her,
and wagging his tail. Mrs. Gunilla was there, and she and the hostess
emulated each other in welcoming their friend.

"Nay! best-beloved, that is charming!" exclaimed Mrs. Gunilla, embracing
Elise cordially. "Now, how does the little lady?--somewhat
pale?--somewhat out of spirits, I fancy? I will tell confidentially that
I know we shall presently get some magnificent coffee, which will cheer
up little Elise."

Evelina took Elise's hand, and looked kindly and sympathising at her
with her calm sensible eyes. Pyrrhus touched her foot gently with his
nose, in order to call her attention, and then seated himself on his
hind legs before her, began growling, in order to express his sympathy
also. Elise laughed, and she and Mrs. Gunilla vied with each other in
caressing the little animal.

"Ah, let me sit down here and chat with you, where everything seems so
kind," said Elise, in reply to Evelina's glance, which spoke such a kind
"How do you do?" "Here all is so quiet and so comfortable. I do not know
how you manage, Evelina, but it seems to me as if the air in your room
were clearer than elsewhere; whenever I come to you it seems to me as if
I entered a little temple of peace."

"Yes, and so it seems to me," said Mrs. Gunilla, cordially.

"Yes, thank God," said Evelina, smiling gratefully, and with tears in
her eyes; "here is peace!"

"And at our little lady's, the young folks raise dust sometimes in the
temper, as well as in the rooms. Is it not so?" said Mrs. Gunilla, with
facetiousness. "Well, well," added she, by way of consolation,
"everything has its time, all dust will in time lay itself, only have
patience."

"Ah, teach me that best thing, Aunt," said Elise, "for I am come here
precisely with the hope of gaining some wisdom--I need it so much. But
where are your daughters to-day, Evelina?"

"They are gone to-day to one of their friends," replied she, "to a
little festival, which they have long anticipated with pleasure; and I
also expect to have my share, from their relation of it to me."

"Ah! teach me, Evelina," said Elise, "how I can make my daughters as
amiable, as good, and as happy, as your Laura and Karin. I confess that
it is the anxiety for the bringing up of my daughters which ever makes
me uneasy, and which lies so heavy on my heart this very day. I distrust
my own ability--my own artistical skill, rightly to form their
minds--rightly to unfold them."

"Ah, education, education!" said Mrs. Gunilla, angrily; "people are
everlastingly crying out now for education. One never can hear anything
now but about education. In my youth I never heard talk and outcry for
education, and yet, thank God, a man was a man in those days for all
that. I confess that when I first heard this talk of education, I
supposed that there would be two sorts, as of everything in the world. I
thought so! But now, ever since _le tiers état_ have pushed themselves
so much forward, have made so much of themselves, and have esteemed
themselves as something exclusive in the world with their education--now
the whole world cries out, 'educate! educate!' Yes, indeed, they even
tell us now that we should educate the maid-servants. I pray God to
dispense with my living in the time when maid-servants are educated; I
should have to wait myself on them, instead of their waiting on me. Yes,
yes! things are going on towards that point at a pretty rate, that I can
promise you! Already they read Frithiof and Axel; and before one is
aware, one shall hear them talk of 'husband and wife,' and 'wife and
husband;' and that they fancy themselves 'to be vines, which must wither
if they are not supported;' and 'sacrifices,' and other such affecting
things, until they become quite incapable of cleaning a room, or
scouring a kettle. Yes, indeed, there would be pretty management in the
world with all their education! It is a frenzy, a madness, with this
education! It is horrible!"

The longer Mrs. Gunilla talked on this subject, the more she excited
herself.

Elise and Evelina laughed heartily, and then declared that they
themselves, as belonging to the _tiers état_, must take education, nay,
even the education of maid-servants, under their protection.

"Ah," said Mrs. Gunilla, impatiently, "you make all so artistical and
entangled with your education; and you cram the heads of children full
of such a many things, that they never get them quite straight all the
days of their life. In my youth, people learned to speak 'the language,'
as the French was then called, just sufficient to explain a motto;
enough of drawing to copy a pattern, and music enough to play a _contre
danse_ if it were wanted; but they did not learn, as now, to gabble
about everything in the world; but they learned to think, and if they
knew less of art and splendour, why, they had the art to direct
themselves, and to leave the world in peace!"

"But, your best Honour," said Evelina, "education in its true meaning,
as it is understood in our time, teaches us to take a clearer view of
ourselves and of the world at large, so that we may more correctly
understand our own allotted station, estimate more properly that of
others, and, in consequence, that every one may be fitted for his own
station, and contented therewith."

"Yes, yes," said Mrs. Gunilla, "all that may be very good, but----" But
just then the coffee came in, with biscuits and gingerbread, which made
an important diversion in the entertainment, which now took a livelier
character. Mrs. Gunilla imparted to Elise, with jesting seriousness, a
variety of good counsel on the education of her children. She sent for
and recommended particularly a certain _Orbis Pictus_, which she herself
had studied when a child, and which began with the words, "Come here,
boy, and learn wisdom from my mouth," and in which one could see clearly
how the soul was fashioned, and how it looked. It looked like a pancake
spread out on a table round and smooth, with all the five senses
properly numbered. Mrs. Gunilla assured Elise, that if her children paid
attention to this picture, it would certainly develop and fashion their
ideas of the human soul. Furthermore, she proposed the same educational
course as had been used with such distinguished success upon her
deceased father and his brother, when they went to school, and which
consisted in every boy being combed with a fine comb every Saturday, and
well whipped, whilst an ounce of English salt was allowed per boy, in
order to drive the bad spirits out of him. Beyond this, they had, too,
on the same day, a diet of bread and beer, in which was a dumpling
called "Grammatica," so that the boys might be strengthened for the
learning of the following week.

During the merriment which these anecdotes occasioned, the Judge came
in: delighted with the merriment, and delighted with his wife, he seated
himself beside her, quite covetous of an hour's gossip with the ladies.
Mrs. Gunilla served him up the human soul in the _Orbis Pictus_, and
Elise instigated her still further to the relation of the purification
of the boys. The Judge laughed at both from the bottom of his heart, and
then the conversation turned again on the hard and disputable ground of
education; all conceding, by general consent, the insufficiency of rules
and methods to make it available.

Evelina laid great stress on the self-instruction of the teacher. "In
the degree," said she, "in which man developes in himself goodness,
wisdom, and ability, he succeeds commonly in calling out these in
children."

All the little committee, without exception, gave their most lively
approval; and Elise felt herself quite refreshed, quite strengthened by
the words which showed her so clearly the path to her great object. She
turned now, therefore, the conversation to Evelina's own history and
development. It was well known that her path through life had been an
unusual one, and one of independence, and Elise wished now to know how
she had attained to that serenity and refreshing quiet which
characterised her whole being. Evelina blushed, and wished to turn the
conversation from herself--a subject which she least of all would speak
about, and that probably because she was in harmony with herself--but as
the Judge with his earnest cordiality united in the wish of his wife and
Mrs. Gunilla, that Evelina would relate to them some passages in the
history of her life, she acceded, remarking only that what she had to
relate was in no way extraordinary; and then, after she had bethought
herself for a moment, she began, addressing herself more especially to
Elise, and in the mean time Mrs. Gunilla hastily jotted down the
narrative, which we will here designate


EVELINA'S HISTORY.

Have you ever been conscious, while listening to a beautiful piece of
music, of a deep necessity, an indescribable longing, to find in your
own soul, in your own life, a harmony like that which you perceived in
the tune?--if so, you have then an idea of the suffering and the release
of my soul. I was yet a little child when, for the first time, I was
seized upon by this longing, without at that time comprehending it.
There was a little concert in the house of my parents; the harp, piano,
horn, and clarionette, were played by four distinguished artists. In one
part of the symphony the instruments united in an indescribably sweet
and joyous melody, in the feeling of which my childish soul was seized
upon by a strong delight, and at the same time by a deep melancholy. It
seemed to me as if I had then an understanding of heaven, and I burst
into tears. Ah! the meaning of these I have learned since then. Many
such, and many far more painful, tears of longing, have fallen upon the
dark web of my life.

To what shall I compare the picture of my youthful years? All that it,
and many other such family pictures exhibit, is unclear, indefinite, in
one word, blotted as it were in the formation. It resembled a dull
autumn sky, with its grey, shapeless, intermingling cloud-masses; full
of those features without precision, of those contours without meaning,
of those shadows without depth, of those lights without clearness, which
so essentially distinguish the work of a bungler from that of a true
master.

My family belonged to the middle class, and we were especially well
content to belong to this noble class; and as we lived from our rents,
and had no rank in the state, we called ourselves, not without some
self-satisfaction, people of condition. We exhibited a certain genteel
indifference towards the _haute volée_ in the citizen society, not only
in words but sometimes also in action; yet, nevertheless, in secret we
were extremely wounded or flattered by all those who came in contact
with us from this circle; and not unfrequently too the family
conversation turned, quite accidentally as it were, on the subject of
its being ennobled on the plea of the important service which our father
could render to the state in the House of Knights; and in the hearts of
us young girls it excited a great pleasure when we were addressed as "my
lady." Beyond this agitation of the question nothing came.

The daughters of the house were taught that all pomp and pleasure of
this world was only vanity, that nothing was important and worth
striving after but virtue and inward worth; yet for all this, it so
happened that their most lively interest and endeavours, and the warmest
wishes of the hearts of all, were directed to wealth, rank, and worldly
fortune of every kind. The daughters were taught that in all things the
will of God must alone direct them; yet in every instance they were
guided by the fear of man. They were taught that beauty was nothing, and
of no value; yet they were often compelled to feel, and that painfully,
in the paternal house, that they wore not handsome. They were allowed to
cultivate some talents, and acquire some knowledge, but God forbid that
they should ever become learned women; on which account they learned
nothing thoroughly, though in many instances they pretended to
knowledge, without possessing anything of its spirit, its nourishing
strength, or its pure esteem-inspiring earnestness. But above all
things they learned, and this only more and more profoundly the more
their years increased, that marriage was the goal of their being; and in
consequence (though this was never definitely inculcated in words, but
by a secret, indescribable influence), to esteem the favour of men as
the highest happiness, denying all the time that they thought so.

We were three sisters. As children, it was deeply impressed upon us that
we must love one another; but in consequence of partiality on the side
of our teachers, in consequence of praise and blame, rewards and
punishments, which magnified little trifles into importance, envy and
bitterness were early sown among the sisters. It was said of my eldest
sister and myself, that we were greatly attached to each other; that we
could not live asunder. We were cited as examples of sisterly love; and
from constantly hearing this, we at last came to believe it. We were
compared to the carriage-horses of the family; and we were in the habit,
almost of our own accord, of seating ourselves every day after dinner on
each side of our good father, who caressed us, and called us his
carriage-horses. Yet, in fact, we did not pull together. My sister was
more richly endowed by nature than I, and won favour more easily. Never
did I envy a human being as I envied her, until in later years, and
under altered circumstances, I learned to love her rightly, and to
rejoice over her advantages.

We were not very rich, and we cast a philosophically compassionate
glance upon all who were richer than we, who lived in a more liberal
manner, had more splendid equipages, or who dressed themselves more
elegantly. "What folly--what pitiable vanity!" said we: "poor people,
who know nothing better!" We never thought that our philosophy was
somewhat akin to the fox and the grapes.

If we looked in this manner upon the advantages of the great, we
despised still more the pleasures of the crowd. (We ought to be so
all-sufficient for ourselves. Ah, alas!) And if ever a theatrical piece
was much talked of and visited, we had a kind of pride in saying, with
perfect indifference, that we never had seen it; and whenever there was
a popular festival, and the crowd went towards Haga or the Park, it was
quite as certain that our calesche--if it went out at all--would drive
on the road to Sabbatsberg, or in some other direction equally deserted
at the time; for all which, we prided ourselves on our philosophy. Yet
with all this in our hearts we really never were happy.

The daughters came out into society. The parents wished to see them
loved and wooed; the daughters wished it no less--but they were not
handsome--were dressed without any pretension. The parents saw very
little company; and the daughters remained sitting at balls, and were
nearly unobserved at suppers. Yet from year to year they slid on with
the stream.

The daughters approached to ripened youth. The parents evidently wished
them married; they wished it likewise, which was only natural,
especially as at home they were not happy; and it must be confessed that
neither did they themselves do much to make it pleasant there. They were
peevish and discontented--no one knew exactly what to do or what she
wanted; they groped about as if in a mist.

It is customary to hear unmarried ladies say that they are satisfied
with their condition, and do not desire to change it. In this pretension
there lies more truth than people in general believe, particularly when
the lively feelings of early youth are past. I have often found it so;
and above all, wherever the woman, either in one way or another, has
created for herself an independent sphere of action, or has found in a
comfortable home that freedom, and has enjoyed that pure happiness of
life, which true friendship, true education, can give.

A young lady of my acquaintance made what was with justice called a
great match, although love played but a subordinate part. As some one
felicitated her on her happiness, she replied, quite calmly, "Oh, yes!
it is very excellent to possess something of one's own." People smiled
at her for her thus lightly esteeming what was universally regarded so
great a good fortune; but her simple words, nevertheless, contain a
great and universal truth. It is this "one's own," in the world, and in
his sphere of action, which every man unavoidably requires if he would
develop his own being, and win for himself independence and happiness,
self-esteem, and the esteem of others. Even the nun has her own cell,
where she can prepare herself in peace for heaven, and in which she
possesses her true home. But in social life, the unmarried woman has
often not even a little cell which she can call her own; she goes like a
cloud of mist through life, and finds firm footing nowhere. Hence,
therefore, are there often marriages the genuine children of necessity,
which ought never to have taken place, and that deep longing after the
deep quiet of the grave, which is experienced by so many. But there is
no necessity for this, and in times, in which the middle classes are so
much more enlightened, it becomes still less so; we need, indeed, only
contemplate the masses of people who strive for a subsistence, the
crowds of neglected and uncared-for children that grow up in the world,
in order to see that whatever is one-sided in the view of the
destination of woman vanishes more and more, and opens to her a freer
sphere of action.

But I return to the _pros_ and _cons_ of my own life, one feature of
which I must particularly mention. If young ladies of our acquaintance
connected themselves by marriage with men who were rather above than
below them in property or station, we considered it, without exception,
reasonable and estimable. But if a man, whose connexions and prospects
were similar to our own, looked round him for a wife in our house, we
considered it great audacity, and treated it accordingly. We were
secretly looking out for genteeler and richer individuals, who again, on
their part, were looking out for genteeler and richer individuals than
we.--N. B. This _looking-out_ in the great world is a very useful thing,
both for gentlemen and ladies, although anybody who would be _naïve_
enough to acknowledge as much, would not be greatly in favour either
with those who looked-out or those who did not.

Popularity and ambition made him the principal promoter of republicanism.
Having failed of becoming a Washington, he is mad to become a Cromwell.
I have no faith in these turncoat constitutionalists.'
"I know that the Queen heartily concurred in this sentiment concerning
General La Fayette, as soon as she ascertained his real character, and
discovered that he considered nothing paramount to public notoriety.
To this he had sacrificed the interest of his country, and trampled
under foot the throne; but finding he could not succeed in forming a
Republican Government in France as he had in America, he, like many
others, lost his popularity with the demagogues, and, when too
late, came to offer his services, through me, to the Queen, to
recruit a monarchy which his vanity had undermined to gratify, his
chimerical ambition.

Her Majesty certainly saw him frequently, but never again would she
put herself in the way of being betrayed by one whom she considered
faithless to all."
[Thus ended the proffered services of General La Fayette, who then
took the command of the national army, served against that of the
Prince de Conde, and the Princes of his native country, and was
given up with General Bournonville, De Lameth, and others, by General
Dumourier, on the first defeat of the French, to the Austrians, by
whom they were sent to the fortress of Olmutz in Hungary, where
they remained till after the death of the wretch Robespierre, when
they were exchanged for the Duchesse d'Angouleme, now Dauphine of
France.

From the retired life led by General La Fayette on his return to France,
there can be but little doubt that he spent a great part of his time in
reflecting on the fatal errors of his former conduct, as he
did not coincide with any of the revolutionary principles which preceded
the short-lived reign of imperialism. But though Napoleon too
well knew him to be attached from principle to republicanism--every vestige
of which he had long before destroyed--to employ him in any military
capacity, still he recalled him from his hiding-place, in order to
prevent his doing mischief, as he politically did--every other
royalist whom he could bring under the banners of his imperialism.

Had Napoleon made use of his general knowledge of mankind in other
respects, as he politically did in France over his conquered subjects,
in respecting ancient habits, and gradually weaned them from their
natural prejudices instead of violently forcing all men to become
Frenchmen, all men would have fought for him, and not against him. These
were the weapons by which his power became annihilated, and which, in
the end, will be the destruction of all potentates who presume to
follow his fallacious plan of forming individuals to a system instead
of accommodating systems to individuals. The fruits from Southern climes
have been reared in the North, but without their native virtue or vigour.

It is more dangerous to attack the habits of men than their religion.

The British Constitution, though a blessing to Englishmen, is very
ill-suited to nations not accustomed to the climate and its
variations.

Every country has peculiarities of thought and manners resulting from the
physical influence of its sky and soil. Whenever we lose sight of this
truth, we naturally lose the affections of those whose habits we counteract.]

Here ends the Journal of my lamented benefactress. I have continued the
history to the close of her career, and that of the Royal Family,
especially as Her Highness herself acted so important a part in many of
the scenes, which are so strongly illustrated by her conversation and
letters.

It is only necessary to add that the papers which I have arranged were
received from Her Highness amidst the disasters which were now thickening
around her and her royal friends.

SECTION XVI.

From the time I left Passy till my final departure from Paris for
Italy, which took place on the 2nd of August, 1792, my residence was
almost exclusively at the capital. The faithful driver, who had given
such proofs of probity, continued to be of great service, and was put in
perpetual requisition. I was daily about on the business of the Queen and
the Princess, always disguised, and most frequently as a drummerboy;
on which occasions the driver and my man servant were my companions.

My principal occupation was to hear and take down the debates of the
Assembly, and convey and receive letters from the Queen to the Princesse
de Lamballe, to and from Barnave, Bertrand de Moleville, Alexandre de
Lameth, Deport de Fertre, Duportail, Montmorin, Turbo, De Mandat, the
Duc de Brissac, etc., with whom my illustrious patronesses kept
up a continued correspondence, to which I believe all of them fell a
sacrifice; for, owing to the imprudence of the King in not removing
their communications when he removed the rest of his papers from the
Tuileries, the exposure of their connections with the Court was
necessarily consequent upon the plunder of the palace on the
10th of August, 1792.

In my masquerade visits to the Assembly, I got acquainted with an
editor of one of the papers; I think he told me his name was Duplessie.
Being pleased with the liveliness of my remarks on some of the organized
disorders, as I termed them, and with some comments I made upon the
meanness of certain disgusting speeches on the patriotic gifts, my new
acquaintance suffered me to take copies of his own shorthand remarks and
reports.

By this means the Queen and the Princess had them before they
appeared in print. M. Duplessie was on other occasions of great service
to me, especially as a protector in the mobs, for my man servant and the
honest driver were so much occupied in watching the movements of the
various faubourg factions, that I was often left entirely unattended.

The horrors of the Tuileries, both by night and day, were now grown
appallingly beyond description. Almost unendurable as they had been
before, they were aggravated by the insults of the national guard to
every passenger to and from the palace.

I was myself in so much peril, that the Princess thought it necessary
to procure a trusty person, of tried courage, to see me through the
throngs, with a large bandbox of all sorts of fashionable millinery,
as the mode of ingress and egress least liable to excite suspicion.

Thus equipped, and guarded by my cicisbeo, I one day found myself,
on entering the Tuileries, in the midst of an immense mob of regular
trained rioters, who, seeing me go towards the palace, directed their
attention entirely to me. They took me for some one belonging to the
Queen's milliner, Madame Bertin, who, they said, was fattening upon
the public misery, through the Queen's extravagance. The poor Queen
herself they called by names so opprobious that decency will not suffer
me to repeat them.

With a volley of oaths, pressing upon us, they bore us to another part
of the garden, for the purpose of compelling us to behold six or
eight of the most infamous outcasts, amusing themselves, in a state
of exposure, with their accursed hands and arms tinged with blood
up to the elbows.

The spot they had chosen for this exhibition of their filthy persons was
immediately before the windows of the apartments of the Queen and the
ladies of the Court. Here they paraded up and down, to the great
entertainment of a throng of savage rebels, by whom they were applauded
and encouraged with shouts of "Bis! bis!" signifying in English,"
Again!
again!"
The demoniac interest excited by this scene withdrew the attention
of those who were enjoying it from me, and gave me the opportunity
of escaping unperceived, merely with the loss of my bandbox.

Of that the infuriated mob made themselves masters; and the hats, caps,
bonnets, and other articles of female attire, were placed on the
parts of their degraded carcases, which, for the honour of human
nature, should have been shot.

Overcome with agony at these insults, I burst from the garden in a flood
of tears. On passing the gate, I was accosted by a person who exclaimed
in a tone of great kindness, "Qu'as tu, ma bonne? qu'est ce
qui vous afflige?" Knowing the risk I should run in representing the
real cause of my concern, I immediately thought of ascribing it
to the loss of the property of which I had been plundered. I told him
I was a poor milliner, and had been robbed of everything I
possessed in the world by the mob. "Come back with me," said he, "and I
will have it restored to you." I knew it was of no avail, but
policy stimulated me to comply; and I returned with him into the
garden toward the palace.

What should I have felt, had I been aware, when this man came up, that I
was accosted by the villain Danton! The person who was with me knew
him, but dared not speak, and watched a chance of escaping in the
crowd for fear of being discovered. When I looked round and found
myself alone, I said I had lost my brother in the confusion, which added
to my grief.

"Oh, never mind," said Danton; "take hold of my arm; no one shall molest
you. We will look for your brother, and try to recover your things;" and
on we went together: I, weeping, I may truly say, for my life, stopped
at every step, while he related my doleful story to all whose
curiosity was excited by my grief.

On my appearing arm in arm with Danton before the windows of the Queen's
apartments, we were observed by Her Majesty and the Princesses. Their
consternation and perplexity, as well as alarm for my safety, may
readily be conceived. A signal from the window instantly apprised me
that I might enter the palace, to which my return had been for some
time impatiently expected.

Finding it could no longer be of any service to carry on the farce of
seeking my pretended brother, I begged to be escorted out of the
mob to the apartments of the Princesse de Lamballe.

"Oh," said Danton, "certainly! and if you had only told the people
that you were going to that good Princess, I am sure your things would
not have been taken from you. But," added he, "are you perfectly
certain they were not for that detestable Marie Antoinette?"
"Oh!" I replied, "quite, quite certain!" All this while the mob was at my
heels.

"Then," said he, "I will not leave you till you are safe in the apartments
of the Princesse de Lamballe, and I will myself make known to her
your loss: she is so good," continued he, "that I am convinced she
will make you just compensation."

       I then told him how much I should be obliged by his doing so, as I
had been commissioned to deliver the things, and if I was made to
pay for them, the loss would be more serious than I could bear.

"Bah! bah!" exclaimed he. "Laissez moi faire! Laissez moi faire!"
When he came to the inner door, which I pretended to know nothing
about, he told the gentleman of the chamber his name, and said he wished
to see his mistress.

Her Highness came in a few minutes, and from her looks and visible agitation
at the sight of Danton, I feared she would have betrayed both
herself and me.

However, while he was making a long preamble, I made signs, from which
she inferred that all was safe.

When Danton had finished telling her the story, she calmly said to
me, "Do you recollect, child, the things you have been robbed of?"

I replied that, if I had pen and ink, I could even set down the prices.

"Oh, well, then, child, come in," said Her Highness, "and we will see
what is to be done!"

"There!"

exclaimed Danton; "Did I not tell you this before?"

Then, giving me a hearty squeeze of the hand, he departed, and thus
terminated the millinery speculation, which, I have no doubt, cost Her
Highness a tolerable sum.

As soon as he was gone, the Princess said, "For Heaven's sake, tell me the
whole of this affair candidly; for the Queen has been in the greatest
agitation at the bare idea of your knowing Danton, ever since we
first saw you walking with him! He is one of our moat inveterate enemies."

I said that if they had but witnessed one half of the scenes that I saw,
I was sure their feelings would have been shocked beyond description. "We
did not see all, but we heard too much for the ears of our sex."
I then related the particulars of our meeting to Her Highness, who observed,
"This accident, however unpleasant, may still turn out to our
advantage.

This fellow believes you to be a marchande de modes, and the circumstance
of his having accompanied you to my apartment will enable you, in future,
to pass to and from the Pavilion unmolested by the national guard."

With tears of joy in her eyes for my safety, she could not, however,
help laughing when I told her the farce I kept up respecting the
loss of my brother, and my bandbox with the millinery, for which I
was also soon congratulated most graciously by Her Majesty, who
much applauded my spirit and presence of mind, and condescended,
immediately, to entrust me with letters of the greatest importance,
for some of the most distinguished members of the Assembly, with
which I left the palace in triumph, but taking care to be ready
with a proper story of my losses.

When I passed the guard-room, I was pitied by the very wretches, who,
perhaps, had already shared in the spoils; and who would have
butchered me, no doubt, into the bargain, could they have penetrated
the real object of my mission.

They asked me if I had been paid for the loss I sustained. I told them
I had not, but I was promised that it should be settled.

"Settled!" said one of the wretches. "Get the money as soon as you
can.

Do not trust to promises of its being settled.

They will all be settled themselves soon!"
The next day, on going to the palace, I found the Princesse de
Lamballe in the greatest agitation, from the accounts the Court had
just received of the murder of a man belonging to Arthur Dillon,
and of the massacres at Nantes.

"The horrid prints, pamphlets, and caricatures," cried she, "daily exhibited
under the very windows of the Tuileries, against His Majesty, the
Queen, the Austrian party, and the Coblentz party, the constant thwarting
of every plan, and these last horrors at Nantes, have so overwhelmed
the King that he is nearly become a mere automaton.

Daily and nightly execrations are howled in his ears. Look at our
boasted deliverers! The poor Queen, her children, and all of us belonging
to the palace, are in danger of our lives at merely being seen; while
they by whom we have been so long buoyed up with hope are quarrelling
amongst themselves for the honour and etiquette of precedency,
leaving us to the fury of a race of cannibals, who know no mercy,
and will have destroyed us long before their disputes of etiquette
can be settled."

The utterance of Her Highness while saying this was rendered almost
inarticulate by her tears.

"What support against internal disorganization," continued she, "is to
be expected from so disorganized a body as the present army of
different nations, having all different interests?"

I said there was no doubt that the Prussian army was on its march, and
would soon be joined by that of the Princes and of Austria.

"You speak as you wish, mia cara Inglesina, but it is all to no
purpose.
Would to God they had never been applied to, never been called upon to
interfere.

Oh, that Her Majesty could have been persuaded to listen to Dumourier
and some other of the members, instead of relying on succours which,
I fear, will never enter Paris in our lifetime!

No army can subdue a nation; especially a nation frenzied by the
recent recovery of its freedom and independence from the shackles
of a corrupt and weak administration.

The King is too good; the Queen has no equal as to heart; but they have
both been most grossly betrayed.

The royalists on one side, the constitutionalists on the other, will
be the victims of the Jacobins, for they are the most powerful,
they are the most united, they possess the most talent, and they
act in a body, and not merely for the time being.

Believe me, my dear, their plans are too well grounded to be defeated,
as every one framed by the fallacious constitutionalists and mad-headed
royalists has been; and so they will ever be while they continue
to form two separate interests.

From the very first moment when these two bodies were worked upon separately,
I told the Queen that, till they were united for the same object, the
monarchy would be unsafe, and at the mercy of the Jacobins, who, from
hatred to both parties, would overthrow it themselves to rule
despotically over those whom they no longer respected or feared, but
whom they hated, as considering them both equally their former
oppressors.

"May the All-seeing Power," continued Her Highness, "grant, for the good
of this shattered State, that I may be mistaken, and that my predictions
may prove different in the result; but of this I see no hope, unless
in the strength of our own internal resources.

God knows how powerful they might prove could they be united
at this moment! But from the anarchy and division kept up between
them, I see no prospect of their being brought to bear, except in a general
overthrow of this, as you have justly observed, organized system of
disorders, from which at some future period we may obtain a solid,
systematic order of government. Would Charles the Second ever have reigned
after the murder of his father had England been torn to pieces by
different factions? No! It was the union of the body of the nation
for its internal tranquillity, the amalgamation of parties against
domestic faction, which gave vigour to the arm of power, and enabled
the nation to check foreign interference abroad, while it annihilated
anarchy at home.

By that means the Protector himself laid the first stone of the
Restoration.

The division of a nation is the surest harbinger of success to its
invaders, the death-blow to its Sovereign's authority, and the total
destruction of that innate energy by which alone a country can obtain the
dignity of its own independence."

SECTION XVII.

While Her Highness was thus pondering on the dreadful situation of
France, strengthening her arguments by those historical illustrations,
which, from the past, enabled her to look into the future, a message
came to her from Her Majesty.

She left me, and, in a few minutes, returned to her apartment, accompanied
by the Queen and Her Royal Highness the Princesse Elizabeth. I was
greatly surprised at seeing these two illustrious and august
personages bathed in tears. Of course, I could not be aware of any
new motive to create any new or extraordinary emotion; yet there was in
the countenances of all of the party an appearance different from
anything I had ever witnessed in them, or any other person before;
a something which seemed to say, they no longer had any affinity
with the rest of earthly beings.

They had all been just writing to their distant friends and relations.

A fatal presentiment, alas! too soon verified, told them it was for
the last time.

Her Highness the Princesse de Lamballe now approached me.

"Her Majesty," observed the Princess, "wishes to give you a mark
of her esteem, in delivering to you, with her own hands, letters to her
family, which it is her intention to entrust to your especial care.

"On this step Her Majesty has resolved, as much to send you out of the
way of danger, as from the conviction occasioned by the firm reliance
your conduct has created in us, that you will faithfully obey the orders
you may receive, and execute our intentions with that peculiar intelligence
which the emergency of the case requires.

"But even the desirable opportunity which offers, through you, for the
accomplishment of her mission, might not have prevailed with Her
Majesty to hasten your departure, had not the wretch Danton twice
inquired at the palace for the 'little milliner,' whom he rescued
and conducted safe to the apartments of the Pavilion of Flora.

This, probably, may be a matter of no real consequence whatever; but it
is our duty to avoid danger, and it has been decided that you should,
at least for a time, absent Paris.

"Per cio, mia cara Inglesina, speak now, freely and candidly: is it your
wish to return to England, or go elsewhere?

For though we are all sorry to lose you, yet it would be a source of still
greater sorrow to us, prizing your services and fidelity as we do, should
any plans and purposes of ours lead you into difficulty or embarrassment."

"Oh, mon Dieu! c'est vrai!" interrupted Her Majesty, her eyes
at the same time filled with tears.

"I should never forgive myself," continued the Princess, "if I
should prove the cause of any misfortune to you."

"Nor I!" most graciously subjoined the Queen.

"Therefore," pursued the Princess, "speak your mind without reserve."
Here my own feelings, and the sobs of the illustrious party, completely
overcame me, and I could not proceed. The Princesse de Lamballe
clasped me in her arms. "Not only letters," exclaimed she, "but my life
I would trust to the fidelity of my vera, verissima, cara Inglesina!
And now," continued Her Highness, turning round to the Queen, "will it
please Your Majesty to give Inglesina your commands."
"Here, then," said the Queen, "is a letter for my dear sister, the Queen
of Naples, which you must deliver into her own hands. Here is another
for my sister, the Duchess of Parma. If she should not be at Parma, you
will find her at Colorno. This is for my brother, the Archduke of
Milan; this for my sister-in-law, the Princesse Clotilde Piedmont, at
Turin; and here are four others. You will take off the envelope
when you get to Turin, and then put them into the post yourself. Do not
give them to, or send them by, any person whatsoever.

"Tell my sisters the state of Paris. Inform them of our cruel situation.

Describe the riots and convulsions you have seen. Above all, assure them
how dear they are to me, and how much I love them."
At the word love, Her Majesty threw herself on a sofa and wept
bitterly.

The Princesse Elizabeth gave me a letter for her sister, and two for her
aunts, to be delivered to them, if at Rome; but if not, to be put
under cover and sent through the post at Rome to whatever place they
might have made their residence.

Will there not be
another to-morrow? Were you not satisfied with a whole half-dozen girls
of your own? And what will become of them? One shall presently not be
able to get into the house for children! I suppose that you have such a
superfluity of money and property, that you must go and squander it on
others! Nay! good luck to you!--good luck to you!"

The Judge and his wife replied only by smiles to the grumbling of their
friend, and by the request that he would spend the evening with them.
But he said he had not time; and then, after he had laid large pears,
which he took from his pocket, under the napkins on the children's
plates, he went out.

Every one of those pears had its own distinctive sign: round Sara's was
a gold-coloured ribbon; and upon her plate, under the pear, was found a
bank-note of considerable value. It was his gift to the fatherless, yet
he never would acknowledge it. That was his way.

As the mother took Sara by the hand, in order to conduct her to rest,
Petrea had the indescribable delight of seeing that, from all the little
presents which had been made to her, she only took with her the girl and
the rose-bush, which she appeared to regard with pleasure.

Sara was seized with violent grief in the comfortable bedroom; tears
streamed with wonderful violence from her eyes, and she called loudly
for her father. Elise held her quietly in her arms, and let her weep out
her grief on her bosom, and then gently undressing her, and laying the
weary child in bed, had the pleasure of feeling how affectionately she
clasped her arms around her neck.

The girl and the rose-bush hung over her bed, but still there seemed to
be no rest on the snow-white couch for the "little African." Her dark
eyes glanced wildly about the room, and her hands grasped convulsively
Elise's white dress.

"Don't go," whispered she, "or else they will come and murder me."

Elise took the child's hands in hers, and repeated a simple and pious
little prayer, which she had taught to all her own children. Sara said
the words after her; and though it was only mechanically, she seemed to
become calmer, though shudderings still shook her frame, and she hold
fast by Elise's dress. Elise seated herself by her, and at the request
of the other children, "Mother, sing the song of the Dove--oh, the song
of the Dove!" she sang, with a pleasant low voice, that little song
which she herself had made for her children:

    There sitteth a dove so white and fair,
        All on the lily-spray,
    And she listeneth how, to Jesus Christ,
        The little children pray.

    Lightly she spreads her friendly wings,
        And to heaven's gate hath sped,
    And unto the Father in heaven she bears
        The prayers which the children said.

    And back she comes from heaven's gate,
        And brings--that dove so mild--
    From the Father in heaven, who hears her speak,
        A blessing for every child.

    Then, children, lift up a pious prayer,
        It hears whatever you say,
    That heavenly dove, so white and fair,
        That sits on the lily-spray.

During this song, the dove of peace descended on the soul of the child.
Pleasant images passed before her mind: the girl and the rose-bush and
the singing Elise were the same person--the rose diffused pleasant
odour; and whilst the long dark lashes approached her cheek yet nearer
and nearer, it seemed to her as if a white lovely singing-bird spread
out his wings caressingly and purifyingly over her breast. By degrees
the little hand opened itself, and let go the dress which it had
grasped, the tearful eyes closed, and the sweetness of repose came over
the fatherless and the motherless.

Elise raised herself gently, and went to the beds of the other children.
The dove on the lily-spray sent sleep also to them; and after the mother
had pressed her lips to their cheeks, had spoken with Brigitta about the
new comer, and had received from the child-loving, good-natured old
woman, the most satisfactory promises, she hastened back to her husband.

He listened with curiosity to what she had to relate of Sara. This new
member of the family, this increase of his cares, seemed to have
expanded and animated his soul. His eyes beamed with a gentle emotion as
he spoke of the future prospects of the children. Evelina's history,
which was still fresh in his and Elise's mind, seemed to spur him on to
call forth for his family quite another picture of life.

"We will bring up our children," said he warmly, "not for ourselves, but
for themselves. We will seek for their good, for their happiness; we
will rightly consider what may conduce to this, as much for one child as
for another; we will endeavour to win and to maintain their full
confidence; and should there, dear Elise, be any harshness or severity
in me, which would repel the children from me, you must assist me; let
their secret desires and cares come to me through you!"

"Yes! where else could they go?" returned she, with the deepest feeling;
"you are my support, my best strength in life! Without you how weak
should I be!"

"And without you," said he, "my strength would become sternness. Nature
gave me a despotic disposition. I have had, and have still, many times
the greatest difficulty to control it; but with God's help I shall
succeed! My Elise, we will improve ever. On the children's account, in
order to make them happy, we will endeavour to ennoble our own nature."

"Yes, that we will, Ernst!" said she; "and may the peace in the house
make betimes the spirit of peace familiar to their bosoms!"

"We will make them happy," began the father again, with yet increasing
warmth; "with God's help, not one of them shall wander through life
unhappy and infirm of spirit. My little girls! you shall not grow up
like half-formed human beings; no illusions shall blind your eyes to
what are the true riches of life; no noble desires shall you experience
unsatisfied. Ah, life is rich enough to satisfy all the birds under
heaven, and no one need be neglected on earth! Your innocent life shall
not fail of strength and joy; you shall live to know the actuality of
life, and that will bring a blessing on every day, interest on every
moment, and importance on every occupation. It will give you repose and
independence in sorrow and in joy, in life and in death!"

Whilst Elise listened to these words, she felt as if a refreshing breeze
passed through her soul. Nothing more seemed to her difficult. All the
troubles of life seemed light, on account of the bright end to be
attained. And then, as she thought on the manly warm heart which lived
so entirely for her good and the children's, she felt a proud joy that
she could look up to her husband; and at the same time a sense of
humility slid into her heart, she bowed herself over his hand, and
kissed it fervently.

This did not please the Judge, because, like every other decided and
powerful man, it gratified him rather to pay homage to woman than, at
least by outward bearing, to receive homage from her. He therefore
withdrew his hand with some displeasure.

"Why may I not kiss your hand," inquired Elise, "if it give me
pleasure?"

"Because it gives me no pleasure, and you must not do it again."

"Well, well, dear friend, you need not forbid it so sternly. Perhaps I
shall never again have the desire to do it."

"All the better," said he.

"Perhaps not!" returned Elise. "But let us now go to rest."


PART II.

CHAPTER I.

THE NEW HOUSE.


"Farewell, oh house of my childhood! Farewell, you walls, insensible
witnesses of my first tears, my first smiles, and my first false steps
on the slippery path of life--of my first acquaintance with water-gruel
and A B C! Thou corner, in which I stood with lessons difficult to be
learned; and thou, in which I in vain endeavoured to tame the most
thankless of all created things, a fly and a caterpillar!--you floors,
which have sustained me sporting and quarrelling with my beloved brother
and sisters!--you papers, which I have torn in my search after imagined
treasures;--you, the theatre of my battles with carafts and
drinking-glasses--of my heroic actions in manifold ways, I bid you a
long farewell, and go to live in new scenes of action--to have new
adventures and new fate!"

Thus spake Petrea Frank, whilst, with dignified gestures, she took a
tragic-comic farewell of the home which she and her family were now
about to leave.

It was a rainy day, in the middle of April. A black silk cloak, called
merrily the "Court-preacher," a piece of property held in common by the
Frank family, and a large red umbrella, called likewise the
"Family-roof," which was common property too, were on this day seen in
active promenade on the streets of the city of X----. What all this
passing to and fro denoted might probably be conjectured if one had seen
them accompanied by a tall, fair, blue-eyed maid-servant, and a little
brown, active, servant-man, carrying bandboxes, baskets, packages, etc.,
etc.

Towards twilight might have been seen, likewise, the tall thin figure of
Jeremias Munter, holding the "family-roof" over the heads of himself and
Petrea Frank. Petrea seemed to be carrying something under her cloak,
laughed and talked, and she and the Assessor seemed to be very much
pleased with each other. Alas! this satisfaction did not endure long;
on the steps of the front-door Petrea accidentally trod on the dangling
lace of her boot, made a false step, and fell. A large paper case of
confectionery suddenly proceeded from under the "court-preacher," and
almond-wreaths, "brown sugar-candy, and iced fruits rolled in all
directions. Even amid the shock and the confusion of the first moment it
was with difficulty that Petrea restrained a loud laugh from bursting
forth when she saw the amazement of the Assessor, and the leaps which he
made, as he saw the confections hopping down the steps towards the
gutter. It was the Assessor's own tribute to the festival of the day
which was thus unluckily dispersed abroad.

"Yes, indeed, if there were no ladies," said the Assessor, vexed, "one
should be able to accomplish something in this world. But now they must
be coming and helping, and on that account things always go topsy-turvy.
'Let me only do it--let me only manage it,' say they; and they manage
and make it, so that----'Did one ever see anything so foolish!--To fall
over your foot-lace!'--but women have order in nothing; and yet people
set up such to govern kingdoms!--To govern kingdoms!!! I would ask
nothing more from them than that they should govern their feet, and keep
their boot and shoe strings tied. But from the queen down to the
charwoman, there is not a woman in this world who knows how to fasten
her boot-lace!"

Such was the philippic of Jeremias Munter, as he came into the room with
Petrea, and saw, after the great shipwreck, that which remained of the
confectionery. Petrea's excuses, and her prayers for forgiveness, could
not soften his anger. True it is, that an unfortunate disposition to
laugh, which overcame her, gave to all her professions of distress a
very doubtful appearance. Her distress, however, for all that, was real;
and when Eva came, and said, with a beseeching, flattering voice, "Dear
uncle, do not be angry any longer; poor Petrea is really quite cast
down--besides which she really has hurt her knee," the good man replied
with a very different voice:

"But has she, indeed? But why are people so clumsy--so given to tripping
and stumbling, that one----"

"One can get some more confections at any time," said Eva.

"Can one!" exclaimed Jeremias; "do they grow on trees, then? How? Shall
one then throw away one's money for confectionery, in order to see it
lie about the streets? Pretty management that would be, methinks!"

"Yet just say one kind word to Petrea," besought Eva.

"A kind word!" repeated Jeremias: "I would just tell her that another
time she should be so good as to fasten her shoestrings. Nay, I will go
now after some more confectionery; but only on your account, little Miss
Eva. Yes, yes; say I--I will now go: I can dance also, if it be
for----But how it rains! lend me the 'family-roof,' and the cloak there
I need also. Give it here handsomely! Well then, what is there to gape
at? How! will the people gape at me?--all very good; if it gives them
any pleasure, they may laugh at me, I shall not find myself any the
worse for it. Health and comfort are above all things, and one dress is
just as good as another."

The young girls laughed, and threw the "court-preacher," which hardly
reached to his knees, over the shoulders of the Assessor; and thus
apparelled he went forth with long strides.

The family had this day removed into a new house. Judge Frank had bought
it, together with a small garden, for the lifetime of himself and his
wife, and for the last two years he had been pulling down, building up,
repairing, and arranging: some doors he had built up, others he had
opened, till all was as convenient and as comfortable as he wished. His
wife, in full confidence, had left all to his good judgment, well
pleased for her own part to be spared the noise of bricklayers and
carpenters, which she escaped not without difficulty; to be spared from
going among shavings and under scaffoldings, and from clambering over
troughs full of mortar, etc. Papers for the walls and other ornamental
things had been left to the choice of herself and her daughters.

And now he went, full of pleasure, with his wife's arm in his, from one
story to another, and from one room into another, greatly pleased with
the convenient, spacious, and cheerful-looking habitation, and yet even
more so with his wife's lively gratification in all his work. And thus
she was obliged to promenade through the whole house, from the cellar up
to the roof; into the mangling-room, the wood-chamber, etc.

We will not weary the reader by following them in this promenade, but
merely make him acquainted with some of the rooms in which he will often
meet the family. We merely pass through the saloon and best parlour;
they were handsome, but resembled all such apartments; but the room
which the Judge had arranged with the most especial love, which was
designed for daily use, and as the daily assembling place of the family,
and which deserves our most intimate acquaintance, was the library, so
called. It was a large, very lively room, with three windows on one side
looking into a spacious market-place. Louise rejoiced especially over
this, for thus they could look out of the windows on market-days, and
see at once what they wished to buy; directly opposite lay the church,
with its beautiful churchyard well planted with trees; these objects
pleased Elise greatly. The side of the room opposite to the windows was
entirely covered with books; the shelves consisted of several divisions,
each one of which contained the literature of a different country. In
niches between the several divisions stood, on simple but tasteful
pedestals, busts of distinguished men, great for their heroic and
peaceful actions--standing there, said the Judge, not because they
separated the different nations of the earth, but because they united
them. Ernst Frank's library was truly a select one; it had been the
pleasure of his life, and still it was his delight to be increasing his
collection of book's. Now, for the first time, they were collected and
arranged all in one place. He rejoiced over these treasures, and
besought his daughters freely to make use of them (on this one express
condition, that every book should be restored again to its right place).
To Louise was consigned the office of librarian; to Petrea that of
amanuensis. Both mother and daughters were delighted with this room, and
began to consider where the work-table, the flower-table, and the
bird-cage should stand, and when all were arranged, they were found to
suit their places admirably. Against one of the short walls stood the
green sofa, the appointed place for the mother; and against the opposite
one the piano, and the harp, which was Sara's favourite instrument,
together with a guitar, whose strings were touched by Eva, as she sang
"Mamma mia."

An agreeable surprise awaited Elise as she was led through a curtained
door which conducted from the library into a sort of boudoir, whose one
window had the same prospect as the library--this was solely and
entirely her own consecrated room. She saw with emotion that the
tasteful furniture of the room was the work of her daughters; her
writing-table stood by the window; several beautiful pictures and a
quantity of very pretty china adorned the room. Elise saw, with thankful
delight, that all her favourite tastes, and all her little fancies, had
been studied and gratified both by husband and children.

A small curtained door, likewise, on the other side, conducted Elise
into her sleeping-room; and her husband made her observe how smoothly
these doors turned on their hinges, and how easily she, from either
side, could lock herself in and remain in quiet.

After this room, nothing gave Elise greater delight than the
arrangements for bathing, which the Judge had made particularly
convenient and comfortable; and he now turned the white taps with
remarkable pleasure, to exhibit how freely the warm water came out of
this, and the cold--no, out of this came the warm water, and out of the
other the cold. The cheerfulness and comfort of the whole arrangement
were intended to give to the bathing-day--which was almost as
religiously observed in this family as the Sunday--a double charm. In a
room adjoining that which was appropriated to dressing, the old cleanly
Brigitta had already her fixed residence. Here was she and the great
linen-press to grow old together. Here ticked her clock, and purred her
cat; here blossomed her geraniums and balsams, with the Bible and
Prayer-book lying between them.

The three light and pleasant rooms intended for the daughters lay in the
story above, and were simply but prettily furnished.

"Here they will feel themselves quite at home," said the father, as he
looked round with beaming eyes; "don't you think so, Elise? We will make
home so pleasant to our children that they shall not wish to leave it
without a really important and deserving cause. No disquiet, no
discontent with home and the world within it, shall drive them from the
paternal roof. Here they can have leisure and quiet, and be often alone,
which is a good thing. Such moments are needed by every one in order to
strengthen and collect themselves, and are good for young girls as well
as for any one else."

The mother gave her applause fully and cordially; but immediately
afterwards she was a little absent, for she had something of importance
to say to her eldest daughter; and as at that very moment Louise came
in, an animated conversation commenced between them, of which the
following reached the father's ear:

"And after them, pancakes; and, my good girl, take care that six of them
are excellently thick and savoury; you know, indeed, how Henrik likes
them."

"And should we not," suggested Louise, "have whipped cream and raspberry
jam with the pancakes?"

"Yes, with pleasure," returned the mother,--"Jacobi would unquestionably
recommend that."

Louise blushed, and the Judge besought with animation that there might
be something a little more substantial than "angels' food" for supper,
which was promised him.

The Assessor shook out the "family-roof" in the hall in indignation.
"The most miserable roof in all Christendom," said he; "it defends
neither from wind nor rain, and is as heavy as the ark! and----"

But at the very moment when he was shaking and scolding his worst, he
perceived a sound----exclamations and welcomes, in every possible
variety of joyous and cordial tones. The "court-preacher" was thrown
head and shoulders over the "family-roof," and with great leaps hastened
Jeremias forward to shake hands with the son and the friend of the
house, who were just now returned home from the University.

Tokens of condolement mingled themselves with welcomes and
felicitations.

"How wet, and pale, and cold you are!"

"Oh, we have had a magnificent shower!" said Henrik, shaking himself,
and casting a side glance on Jacobi, who looked both downcast and
doleful in his wet apparel. "Such weather as this is quite an affair of
my own. In wind and rain one becomes so--I don't know rightly how--do
you, _mon cher_?"

"A jelly, a perfect jelly!" said Jacobi, in a mournful voice; "how can
one be otherwise, knocked about in the most infamous of peasant-cars,
and storm, and pouring rain, so that one is perfectly battered and
melted! Hu, hu, u, u, u, uh!"

"Oh, according to my opinion," said Henrik, laughing heartily at the
gestures of his travelling companion, "it is a hardening sort of
weather; there is a proud exalting feeling in it, sitting there quite
calm under the raging of the elements; especially when one looks down
from one's elevation on other fellow-mortals, who go lamenting, and full
of anxiety, under their umbrellas. Thus one sits on one's car as on a
throne; nay, indeed, one gets quite a flattering idea of oneself, as if
one were a little, tiny philosopher. Apropos! I bethink myself now, as
if we had seen, as we came this way, a philosopher in a lady's cloak
walking hither. But, how are you all, sweet, sweet sisters? How long it
is since I saw you!" and he pressed their hands between his cold and wet
ones.

This scene, which took place in twilight, was quickly brought to an end
by the ladies resolutely driving the gentlemen out to their own chamber
to change their clothes. Jacobi, it is true, on his own account, did not
require much driving, and Louise found Henrik's philosophy on this
occasion not so fully adopted. Louise had already taken care that a good
blazing fire should welcome the travellers in their chamber.

In the mean time, the ladies quartered themselves in the library; lights
were kindled, the table spread; the Judge helped all, and was highly
delighted if people only called to him. The Assessor looked enraptured,
as Eva arranged his confections on little plates. Petrea did not venture
to look at them, much less to touch them.

"By Jove, my dear girls, how comfortable it is here!" exclaimed the
Judge in the joy of his heart, as he saw the library thus peopled, and
in its for-the-future every-day state. "Are you comfortable there, on
the sofa, Elise? Let me get you a footstool. No; sit still, my friend!
what are men for in the world?"

The Candidate--we beg his pardon, the Master of Arts, Jacobi--appeared
no longer to be the same person who had an hour before stood there in
his wet dress, as he made his appearance, handsomely apparelled, with
his young friend, before the ladies, and his countenance actually beamed
with delight at the joyful scene which he there witnessed.

People now examined one another nearer. They discovered that Henrik had
become considerably paler as well as thinner, which Henrik received as a
compliment to his studies. Jacobi wished also a compliment on his
studies, but it was unanimously refused to him on account of his
blooming appearance. He protested that he was flushed with the weather,
but that availed nothing. Louise thought privately to herself that
Jacobi had decidedly gained in manly bearing; that he had a simpler and
more vigorous demeanour; he was become, she thought, a little more like
her father. Her father was Louise's ideal of manly perfection.

Little Gabriele blushed deeply, and half hid herself behind her mother,
as her brother addressed her.

"How is your highness, my most gracious Princess Turandotte!" said he;
"has your highness no little riddle at hand with which to confuse weak
heads?"

Her little highness looked in the highest degree confused, and tried to
withdraw the hand which her brother kissed again and again. Gabriele was
quite bashful before the tall student.

Henrik had a little _tête-à-tête_ with every sister, but it was somewhat
short and cold with Sara; after which he seated himself by his mother,
took her hand in his, and a lively and general conversation began,
whilst Eva handed about the confectionery.

"But what is amiss now?" asked Henrik, suddenly. "Why have the sisters
all left us to take council together there, with such important
judge-like faces? Is the nation in danger? May not I go, in order to
save the native land?--If one could only first of all have eaten one's
supper in peace," added he, speaking aside, after the manner of the
stage.

But it was precisely about the supper that they were talking. There was
a great danger that the pancakes would not succeed; and Louise could not
prevent Henrik and Jacobi running down into the kitchen, where, to the
greatest amusement of the young ladies, and to the tragi-comic despair
of the cook, they acted their parts as cooks so ridiculously that Louise
was obliged at length, with an imposing air, to put an end to the
laughter, to the joking, and to the burnt pancakes, in order that she
herself might put her hand to the work. Under her eye all went well; the
pancakes turned out excellently. Jacobi besought one from her own hand,
as wages for his work; graciously obtained it, and then swallowed the
hot gift with such rapture that it certainly must have burnt him
inwardly, had it not been for another species of warmth (which we
consider very probable)--a certain well-known spiritual fire, which
counteracted the material burning, and made it harmless. Have we not
here, in all simplicity, suggested something of a homoeopathic nature?

But we will leave the kitchen, that we may seat ourselves with the
family at the supper-table, where the mother's savoury, white pancakes,
and the thick ones for Henrik, were found to be most excellent, and
where the "angels' food" was devoured with the greatest earthly
enjoyment.

After this, they drank the health of the travellers, and sang a merry
little song, made by Petrea. The father was quite pleased with his
Petrea, who, quite electrified, sang too with all her might, although
not with a most harmonious voice, which, however, did not annoy her
father's somewhat unmusical ear.

"She sings louder than they all," said he to his wife, who was
considerably less charmed than he with Petrea's musical accompaniment.

Although every one in the company had had an exciting and fatiguing day,
the young people began immediately after supper, as if according to a
natural law, to arrange themselves for the dance.

Jacobi, who appeared to be captivated by Sara's appearance, led her in
the magic circle of the waltz.

"Our sensible little Queen-bee," a rather broad-set, but very well-grown
blonde of eighteen, distinguished herself in the dance by her beautiful
steps, and her pleasing though rather too grave carriage. Everybody,
however, looked with greater admiration on Eva, because she danced with
heart and soul. Gabriele, with her golden curls, flew round like a
butterfly. But who did not dance this evening?--Everybody was actually
enthusiastic--for all were infected with the joyous animal spirits of
Henrik. Even Jeremias Munter, to the amazement of everybody, led Eva,
with most remarkable skill, through the Polska,[4] the most artificial
and perplexing of dances.

It was only at midnight that the dance was discontinued, at the
suggestion of Elise. But before they separated, the Judge begged his
wife to sing the well-known little song--"The First Evening in the New
House." She sang it in her simple, soul-touching manner, and the joy
full of peace which this song breathed penetrated every heart; even the
grave countenance of the Judge gleamed with an affectionate emotion. A
quiet glory appeared to rest on the family, and beautified all
countenances; for it is given to song, like the sun, to throw its
glorifying light upon all human circumstances, and to lend them beauty,
at least for a moment. "The spinner," and "the aged man by the
road-side," are led by song into the kingdom of beauty, even as they are
by the Gospel into the kingdom of heaven.

On taking leave for the night, all agreed upon a rendezvous the next
morning after breakfast in the orchard, in order to see what was to be
made of it.

The father conducted the daughters up into their chambers. He wanted to
see yet once more how they looked, and inquired from them again and
again--"Are you satisfied, my girls? Do they please you? Would you wish
anything besides? If you wish anything, speak out right Swedishly."

As now his daughters, assuring him of their contentment, gratefully and
affectionately hung about him, there was not a happier man on the face
of the earth than Judge Frank.

The mother, on her part, had taken her first-born with her into her
little boudoir. She had as yet not been able to speak one word to him
alone. Now she questioned him on everything, small and great, which
concerned him, and how freely and entirely he opened his whole heart to
her!

They talked of the circumstances of the family; of the purchase of this
new property; of the debt which they had thereby contracted; of the
means through which, by degrees, it would be paid off, and of the
necessity there was for greater economy on all sides. They talked, too,
of the daughters of the house.

"Louise is superb," said Henrik, "but her complexion is rather muddy;
could she not use some kind of wash for it? She would be so much
handsomer if she had a fresher complexion; and then she looks, the least
in the world, cathedral-like. What a solemn air she had to-night, as
Jacobi made some polite speech to her! Do you know, mother, I think the
sisters sit too much; it is in that way that people get such grave
cathedral-like looks. We must make them take more exercise; we must find
out some lively exhilarative exercise for them. And Eva! how she is
grown, and how kind and happy she looks! It is a real delight to see
her--one can actually fall in love with her! But what in all the world
is to be done with Petrea's nose? It does, indeed, get so large and
long, that I cannot tell what is to be done! It is a pity, though, for
she is so good-hearted and merry. And Leonore! How sickly and unhappy
she looks at times! We must endeavour to cheer her up."

"Yes, that we will," said the mother; "if she were but healthy, we could
soon manage that; but how does little Gabriele please you?"

"Ah! she is very lovely, with her high-bred little airs--quite
fascinating," said Henrik.

"And Sara!" asked she.

"Yes," said he, "she is lovely--very lovely, I think; but still there is
something, at least to my taste, very unpleasant in her. She is not like
my sisters; there is something about her so cold, so almost repulsive."

"Yes," said the mother, sighing; "there is at times something very
extraordinary about her, more particularly of late. I fear that a
certain person has too great, and that not a happy, influence over her.
But Sara is a richly gifted and truly interesting girl, out of whom
something very good may be made, if--if----She gives us, indeed, anxiety
at times, for we are as much attached to her as if she were our own
child. She has a most extraordinary talent for music--you must hear her.
There really is much that is very distinguished and truly amiable in
her; you will see it, as you remain so much longer time with us."

"Yes, thank God!" said Henrik, "I can now reckon on that, on remaining
some months at home."

The conversation now turned on Henrik's future prospects. His father
wished him to devote himself to mining, and with this end in view he had
studied, but he felt ever, more and more, a growing inclination to
another profession, and this had become a ground of dissatisfaction in
the family. The mother now besought her first-born to prove himself
carefully and seriously before he deserted the path to which his father
was attached, and which Henrik himself had selected in common council
with his father. Henrik promised this solemnly. His soul was warm and
noble. His young heart possessed every fine sentiment, a pure enthusiasm
for virtue and for his country, a glowing desire to live for them, this
belonged to his heart in the richest measure. The wish to be useful to
the community generally, united itself with all his views of
self-advantage, and he only saw his own prosperity in connexion with
that of his family. These thoughts and sentiments poured themselves
forth in that sweet confidential hour freely and fully to his
mother--the happy mother, whose heart beat with joy and with proudest
hope of her first-born, the favourite of her soul, her summer child!

"And when I have made my own way in the world," added Henrik, joyfully
kissing the hand of his mother, "and have a house of my own, then,
mother, you shall come to me, and live with me, will you not?"

"And what would your father say to that?" said she, in a tone like his
own.

"Oh! he has all the sisters who can keep house for him," said Henrik,
"and----"

"Do you intend to sit up here the whole night?" asked a voice at the
door. It was the voice of the Judge, and both mother and son rose up as
if they had been caught in the fact of conspiracy. The conspiracy,
however, was immediately imparted to the Judge, whereupon he declared
that all this would lead to such fearful consequences that they had
better say no more about it.

Both mother and son laughed, and said "Good night" to each other. But as
Henrik conveyed the hand of his mother towards his lips, he fell into a
sort of ecstasy over it.

"Heavens! what a white hand! and what small fingers! nay, how can people
have such small fingers?" And with a sort of comic devotion he kissed
the little finger of that beautiful hand.

"I see I must carry you off forcibly, if I would have you to myself,"
said the Judge merrily, and taking his wife's arm in his, led her out.

But her thoughts still hovered around her first-born, her handsome and
richly endowed son. She uttered a glowing prayer for his perfecting in
all good, whilst all were sleeping sweetly the first night in the new
house.

FOOTNOTES:

[4] A wild and animated Swedish national dance.


CHAPTER II.

THE MORROW.


How pleasant it must have been to the family the next morning to
assemble round the amply-supplied breakfast-table in a handsome and
spacious drawing-room. But drawing-room, and breakfast-table, and all
outward comforts, signify nothing, if the inward are wanting; if
affectionate dispositions and kind looks do not make the room bright,
and the breakfast well-flavoured. But nothing was wanting on this
morning to the family of the Franks--not even the sun. It shone in
brightly to illumine the bright scene.

Henrik made a speech to Madame Folette, in testimony of his love and
reverence for her, and of his joy on meeting her again in so good a
state of preservation.

Louise, with the help of Eva, served tea and coffee, bread and butter,
etc., taking particular care that everybody had just what they liked
best. The basket which held sugar-biscuits was constantly in the
neighbourhood of Jacobi.

"How glorious this is!" exclaimed Henrik, rubbing his hands, and casting
a glance of pleasure around on his parents and sisters, "it is quite
paradisiacal! What does your Majesty desire? Ah, your most devoted
servant! Coffee, if I might ask it, excellent Madame Folette!"

"After breakfast," said the mother, "I have something for you to guess."

"Something to guess?" said Henrik, "what can it be? Tell me, what is it
like, sweet mamma? what name does it bear?"

"A wedding," replied she.

"A wedding? A most interesting novelty! I cannot swallow another morsel
till I have made it out! Jacobi, my best fellow, can I possess myself of
a biscuit? A wedding! Do I know the parties?"

"Perfectly well."

"It cannot possibly be our excellent Uncle Munter, himself?" suggested
he. "He seems to me very odd, and, as it were, a little touched in the
heart."

"Oh, no, no! He'll not marry."

"He is already so horribly old," said Eva.

"Old!" exclaimed the Judge. "He is something above forty, I fancy; you
don't call that so horribly old, my little Eva. But it is true he has
always had an old look."

"Guess better," said the mother.

"I have it! I have it!" said Petrea, blushing. "It is Laura! Aunt
Evelina's Laura!"

"Ah, light breaks in," said Henrik; "and the bridegroom is Major Arvid
G. Is it not?"

"Precisely," said his mother. "Laura makes a very good match. Major G.
is a very good-looking, excellent young man; and beyond this, has a good
property. He has persuaded Evelina to remove with Karin to his beautiful
seat at Axelholm, and to consider Laura's and his home as theirs for the
future. Eva dear, set the ham before Henrik. What do you want, my angel
Gabriele? Another rusk? Heavens! how quick you are! Leonore, may I give
you some more bread and butter, my child? No?"

"But I hope," exclaimed Henrik, "that we shall be invited to the
wedding. Evelina, who is such a sensible woman, must have the good sense
to invite us. Most gracious sister Queen-bee, these rolls--very
nourishing and estimable rolls--were they baked before or after the
Flood?"

"After," replied Louise, a little piqued, yet with a smile.

"Oh! I humble myself in the dust," said he. "I pray your Majesty most
graciously to pardon me--[_aside_--but after all they taste remarkably
either of the ark or of a cupboard]. But what in all the world sort of
breakfast are you making, Petrea? Nay, dear sister, such, a superfluity
in eating never can prosper. I pray you do not eat yourself ill!"

Petrea, who had her curious fancies, or as Louise called them,
her "raptures," had now for some time had the fancy to take only a
glass of cold water and a piece of dry bread for her breakfast. On
account of this abstinence, Henrik now jested, and Petrea answered
him quite gaily; Louise, on the contrary, took up the matter quite
seriously, and thought--as many others did--that this whim of Petrea's
had a distant relationship to folly; and folly, Louise--the sensible
Louise--considered the most horrible of horrors; Louise, who was so very
sensible!

"Now, really, you must not sit gossiping any longer!" exclaimed the
father, when he saw their mouths only put in motion by conversation,
"else I must go away and leave you; and I should very much like to go
into the garden with you first."

A general rising followed these words, and all betook themselves to the
garden, with the exception of Leonore, who was unwell, and the little
Gabriele, who had to be careful on account of the damp.

In the mean time the garden had its own extraordinary circumstances, and
all here did not go on in the usual mode; for although the place was yet
not laid out, and the April snow covered the earth, and still hung in
great masses on the low fruit-trees, which were the only wealth of the
garden, yet these, not at all according to the commonly established laws
of nature, were covered with fruit the most beautiful; rennets and
oranges clustered the twigs, and shone in the sun. Exclamations were
uttered in every variety of tone; and although both Jacobi and Henrik
protested that they could not discover any way of accounting for this
supernatural phenomenon, still they did not escape the suspicion of
being instrumental in the witchcraft, spite of all the means they used
to establish their innocence. The opinion, however, was universally
adopted, that good and not bad elves had been thus busily at work; and
the fruit, therefore, was gathered without fear of bad consequences, and
laid in baskets. The elves were praised both in prose and verse; and
there never was a merrier harvest-feast.

The Judge had some trouble to get anybody to listen to all his plans of
lilac-hedges, strawberry-beds, of his arbour, and his garden-house. The
narrow space, however, in which he had to work troubled him.

"If one could only get possession of the piece of land beyond this!"
said he, striking with his stick upon the tall red-boarded fence which
bounded one side of the garden. "Look here, Elise, peep through that
gap; what a magnificent site it is for building--it extends down to the
river!--what a magnificent promenade it would make, properly laid out
and planted! It might be a real treasure to the whole city, which needs
a regular walk in its neighbourhood; and now it lies there desolate, and
useful to nobody, but only for a few cows, because the proprietor does
not know how to make use of it; and our good men of the city have not
public spirit enough to purchase it out of the common fund for the
general good. If I were but rich enough to buy the place, it should soon
have a different appearance, and instead of cows human beings should be
walking there; these boards should be torn down, and our garden should
be united to the great promenade. What a situation it would be!"

"Would not beehives answer very well here?" asked our sensible
Queen-bee; "the sun strikes directly on these boards."

"You are perfectly right, Louise," said her father, well pleased; "that
is a good thought; this is an excellent place for beehives: to-morrow
I'll see about some. Two or three we must have, and that directly, that
the bees may have the advantage of the apple and cherry bloom. Thus we
can see them working altogether, and learn wisdom from them, and watch
how they collect honey for us. That will be a pleasure--don't you think
so, Elise?"

Elise rejoiced sincerely over the bees, and over the garden. It would
give her great pleasure to lay it out. She would set Provence-roses as
soon as possible; and forcing houses also should be erected. Eva thought
she should give herself up to gardening.

But it was necessary to leave for the present the future home of
radishes and roses, because it was wet and uncomfortable out of doors.

Gabriele made large eyes when she saw the basketful of fruit which had
been gathered in the garden. But the little Princess Turandotte could
not unravel the riddle respecting them, as Henrik presented it to her.

The forenoon was spent in clearing away, and in arranging things in the
house. Sara alone took no part in it, but took lessons on the harp from
a distinguished young musician of the name of Schwartz, who had come a
stranger to the city. She sate the whole morning at her music, which she
loved passionately; in the mean time, Petrea had promised to enact the
part of lady's-maid to her, and to put all her clothes and things in
order.

Henrik sate perfectly happy in his sisters' rooms, and nearly killed
himself with laughing while he watched in part their clearing away and
bustling about, and in part taking a share in all. The quantities of
bundles of pieces, old bonnets, cloaks, dresses, etc., which were here
in motion, and played their parts, formed a singular contrast to his
student-world, in which such a thing as a piece of printed cotton or a
pin might be reckoned quite a curiosity. Then the seriousness with which
all these things were treated, and the jokes and merriment which arose
out of all this seriousness, were for him most delicious things.

Nothing, however, amused him more than Louise and all her "properties,"
as well as the great care which, with a half-comic, half-grave
earnestness, she took of them; but he declared solemnly that he would
disclaim all relationship with her if ever he should see her wearing a
certain pale green shawl, called jokingly "spinage," and a pale grey
dress, with the surname of "water-gruel." None of the sisters had so
many possessions as Louise, and none treated them with so much
importance; for she had in the highest degree that kind of passion which
we will call property-passion. Her bandboxes and bundles burst
themselves out of the space in which she wished to stow them, and came
tumbling down upon her head. She accused Henrik of being guilty of these
accidents; and certain it is that he helped her, not without some
mischievous pleasure, to put them up again in their places.

Louise was well known in the family for her love of what was old; the
more shabby a dress was, the more distinguished she seemed to think it;
and the more faded a shawl, the more, according to her, it resembled a
Cashmere. This affection for old things extended itself sometimes to
cakes, biscuits, creams, etc., which often occasioned Henrik to inquire
whether an article of a doubtful date had its origin before or after the
Flood. We will here add to the description of Louise a few touches,
which may make the reader more fully acquainted with her character.

Pure was she both in Heart and intention, with great love of truth, and
a high moral sense, although too much given to lecturing, and sometimes
a little wanting in charity towards erring fellow-mortals. She had much
of her father's understanding and prudence, but came, of course, far
short of him in knowledge of mankind and in experience, although now, in
her eighteenth year, she considered herself to have a perfect knowledge
of mankind. The moral worth of her soul mirrored itself in her exterior,
which, without her being handsome, pleased, and inspired a degree of
confidence in her, because good sense expressed itself in her calm
glance, and her whole demeanour was that of a decided and well-balanced
character. A certain comic humour in her would often dissolve her solemn
mien and important looks into the most hearty laughter; and when Louise
laughed, she bore a charming resemblance to her mother, for she
possessed Elise's beautiful mouth and teeth.

She was as industrious as an ant, and in the highest degree helpful to
those who were deserving of help, but less merciful than Lafontaine's
ants were to thoughtless crickets and their fellows. Louise had three
hobby-horses, although she never would confess that she had a single
one. The first was to work tapestry; the second, to read sermons; and
the third, to play Patience, and more especially Postillion. A fourth
had of late began to discover itself, and that was for medicine--for the
discovering and administering of useful family medicines; nay, she had
herself decocted a certain elixir from nine bitter herbs, which Henrik
declared would be very serviceable in sending people to the other world.
Louise was no way disturbed by all this, for she did not allow herself
to be annoyed by remarks.

She prized, enjoyed, and sought, above all things, after "the right;"
but she also set a high value on "respectability" and "property," and
seemed to think that these were hers of course. She had the excellent
peculiarity of never undertaking anything that she could not creditably
get through with; but she had a great opinion of her own ability, in
which her family participated, although they sometimes attempted to set
her down. In the mean time she was in many instances the adviser and
support of the family; and she had a real genius for the mighty
department of housekeeping.

The parents called her, with a certain satisfaction--the father with a
secret pride--"our eldest daughter." The sisters styled her rather
waggishly "our eldest sister," and sometimes simply "our eldest;" and
"our eldest" knew exceedingly well how to regard her own dignity in
respect to rank and priority. Beyond this, she had a high idea of the
value of woman.

Louise had an album, in which all her friends and acquaintance had
written down their thoughts or those of others. It was remarkable what a
mass of morality this book contained.

We fear that our readers may be somewhat weary of hearing the names of
Sara, Louise, Eva, Leonore, Petrea, Gabriele, repeated so often one
after another, and we are very sorry that we find it unavoidable yet
once more to present the whole array in connexion with Louise. But we
will see what little variety we can make by taking them at hap-hazard,
and therefore now steps forward


PETREA.

We are all of us somewhat related to chaos; Petrea was very closely so.
Momentary bursts of light and long periods of confusion alternated in
her. There was a great dissimilarity between Louise and Petrea. While
Louise required six drawers and more to contain her possessions, there
needed scarcely half a one for the whole wardrobe of Petrea; and this
said wardrobe too was always in such an ill-conditioned case, that it
was, according to Louise, quite lamentable, and she not unfrequently
lent a helping hand to its repair. Petrea tore her things, and gave away
without bounds or discrimination, and was well known in the sisterly
circle for the bad state of her affairs. Petrea had no turn for
accumulation; on the contrary, she had truly, although Louise would not
allow it, a certain turn for art.

She was always occupied by creations of one kind or another, either
musical, or architectural, or poetical. But all her creations contained
something of that which is usually called trash. At twelve years old she
wrote her first romance: "Annette and Belis loved each other tenderly;
they experienced adversity in their love; were at last, however, united,
and lived henceforth in a charming cottage, surrounded with hedges of
roses, and had eight children in one year," which we may call a very
honourable beginning. A year afterwards she began a tragedy, which was
to be called "Gustavus Adolphus and Ebba Brahe," and which opened with
these verses spoken by one Delagardie:

          Now from Germania's coast returned,
              I see again the much-loved strand;
          From war I come, without a wound,
              Once more into my native land.
    Say, Bannér say, what woe has caused these tears,
    Am I not true to thee, or is it idle hope alone that will befool my years?

Whether no sheet of paper was broad enough to contain the lengthened
lines, or any other cause interfered to prevent the completion of the
piece, we know not; but certain it is that it was soon laid aside.
Neither did a piece of a jocular nature, which was intended to emulate
the fascinating muse of Madame Lenngren,[5] advance much further--the
beginning was thus:

    Within the lordly castle Elfvakolastie,
        Which lay, in sooth, somewhere in Sverge,[6]
    There lived of yore the lovely Melanie,
        The only daughter of Count Stjerneberge.

At the present time Petrea was engaged on a poem, the title of which,
written in large letters, ran thus--"The Creation of the World!"

The Creation of the World began thus:

    CHAOS.

    Once in the depths etern of darkness lying,
        This mighty world
    Waited expectantly the moments flying
        When light should be unfurled.
    The world was nothing then, which now is given
        To crowds of busy men;
    And all our beautiful star-spangled heaven
        Was desolate darkness then;
    Yet He was there, who before time existed,
        Who will endure for ever.

The creation of the world ceased with this faint glimmering of light,
and was probably destined under Petrea's hand never to be brought forth
from chaos. Petrea had an especially great inclination for great
undertakings, and the misfortune to fail in them. This want of success
always wounded her deeply, but in the next moment the impulse of an
irresistibly vigorous temperament raised her above misfortune in some
new attempt. The blood rushed up to her young head, and filled it with a
mass of half-formed thoughts, fancies, and ideas; her mind and her
character were full of disquiet. At times joyous and wild beyond bounds,
she became on the other hand wretched and dispirited without reason.
Poor Petrea! She was wanting in every kind of self-regulation and
ballast, even outwardly; she walked ill--she stood ill--she curtseyed
ill--sate ill--and dressed ill; and occasioned, in consequence, much
pain to her mother, who felt so acutely whatever was unpleasing; and
this also was very painful to Petrea, who had a warm heart, and who
worshipped her mother.

Petrea also cherished the warmest affection and admiration for Sara, but
her manner even of evidencing her affection was commonly so entirely
without tact, as rather to displease than please the object of it. The
consciousness of this fact embittered much of Petrea's life; but it
conducted her by degrees to a love in which tact and address are of no
consequence, and which is never unreturned.

Sometimes Petrea was seized with a strong consciousness of the
chaoticness of her state; but then, again, at other times she would have
a presentiment that all this would clear itself away, and then that
something which was quite out of the common way would come forth; and
then she was accustomed to say, half in jest and half in earnest, to her
sisters, "You'll see what I shall turn out sometime!" But in what this
extraordinary turning out should consist nobody knew, and least of all
poor Petrea herself. She glanced full of desire towards many suns, and
was first attracted by one and then by another.

Louise had for Petrea's prophesyings great contempt, but the little
Gabriele believed in them all. She delighted herself, moreover, so
heartily in all that her sister began, that Petrea sacrificed to her her
most beautiful gold-paper temple; her original picture of shepherdesses
and altars; and her island of bliss in the middle of peaceful waters,
and in the bay of which lay a little fleet of nut-shells, with rigging
of silk, and laden with sugar-work, and from the motion of which, and
the planting of its wonderful flowers, and glorious fruit-bearing trees,
Petrea's heart had first had a foretaste of bliss.

Petrea's appearance imaged her soul;--for this too was very variable;
this too had its "raptures;" and here too at times also a glimmering
light would break through the chaos. If the complexion were muddled, and
the nose red and swollen, she had a most ordinary appearance; but in
cooler moments, and when the rose-hue confined itself merely to the
cheeks, she was extremely good-looking; and sometimes too, and that even
in her ugly moments, there would be a gleam in her eye, and an
expression in her countenance, which had occasioned Henrik to declare
that "Petrea was after all handsome!"

To a chaotic mind, the desire for controversy is in-born; it is the
conflict of the elements with each other. There was no subject upon
which Petrea had not her conjectures, and nothing upon which she was not
endeavouring to get a clear idea; on this account she discussed all
things, and disputed with every one with whom she came in contact;
reasoned, or more properly made confusion, on politics, literature,
human free-will, the fine arts, or anything else; all which was very
unpleasant to the tranquil spirit of her mother, and which, in connexion
with want of tact, especially in her zeal to be useful, made poor Petrea
the laughing-stock of every one; a bitter punishment this, on earth,
although before the final judgment-seat of very little, or of no
consequence at all.


LEONORE.

Spite of the mother's embraces, and the appellation, "thou beloved,
plain child!" the knowledge by degrees had come painfully to Leonore
that she was ugly, and that she was possessed of no charm--of no fine
endowment whatever; she could not help observing what little means she
had of giving pleasure to others, or of exciting interest; she saw very
plainly how she was set behind her more gifted sisters by the
acquaintance and friends of the family; this, together with feeble
health, and the discomfort which her own existence occasioned to her,
put her in a discordant state with life and mankind. She was prone to
think everything troublesome and difficult; she fell easily into a state
of opposition to her sisters, and her naturally quick temper led her
often into contentions which were not without their bitterness. All this
made poor Leonore feel herself very unhappy.

But none, no! none, suffer in vain, however for a while it may appear
so. Suffering is the plough which turns up the field of the soul, into
whose deep furrows the all-wise Husbandman scatters his heavenly seed;
and in Leonore, also, it already began to sprout, although, as yet, only
under the earth. She was not aware of it herself yet; but all that she
experienced in life, together with the spirit which prevailed in her
family, had already awakened the beauty of her soul. She was possessed
of deep feeling, and the consciousness of her many wants made her, by
degrees, the most unpretending and humble of human beings; and these are
virtues which, in private life, cannot be exceeded. If you come near a
person of this character, the influence on you is as if you came out of
the sun's heat into refreshing shadow: a soft coolness is wafted over
your soul, which refreshes and tranquillises you at the same time.

In the period at which we have now to meet Leonore, she had just
recovered from the scarlet fever, which had left behind it such an
obstinate and oppressive headache as compelled her almost constantly to
remain in her own room; and although her parents and her sisters visited
her there, it afforded her but little pleasure, for as yet she had not
learned how, by goodness and inward kindness, to make herself agreeable
to others.

But, poor Leonore! when I see thee sitting there in deep thought, thy
weak head supported by thy hand, sunk in sorrowful reflections, I am
ready to lay thy head on my bosom, and to whisper a prophesying in thy
ear--but this may as well remain to a future time. We leave thee now,
but will return another time to thy silent chamber.

And now step forth, thou, the joy and ornament of home, the beautiful


EVA!

Eva was called in the family, "our rose," "our beauty." There are many
in the world like Eva, and it is well that it is so; they are of a
pleasing kind. It is delightful to look upon these blooming young girls,
with smiles on their lips, and goodness and joy of life beaming from
their beautiful eyes. All wish them so well, and they wish so well to
all; everything good in life seems as if it came from themselves. They
have favourable gales in life--it was so with Eva. Even her weakness, a
desire to please, which easily went too far, and an instability of
character which was very dangerous to her, exhibited themselves only on
their pleasing side, within the circle of her family and of her
acquaintance, and helped to make her more beloved.

Eva, although perhaps, strictly speaking, not beautiful, was yet
bloomingly lovely. Her eyes were not large, but were of the most
exquisite form, and of the clearest dark blue colour, and their glance
from under their long black lashes was at once modest, lively, and
amiable. The silky chestnut brown hair was parted over a not lofty but
classically-formed brow. Her skin was white, fine, and transparent, and
the mouth and teeth perfectly beautiful; add to all this, Eva had the
fine figure of her mother, with her light and graceful action. Excellent
health, the happiest temper, and a naturally well-tuned soul, gave a
beautiful and harmonious expression to her whole being. Whatever she
did, she did well, and with grace; and whatever she wore became her; it
was a kind of proverb in the family, that if Eva were to put a black cat
on her head it would be becoming.

A similarity in understanding and talent, as well as companionship
together, had made Louise and Eva hitherto "_les inseparables_," both at
home and abroad; of late, however, without separating herself from
Louise, Eva had been drawn, as it were, by a secret power to Leonore.
Louise, with all her possessions, was so sufficient for herself. Leonore
was so solitary, so mournful, up there, that the good heart of Eva was
tenderly drawn towards her.

But it seems to us as if Gabriele looks rather poutingly, because she
has been so long, as it were, pushed aside. _We_ will therefore hastily
turn to


THE LITTLE LADY.

It did not please "our little lady" to be neglected at all. Gabriele
was, in truth, a spoiled child, and often made "_la pluie_" and the
"_beau temps_" in the house. She was defended from cold, and wind, and
rain, and vexation, and faddled with and indulged in all possible ways,
and praised and petted as if for the best behaviour, if she were only
gracious enough to take a cup of bouillon, or the wing of a chicken for
dinner. She herself is still like the chicken under the mother's wing;
yet she will sometimes creep from under, and attempt little flights on
her own account. Then she is charming and merry, makes enigmas and
charades, which she gives mostly to her mother and Petrea to guess. It
gives her particular pain to be treated as a little girl; and nothing
worse can happen to her than for the elder sisters to say, "Go out just
for a little while, Gabriele, dear!" in order that they may then impart
to each other some important affair, or read together some heart-rending
novel. Beat the batter very hard, ten or fifteen minutes; it should be a
soft dough. Set to rise over night. Flour the board well, drop the
dough in large spoonfuls in the flour, flatten with the hands and
form into shape.

Let them rise on the board in a warm place, and when light bake on a
griddle, heated only half as hot as for griddle cakes. Flour the muffins
and bake slowly on one side six minutes; then turn and bake the same on
the other side. They are very nice split and toasted and
buttered immediately and put together again.

GRAHAM POPOVERS.

Beat three eggs very light, and add to them one tablespoonful of sugar,
one pint of milk, a saltspoonful of salt. Put in a mixing bowl half a
pint each of Graham and white flour, stir the eggs and milk gradually
into this and beat until perfectly smooth.

Then add one tablespoonful of melted butter and beat again for some minutes.
Brush the cups over with melted butter; if they are of iron heat
them, half fill with the batter and bake in a quick oven fifty minutes
at least.

GRAHAM GEMS.

To one quart of sweet milk, four cups of Graham flour, a teaspoonful
of salt.

Stir together and beat well, the longer the better. Have the gem pans
very hot, brush well with butter, half fill them with the batter and bake
thirty-five minutes.

GEMS OF KERNEL (Middlings) AND WHITE FLOUR.

Two cups of kernel flour, two cups of white flour, four cups of milk
or two of milk and two of water, one egg; a little salt, a heaping
teaspoonful of sugar, two teaspoonfuls of baking powder, two large
tablespoonfuls of melted butter.

Beat the egg very light in a bowl, add the sugar and salt, the milk and
butter, sift the flour together and beat the batter hard for a few
minutes. Have the iron gem pans very hot, butter and fill, and bake
them in a good, quick oven not less than thirty-five minutes.

GEMS OF RYE MEAL.

Mix together three-quarters of a cup of rye meal and a quarter of a cup
of white flour and a saltspoonful of salt. Beat two egg
yolks and stir into it a cup of sweet milk and one tablespoonful of
granulated sugar, add this to the rye meal and flour, beat hard, then
add the whites of two eggs beaten to a stiff froth. Heat the iron gem
pans, brush with butter and bake thirty-five to forty minutes.

CORN BATTER BREAD.

Pour a pint of boiling milk over four heaping tablespoonfuls of
yellow corn meal, add a heaping teaspoonful of butter, a heaping
teaspoonful of sugar, and a little salt.

Beat the yolks of three eggs to a cream and add to the batter, then the
whites of three eggs beaten to a stiff froth. Butter a pudding dish,
turn the mixture into it and bake from twenty-five to thirty minutes.
Serve immediately in the dish in which it is baked.

CORN BREAD.

Put half a pint of yellow corn meal in a mixing bowl, pour over it
one pint of rich, sweet milk.

When cold add two tablespoonfuls of melted butter, half a teaspoonful
of salt, one teaspoonful of sugar and four eggs beaten separately, the
whites beaten to a stiff froth and added at the last. Pour into a
well-buttered shallow pan and bake about half an hour in a good oven.

CORN GRIDDLE CAKES.

One cup of yellow corn meal in a mixing bowl, pour over it three cups of
boiling milk.

When cold add two tablespoonfuls of melted butter, two teaspoonfuls
of sugar, one teaspoonful of salt. Sift one teaspoonful of cream of
tartar and half a teaspoonful of soda with half a cup of white
flour, add to the batter and at the last mix in two well-beaten
eggs.

WHITE BREAD GRIDDLE CAKES.

Chop as much stale bread as will measure two cupfuls, put it into a
bowl and pour over it a cupful of sweet, rich milk, let it soak
for an hour.

When ready to bake the cakes, mash the bread in the milk with a
wooden spoon, add a heaping teaspoonful of sugar, a teaspoonful of salt,
two tablespoonfuls of melted butter, two well-beaten eggs, sift
into the mixture a cupful of white flour and an even teaspoonful of soda,
stir well together, then add a cupful of sour milk and bake on a
griddle.

BOSTON BROWN BREAD GRIDDLE CAKES.

Crumble enough Boston brown bread to make two cupfuls, pour over it
a cup of sweet milk, soak an hour. Then mash fine in the milk, add two
tablespoonfuls of melted butter, an even teaspoonful of salt, two
well-beaten eggs, and sift into the mixture a cupful of white flour
and a heaping teaspoonful of baking powder, beat well; then add a
scant half cup of milk and bake as other griddle cakes.

WAFFLES.

Put a quart of milk to warm, melt a quarter of a pound of butter in it
and stir in a teaspoonful of salt. When cold add a pint of sifted
flour, four eggs, the whites and yolks beaten separately, and just before
baking stir in two teaspoonfuls of baking powder.

EPICUREAN ROLLS.

Boil several potatoes and put them through a vegetable press or
else grate them, measure one cupful, one tablespoonful of sugar,
half a yeast cake dissolved in half a cup of tepid water, half a
pint of milk, half a cup of butter, one egg beaten separately, half
a teaspoonful of salt, and flour enough to make a soft dough.

Set to rise at night. Pour a third of a cup of boiling water over the
potato, salt and sugar. Beat smooth, and when tepid add the yeast, cover
and set away to rise.

In the morning bring the milk to a boil, and melt the butter in it; when
cool enough add the beaten yolk and stir all into the potato sponge,
beat the white of egg to a stiff froth and add to the other ingredients,
with flour enough to make a soft dough; knead well and let it rise
again; when very light roll out about half an inch thick, cut with
a round biscuit-cutter, prick them with a fork, put in pans for a
short time to rise and bake from fifteen to twenty minutes.

The most delicate and delicious of rolls.

BREAD FROM RUMMER FLOUR.

Two quarts of improved Graham flour, half a pint of boiling water, half a
pint of lukewarm water, one-fourth of a yeast cake dissolved in half
a pint of lukewarm water, one tablespoonful of granulated sugar
added when kneading the dough, one teaspoonful of salt. Put the salt in
the flour, make a hole, pour in the boiling water, then the lukewarm
water, and last the yeast.

Knead well at night at least fifteen minutes, set to rise.

In the morning mould into loaves, let it rise until very light and bake
until well done.

BISCUITS OF KERNEL OR GRAHAM FLOUR.

Follow the recipe for baking powder biscuits, using kernel or Graham
flour instead of white flour. If Graham is used sift twice before adding
the baking powder. Roll thin, cut with a biscuit-cutter, prick with a
fork and bake in a quick oven.

Eggs.

TO SOFT BOIL EGGS.

Cover the eggs with cold water in a saucepan, place over the fire, and
when the water comes to the boiling point the eggs are perfectly cooked;
remove at once and serve.

TO HARD BOIL EGGS.

Put the eggs in boiling water and boil hard for ten minutes, set them
where they will boil gently for ten minutes more, then remove from
the fire. Eggs boiled in this way will be tender and digestible.

EGGS À LA CRÊME.

Boil twelve eggs fifteen minutes. Line a dish with very thin slices of
bread and fill with layer of eggs cut in slices, strewing them with a
little grated bread, pepper and salt; rub a quarter of a pound
of butter with two tablespoonfuls of flour, put it in a saucepan with a
tablespoonful of chopped parsley, a little onion grated, salt,
pepper and half a pint of milk or cream; when hot pour over the
eggs; cover the top with grated bread crumbs and put it in the oven,
let it heat thoroughly and brown.

EGGS AU GRATIN.

Boil twelve eggs hard, shell and cut them in slices and lay them in
a deep dish in close circular rows; make a sauce of a tablespoonful
of butter, the yolks of four eggs, a little grated cheese, and half
a pint of milk; stir this over the fire until it thickens, pour it
over the eggs, strew some bread crumbs on top and bake for ten
minutes.

NUN'S TOAST.

Cut four or five hard boiled eggs into thin slices; put a piece of butter
half the size of an egg in a saucepan, and when it begins to bubble
add a teaspoonful of grated onion; let it cook a little without taking
color, then stir in a teaspoonful of flour and a cupful of milk and
stir until smooth; add pepper and salt to taste, then put in the slices
of egg and let them get hot. Have ready some neatly trimmed slices
of buttered toast, pour the mixture over them and serve at once.

EGGS À LA MAÎTRE D'HÔTEL.

One-quarter of a pound of fresh butter, half a pint of milk, one
tablespoonful of flour, one tablespoonful of minced parsley, half a
teaspoonful of onion juice, one-fourth of a teaspoonful of white pepper,
salt to taste, the juice of half a lemon, and eight hard boiled
eggs.
Stir the flour and half of the butter in a saucepan over the fire until
the mixture thickens, stir in the milk; when hot add the pepper and
let it simmer a minute; cream the rest of the butter and beat in
the lemon, onion juice and parsley; cut the eggs in quarters lengthwise,
add the creamed butter to that in the saucepan, allow it to heat
thoroughly, pour over the eggs and serve.

EGG TIMBALES.

For six persons use half a dozen eggs, three gills of milk, one
teaspoonful of salt, one-eighth of a teaspoonful of pepper, one
teaspoonful of chopped parsley, and one-fourth of a teaspoonful of
onion juice, if liked.

Break the eggs into a bowl and beat well with a fork, then add the seasoning
and beat for a minute longer; now add the milk and stir well;
butter well medium sized timbale moulds, one for each person,
pour the mixture into them; put the moulds in a deep pan and pour in
enough hot water to come almost to the top of the moulds. Place in a
moderate oven and cook until firm in the center--for about twenty
minutes--then turn out on a warm dish and pour cream or tomato sauce
around them.

EGGS STUFFED WITH MUSHROOMS.

Boil half a dozen eggs hard; when done pour cold water over them,
shell and cut in half lengthwise; take out the yolks, mash them and
add three ounces of fresh mushrooms that have been chopped very
fine and cooked tender in a teaspoonful of butter; season with salt
and pepper to taste and stir in a dessertspoonful of cream, mix
thoroughly.

Fill the whites with this mixture, rounding the top to the shape
and size of a whole yolk; sift some fine bread crumbs over the top
and tiny bits of butter, brown a moment in the oven. Arrange on a dish
and pour a white sauce around them in which an ounce of chopped and
cooked mushrooms has been stirred, garnish with parsley and serve.

EGGS WITH CREAM.

Melt a small lump of butter in a shallow baking dish and break into
it carefully six eggs, pour over them a third of a cup of boiling
cream, place in a very quick oven long enough to set the whites of
eggs and serve at once in the dish in which they are baked.

Two or three minutes will cook them.

CURRIED EGGS.

Boil six eggs hard, cut in half lengthwise, make a white sauce and stir
into it a heaping teaspoonful of curry powder; put the eggs carefully
into this sauce, heat thoroughly, lift them out and place in the center
of a dish. Arrange boiled rice around them, pour the sauce over the eggs,
garnish with parsley and serve.

STUFFED EGGS.

Boil six eggs hard, cut in half lengthwise, take out the yolks and mash
them very fine; put aside a heaping teaspoonful of it, add to the rest
two teaspoonfuls of butter, three teaspoonfuls of rich cream, a
few drops of onion juice, and salt and pepper to taste; mix well,
fill the whites of eggs, rounding the top of each to the size of a
whole egg.

Make a white sauce as follows: Rub a heaping tablespoonful of butter into
half a tablespoonful of flour, and stir into it a cup of boiling milk;
when it is smooth and thick put the eggs into it carefully, when hot
take them out, arrange daintily on a platter, pour the sauce around
them, sprinkle the teaspoonful of the yolk reserved over them,
garnish with parsley and serve.

FRIED STUFFED EGGS.

Prepare the eggs as in the recipe for stuffed eggs, filling the cavity
of the whites evenly, and pressing the two halves together so as
to make it appear as a whole egg. Take what is left of the mixture, add
to it one raw egg beaten light, roll each egg in this, covering
thoroughly every part of it, and fry in boiling fat.

Serve around a dish of green peas, or with a cream sauce into which
has been stirred, just before removing from the fire, two slightly
heaping tablespoonfuls of grated Parmesan cheese.

FRICASSEED EGGS.

Put two tablespoonfuls of butter in a spider, when hot add a tablespoonful
of flour, stir until smooth, then add a teaspoonful of finely
minced parsley and a heaping tablespoonful of fresh mushrooms chopped
very fine, and a cup of rich milk or cream.

Cook until the mushrooms are tender, then add four or five hard-boiled
eggs cut in quarters lengthwise; let it come to a boil and serve.

EGG CHOPS.

Take five or six hard-boiled eggs, rub the yolks through a sieve
and chop the whites rather fine; put a cupful of milk in a saucepan
over the fire, when hot stir into it a tablespoonful of butter
rubbed smooth in two tablespoonfuls of flour with one raw egg, first
adding a little of the warm milk, then pepper and salt to taste,
and if liked a few drops of onion juice.

Stir constantly until thick and smooth, remove from the fire, add
the prepared eggs, mix well, and when cold form into the shape of chops,
dip in beaten egg and fine bread crumbs and fry in boiling fat
until a delicate brown; stick a sprig of parsley in the small end
of each chop, arrange in the middle of a platter and serve with a
white sauce around them, or green peas.

PLAIN OMELET.
Beat six eggs, the yolks to a cream, the whites to a stiff froth,
add three tablespoonfuls of warm milk to the yolks and then beat
into the whites of eggs. Put a small tablespoonful of butter in a
spider, when it is hot turn the eggs into it, stirring gently all
the time until the eggs are well set; let it brown, fold and turn
out on a hot platter.

OMELET WITH CHEESE.
Follow the recipe for plain omelet; while it is cooking stir in
three tablespoonfuls of grated Parmesan cheese and finish as
above.

OMELET WITH MUSHROOMS.
Make an omelet as in preceding recipe. Have a quarter of a pound
of fresh mushrooms chopped fine and cooked until tender in a little
butter and their own juice, seasoned with salt and pepper, and add
hot to the omelet just before folding it.

OMELET WITH TOMATOES.
A cup of tomatoes, the water drained from them, cooked and seasoned
with pepper and salt, a teaspoonful of onion juice, and one of green
pepper chopped very fine; have it hot and add to the omelet just
before folding it.

POACHED EGGS WITH TOMATO CATSUP.
Poach some eggs in boiling water, trim nicely and place each egg
on a round of toast buttered and moistened with a little hot milk.
Have ready a white sauce, pour it over them and put on the top of
each egg a teaspoonful of tomato catsup; garnish with parsley and
serve.

EGGS POACHED IN CREAM.
Half a pint of cream, six eggs, salt and white pepper, and a small
teaspoonful of finely minced parsley. Bring the cream to a boil in
a chafing dish, break the eggs carefully, to keep the yolks whole,
into the cream and cook until the whites are set--about three
minutes. Have a delicate slice of toast for each egg on hot plates,
lay an egg on each, pour the cream over them, sprinkle with pepper
and salt and the chopped parsley and serve.
EGGS POACHED IN TOMATOES.
Put a quart can of tomatoes in a saucepan over the fire with half
an onion, three cloves, a bay leaf, a sprig of parsley, a saltspoonful
of sugar, and salt and pepper to taste. Cook until the onion is
tender--about ten minutes--remove from the fire, press through a
sieve fine enough to retain the seeds."Because in that case she might like him, _mon cher_," replied Henrik;
"a most respectable and substantial fellow is my Cousin Thure of
Oestanvik. I advise you to cultivate his acquaintance. Well, now,
Gabriele dear, what wants your highness?--Yes, what is it?--I shall lose
my head about the riddle.--Mamma dear, come and help your stupid son!"

"No, no, mamma knows it already! Mamma must not tell," exclaimed
Gabriele, terrified.

"What king do you set up above all other kings, Master Jacobi?" for the
second time asked Petrea, who this evening had a sort of question mania.

"Charles the Thirteenth," replied he, and listened to Louise's answer to
the Landed-proprietor.

"Cousin Louise, are you fond of birds?" asked the Landed-proprietor.

"Oh, yes, particularly of fieldfares," answered Louise.

"Nay, that's capital!" said the Landed-proprietor. "There are
innumerable fieldfares on my estate of Oestanvik. I often go out myself
with my gun and shoot them for my dinner; piff-paff! with two shots I
have killed a whole dishful!"

"Don't you imagine, Master Jacobi, that the people before the Flood were
much wickeder than those of our time?" asked Petrea, who wished to
occupy the Candidate, nothing deterred by his evident abstraction, and
whom nobody had asked if she liked fieldfares.

"Oh, much--much better," answered Jacobi.

"Cousin Louise, are you fond of roast hare?" asked the
Landed-proprietor.

"Master Jacobi, are you fond of roast hare?" whispered Petrea,
waggishly, to the Candidate.

"Bravo, Petrea!" whispered her brother to her.

"Cousin Louise, are you fond of cold meat?" asked the Landed-proprietor,
as he handed Louise to the supper-table.

"Should you like to be a landed-proprietor?" whispered Henrik to her as
she left it.

Louise answered exactly as a cathedral would have answered--looked very
solemn, and was silent.

Petrea, like something let quite loose, after supper would not let
anybody remain quiet who by any possibility could be made to answer her.
"Is reason sufficient for mankind?" asked she. "What is the foundation
of morals? What is the proper meaning of revelation? Why is the nation
always so badly off? Why must there be rich and poor?" etc., etc.

"Dear Petrea," said Louise, "what can be the use of asking such
questions?"

It was an evening for questions; there was not even an end to them when
people separated for the night.

"Do you not think," asked the Judge from his wife when they were alone
together, "that our little Petrea begins to be quite disagreeable with
her perpetual questions and disputations? She leaves nobody at peace,
and is at times in a sort of unceasing disquiet. She will, some time or
other, make herself quite ridiculous if she goes on so."

"Yes," replied Elise, "_if_ she goes on so; but I think she will not. I
have observed Petrea narrowly for some time, and do you know I fancy
there is something out of the common way in that young girl."

"Yes, yes," said he, "in the common way she certainly is not; the
merriment and the everlasting joviality which she occasions, and the
comical devices that she has----"

"Yes," replied the mother, "do they not indicate a decided turn for art?
And then she has a remarkable thirst for knowledge. Every morning she is
up between three and four, in order to read or write, or to work at her
Creation. It is, in fact, quite uncommon; and may not this unrest, this
zeal to question and dispute, arise from a sort of intellectual hunger?
Ah! from such hunger, which many a woman for want of fitting aliment
suffers through the whole of her life! From such an emptiness of the
soul proceed unrest, discontentedness, nay, innumerable faults!"

"I believe you are right, Elise," said her husband; "and no condition in
life is more melancholy, particularly in advanced years. But this shall
not be the lot of my Petrea--that we will prevent. What do you think now
would be good for her?"

"I fancy," said Elise, "that a course of serious and well-directed
study would assist in regulating her mind. She is too much left to
herself, with her disarranged bent--with her enthusiasm and her
attempts. I myself have too little knowledge to instruct her, you have
too little time, and there is no one here who would undertake the
guidance of her young unsettled mind. I am sometimes extremely grieved
about her; for her sisters do not understand the workings of her mind,
which I must confess sometimes give me pain. I wish I were better able
to help her. Petrea requires a ground on which to take her stand--as yet
she has none; her thoughts require some firm holding-place; from the
want of this comes her unrest. She is like a flower without roots, which
is driven about by wind and wave."

"She shall be firmly rooted; she shall find firm ground to stand upon,
if such is to be found in the world!" said the Judge, with a grave yet
beaming eye, and striking his hand at the same time with such violence
on a volume of West-Gotha law, that it fell to the ground. "We will
think about it," continued he; "Petrea is yet too young for one to say
with certainty what is her decided bent; but we will strengthen her
powers! she shall no longer know hunger of any kind, so long as I live
and can get my own bread. You know my friend, the excellent Bishop
B----. Perhaps we can at first confide Petrea to his guidance. After a
few years we shall see----as yet she is only a child. But don't you
think we might speak with Jacobi, whether he could not read with her and
talk with her--apropos! how is it with Jacobi? I fancy he begins to
think about Louise."

"Yes, yes, you are not wrong," said Elise; "and our Cousin Thure of
Oestanvik--have you remarked nothing there?"

"Yes, I did remark something," replied he. "The thousand! What stupid
questions were those that he put to her! 'Does Cousin like this?' or,
'Does Cousin like that?' But I don't like that! not I! Louise is not yet
grown up, and already shall people come and ask her, does Cousin like?
Nay, perhaps, after all it means nothing; that would please me best.
What a pity it is, however, that our Cousin Thure is not more of a man!
A most beautiful estate he has, and so near us."

"Yes, a pity," said Elise; "because such as he is now, I am quite
convinced Louise would find it impossible to endure him."

"You do not think she would like Jacobi?" asked the father.

"To tell the truth," returned she, "I think it probable she might."

"Nay," said he, "that would be very unpleasant, and very imprudent: I am
very fond of Jacobi, but he has nothing, and he is nothing."

"But, my love," reasoned his wife, "he may become something, and he may
get something. I confess, dear Ernst, that he would suit Louise better
for a husband than almost any one else, and I would willingly call him
son."

"Would you, Elise!" exclaimed the Judge, "then I suppose I must prepare
myself to do the same. You have had most trouble, most labour, with the
children, and you have, therefore, most to say in their affairs."

"You are so good, Ernst," said Elise.

"Say reasonable--nothing more than reasonable," said he; "beyond this I
have the belief that our thoughts and our inclinations do not differ
much. I confess that I consider Louise as a great treasure, and I know
nobody whom, of my own will, I would confer her upon; still, if Jacobi
obtains her affections, I could not find in my heart to oppose a union
between them, although, on account of his uncertain prospects, it would
make me anxious. I am much attached to Jacobi, and on Henrik's account
we have much to thank him for. His excellent heart, his honesty, his
good qualities, will make him as good a citizen as husband and father,
and he belongs at the same time to that class of persons with whom it is
most pleasant to have daily intercourse. But, God forbid! I am talking
just as if I wished the union, and I am a long way from that yet. I
would much rather keep my daughters with me as long as they could feel
themselves happy with me; but when girls grow up, one cannot reckon on
peace. I wish all wooers and question-askers at Jericho! Now, we could
live here as in a kingdom of heaven, since we have got all into such
nice order--some little improvements, it is true, I could yet make,
though things are well enough, if we could be at peace. I have been
thinking that we could so easily make a wardrobe. See on this side, in
the wall; don't you think that if we here opened----Heavens! are you
already asleep, my dear?"


CHAPTER V.

AN INVITATION.


About this time the sisters of the house began to dream a great deal
about conflagrations, and there was no end of the meanings of dreams,
hints, little jokes, and communications among the sisters, none of whom
dreamt more animated or more significant dreams than Petrea. Gabriele,
who, in her innocence, did not dream at all, wondered what all this
extraordinary talk about conflagration meant; but she could not learn
much, for as often as she desired to have her part in the mysteries, it
was said, "Go out for a little while, Gabriele dear."

One evening Sara, Louise, Eva, and Petrea were sitting together at a
little table, where they were deep in the discussion of something which
seemed to possess extraordinary interest for them, when Gabriele came
and asked just for a little place at the table for herself and her
books; but it was impossible, there was no room for the little one.
Almost at the same moment Jacobi and Henrik came up; they too sought for
room at the circle of young ladies, and now see! there was excellent
room for them both, whereupon Gabriele stuck her little head between
Louise and Petrea, and prayed her sisters to solve the following riddle:

"What is that at which six places may be found, but not five?"

The sisters laughed; Louise kissed the little refined moralist; and
Petrea left the table, the gentlemen, and a political discussion, which
she had begun with Henrik, in order to sit on one side and relate to
Gabriele the Travels of Thiodolf, which was one of the greatest
enjoyments of our little lady.

"Apropos!" cried Henrik, "will there not be a wedding celebrated the day
after to-morrow, to which we ought naturally to be invited.--N. B.
According to my reckoning, Aunt Evelina has far less genius than I gave
her credit for, if----"

"Aunt Evelina stands here now ready, if possible, to vindicate her
genius," said a friendly voice, and to the amazement of all Aunt Evelina
stood in the middle of the room.

After the first salutations and questions, Evelina presented an
invitation, not as Henrik expected for the marriage, but for the
entertainment after the marriage.[7]

Laura's marriage with Major G. was to be celebrated in the quietest
manner, at her adopted mother's house, and only in the presence of a few
relations. But the mother of the bridegroom, one of those joyous persons
who in a remarkable manner lightens the world of its cares--and for
which the world thanks them so little--one of those who, if possible,
would entertain and make glad all mankind, and whom mankind on that
account very willingly slanders;--she, the stout and cordial widow of a
Councillor of War, was determined to celebrate the marriage of her only
and beloved son in a festive and cheerful manner, and to make the whole
country partakers of the joy which she herself felt.

The great marriage-festival was to last eight days, and already the
great doors of Axelholm were standing wide open to receive a
considerable party of the notables of the place. The bride and
bridegroom were to invite their respective friends and acquaintances,
and commissioned now by the bride and her future mother-in-law, Evelina
brought a written invitation from her; she came now to beseech the
family--the whole family, Jacobi included, to honour the festivity with
their presence; above all things, desiring that _all_ the daughters
might come--every one of them was wanted for one thing or another. They
reckoned on Petrea, she said, who had a great turn for theatricals, to
take a character in a play which was to be acted; and the others were
wanted for dancing and for _tableaux vivants_. Gabriele must allow
herself to be made an angel of--and naturally they hoped, that out of
all this the young people would find amusement.

They wished and prayed that the whole family would establish themselves
at Axelholm, where everything was prepared for them during the whole
time of the festival, and, if possible, longer, which would contribute
so much to their friends' satisfaction there.

Pitt, Fox, Thiers, Lafitte, Platen, Anckarsvärd, nay, one may even
assert that all the orators in the world never made speeches which were
considered more beautiful by their hearers, nor which were received with
warmer or more universal enthusiasm than this little oration of Aunt
Evelina. Henrik threw himself on his knee before the excellent, eloquent
Aunt; Eva clapped her hands, and embraced her; Petrea cried aloud in a
fit of rapture, and in leaping up threw down a work-table on Louise;
Jacobi made an _entrechat_, freed Louise from the work-table, and
engaged her for the first _anglaise_ of the first ball.

The Judge, glad from his heart that his children should have so much
enjoyment, was obliged, for his part, to give up the joyful festivity.
Business! Judge Frank had seldom time for anything but business! yet he
would manage it so that at least he would take them there, and on the
following day he would return. Elise sent back her compliments, but
could not take more than two, or at most three, of her daughters with
her; Evelina, however, overruled this, as did also her husband, who
insisted that they _all_ should go.

"Perhaps," said he, "they may never have such another opportunity to
enjoy themselves."

Seldom, indeed, does it happen that people beg and pray and counsel a
mother to take all her six daughters with her. Long may such counsellors
live! But then it must be acknowledged, that the daughters of the Franks
were universally beloved on account of their kind, agreeable manners,
and their many good qualities.

Elise must promise to take them all with her--Sara, Louise, Eva,
Leon----no! It is true Leonore could not go with her; the poor Leonore
must remain at home, on account of indisposition; and very soon,
therefore, Eva and Petrea emulated each other as to which should remain
with her. Leonore declared coldly and peevishly that nobody should stay
at home on her account; she needed nobody; she would much rather be
alone; the sisters might all go, without hesitation; there was no fear
of her not living through it! Poor Leonore had become changed by her
sickness and her sedentary life;--her better self had become hidden
under a cloud of vexation and ill-humour, which chilled the kindliness
and friendliness that people otherwise would have shown to her.

In the mean time there was a stir among the young people of the family;
for much had to be bought, much to be made, and much to be put in order,
that they might be able to make an honourable appearance at the marriage
festival. What a review was there then of dresses, flowers, ribbons,
gloves, etc.! what counsel-takings and projects regarding the new
purchases! what calculations, so that the present of money which the
good father had, all unsolicited, made to each daughter might not be
exceeded. Louise was invaluable to everybody; she had counsel and
contrivance for everybody; besides all this, she was unwearied in
shopping, and never disheartened in buying. She made very few
compliments--would let them in a shop open all they had, if she wanted
only an ell of cloth; and would go to twelve places in order to get a
piece of ribbon cheaper or of better quality--she paid great regard to
_quality_. According to her own opinion, as well as that of her family,
she was an excellent hand at getting good bargains; that is, for
obtaining good wares at unheard-of low prices. With all this our Louise
was held in great consideration in all the shops of the city, and was
served with the greatest zeal and respect; whilst, on the contrary,
Petrea, who never bargained about anything, and always took that which
was first offered to her, at all events when she was alone, was not
esteemed in the least, and always obtained bad, and at the same time
dear goods. True it is that Petrea went a-shopping as little as
possible; whilst Louise, on the contrary, who took the difficult part of
commissioner for all her friends and acquaintance, was about as much at
home in a shop as in her own wardrobe.

It was unanimously decided that Sara, Louise, and Eva should all wear
the same dress on the evening of the great ball at Axelholm, which would
be given on the day they arrived there; namely, that they should wear
white muslin dresses, with pale pink sashes, and roses in their hair.
Petrea was enraptured by this project, and did not doubt but that her
sisters would be universally known by the appellation of "the three
Graces." For her own part, she would willingly have been called Venus,
but, alas! that was not to be thought of. She studied her face in all
the glasses in the house--"It is not so very bad-looking," thought she,
"if the nose were only different." Petrea was to appear at the ball in
sky-blue; and "the little lady" was quite enraptured by the
rose-coloured gauze dress which her mother was making for her.

The toilet occupied every one, body and soul.

FOOTNOTES:

[7] Hemkommeöl, literally, coming-home-ale. The names of many of the
domestic festivities of Sweden remind us very much of those of our own
old festivities; as church-ales, christening-ales, etc.: thus, barnsöl,
the christening-feast; graföl, burial-feast; arföl, the feast given by
the heir on descent of property, etc.--M. H.


CHAPTER VI.

CONFUSION.


A fine mizzling rain fell without; and Jacobi, with secret horror,
beheld Louise equipped in the "court-preacher," which became her so ill,
ready to go out with Eva, under shelter of the "family-roof," in order
to make good bargains. In the mean time Sara took her music lesson with
Schwartz, but had promised Petrea to go out with her in the afternoon,
in order to make good bargains likewise.

"Henrik!" said Jacobi to his young friend, "I fancy that we too are
going out on a 'good bargain' expedition. I want a pair of gloves,
and----"

"And perhaps we shall meet the sisters in the shop," said Henrik,
waggishly.

"Quite right," returned Jacobi, smiling; "but, Henrik, cannot you tell
your sister Louise that she should not wear that horrible black cloak? I
declare she does not look as----indeed she does not look well in it."

"Don't you think that I have told her so already?" replied Henrik. "I
have preached so long against the 'court-preacher,' that he ought long
ago to have been banished from respectable society; but it is all to no
purpose. He has worked himself so completely into the good graces of our
gracious oldest, that depend upon it, my brother, we must endure him all
our lives long. And what think you? I almost fancy our Cousin of
Oestanvik likes him!"

"Nay," said Jacobi, "one can very well see that that creature has a
wretched taste--a true Hottentot taste!"

"And is that the reason," remarked Henrik, "that he likes Louise?"

"Hum!" said Jacobi.

At dinner-time the bargaining young ladies came back, attended by the
bargaining gentlemen, who had, after all, gone about peacefully with the
"court-preacher." Louise was quite full of glory; never in her whole
life before had she made more lucky bargains.

"Look, sisters," said she, "this muslin for a crown-banco[8] the ell! Is
it not a charming colour? I have saved in it alone twelve shillings.[9]
And see these ribbons which I have got for four-and-twenty shillings the
ell--thirty were asked. Are they not beautiful?--will they not look
magnificently?--is it not a real discovery?--did you ever hear of
anything like it? Sara, if you will go to the same shop as I do, you
will get all at the same price. I have made that agreement for you at
three places: at Bergvall's, and at Åström's, and Madame Florea's for
the flowers."

Sara thanked her, but said she had altered her plans; she did not intend
to have the same dress as Louise and Eva, but another, which pleased her
better.

The sisters were astonished, and rather vexed; Louise quite offended.
Had they not already agreed about it? What was to become of the Three
Graces?

Sara answered, that the third Grace might be whoever she would, but for
her part she should not have that honour.

The sisters thought her very ungracious.

Eva ran up to Leonore in order to show her her purchases.

"Look at this rose, Leonore," said she, "is it not very pretty? just as
if it were natural! And these ribbons!"

"Yes, yes," said Leonore, with a depressed voice, regarding these
ornaments with a gloomy look; and then pushing them from her so hastily
that they fell on the floor, burst into tears. Eva was quite concerned;
a book had fallen on her beautiful rose and had crushed it. For one
moment Eva shed tears over her flower, the next over her sister.

"Why have you done so, Leonore?" said she; "you must be very ill, or are
you displeased with me?"

"No, no!" said poor Leonore; "forgive me, and leave me."

"Why?" asked Eva. "Ah, do not weep--do not distress yourself. It was
quite thoughtless of me to come here and----But I will bid farewell to
all the magnificence; I will not go to the ball; I will stop at home
with you, only tell me that you love me, and that you would like me to
do so. Just say so--say so!"

"No, no!" said Leonore, passionately, and turning away from the
affectionate comforter; "I do not like it! You teaze me, all of you,
with this talk of stopping at home on my account. I know very well that
I am not such as any one would wish to please--I am neither merry nor
good. Go, Eva, to those who are merry, and follow them. Leave me, leave
me in peace, that is all that I desire."

Eva retired weeping, and with the crushed rose in her hand.

In the afternoon, when Petrea was ready to go out on the promised
expedition, she found Sara also was in an ill-humour. She would go, but
only on Petrea's account; she had no intention of buying anything; she
had not money enough wherewith to make purchases; she would not go to
the festival; she could not have any pleasure if she did; nothing in the
world gave one any pleasure when one had not things exactly to one's own
wishes.

Petrea was quite confounded by this sudden change, and sought in all
possible ways to discover the cause of it.

"But why," asked she, with tears in her eyes, "will you not go with us?"

"Because I will not go," answered Sara, "if I cannot go with honour, and
in my own way! I will not be mixed up in a mass of every-day mediocre
people! It is in my power to become distinguished and uncommon. That is
now, for once, my humour. I will not live to be trammelled. I would
rather not live at all!"

"Ah!" exclaimed Petrea, who now comprehended what was working in Sara,
whilst her eyes flashed with sudden joy--"ah, is it nothing more than
that? Dear Sara, take all that I possess; take it, I beseech you! Do you
not believe that it gives me a thousand times the pleasure if I see you
happy and beautiful, than if I possessed the most glorious things in the
world? Take it, best, dearest Sara! I pray you, on my knees, to take it,
and then if there be enough you can buy what you like and go with
us--else the whole splendour will be good for nothing!"

"Ah, Petrea, and you?" asked Sara.

"Ah," said Petrea, "I'll just furbish up my gauze dress, and keep a
little money for some ribbon, and then all is done; and as for the rest,
it does not matter how I look. Be only contented, Sara, and do as I bid
you."

"But ought I? Can I?" asked Sara. "Ah, no, Petrea, I could not do it!
Your little all! And then it would not be sufficient."

"Ah, yes," said Petrea, "make it sufficient. We can go to Louise's
shops, and one gets everything so cheap there. I shall never be happy
again if you do not do as I pray you. See now, you are my good, dear
Sara! Thank you, thank you! Ah, now am I so light at heart! Now I need
not trouble myself about the blessed toilet. And that is a great gain
for me!"

The bird that sits on the swinging bough is not lighter of mood than
Petrea was as she went out with Sara, who was far less cheerful, but who
still had never been more friendly towards Petrea.

It went thus with Petrea's purchase of ribbon:--In passing a
gingerbread-booth she saw a little chimney-sweeper, who was casting the
most loving glances on some purple-red apples, and Petrea, with the
money in her hand, could not resist the desire of making him a present
of them, and felt more than rewarded as she saw the boy's white teeth
shining forth from their black neighbourhood, first in smiles at her,
and then as they attacked the juicy fruit. Her own mouth watered at it,
and as she now cast her eyes round the booth, and saw such beautiful
bergamotte-pears--the favourite fruit of her mother--and such
magnificent oranges, that would please Leonore so much!--the result was,
that Petrea's reticule was filled with fruit, and the ribbon--for that
there was not now money enough.

"But," consoled herself Petrea, "Louise has such a deal of old
ribbon--she can very well lend me some." Petrea thought like all bad
managers.

When Sara and Petrea returned from the shopping expedition, Louise saw
directly that the things which Sara had bought must far have exceeded
her means; and besides this, Louise justly thought that they were
unseemly for a young girl of her station. She saw without saying one
word the white silk; the blue gauze for the tunic; the beautiful white
and yellow asters for the hair, and the other ornaments which Sara, not
without vanity, displayed.

"And what have you bought, Petrea?" now asked Louise; "let us see your
bargains."

Petrea replied, with a blush, that she--had bought nothing yet.

Not long afterwards Petrea came to Louise, and besought her, with a
certain bashfulness, to lend her some ribbon.

"Good Petrea," said Louise, displeased, "I want my ribbons myself, and
you have had money just as well as I or any of the others, to buy what
you may want."

Petrea was silent, and tears were in her eyes.

"I did not think, Louise," said Sara, hotly, "that you would have been
so covetous as to refuse Petrea some old ribbons which you are certain
not to want yourself."

I do not mean to say that they are in general unduly civilized.
Throughout large parts of the population even in long-settled regions
there is no excess of those virtues needed for the maintenance of social
harmony. Especially out in the West men's dealings do not yet betray
too much of the "sweetness and light" which we are told distinguish
the cultured man from the barbarian; nevertheless there is a sense
in which my assertion is true.

You know that the primitive man lacks power of application. Spurred
by hunger, by danger or revenge he can exert himself energetically
for a time, but his energy is spasmodic.

Monotonous daily toil is impossible to him. It is otherwise with the more
developed man. The stern discipline of social life has gradually increased
the aptitude for persistent industry; until among us, and still more
among you, work has become with many a passion. This contrast of nature
is another aspect.
The savage thinks only of present satisfactions and leaves future
satisfactions uncared for. Contrariwise the American, eagerly pursuing
a future good almost ignores what good the passing day offers him; and
when the future good is gained, he neglects that while striving
for some still remoter good.

What I have seen and heard during my stay among you has forced on me the
belief that this slow change from habitual inertness to persistent activity
has reached an extreme from which there must begin a counter-change--a
reaction.

Everywhere I have been struck with the number of faces which told
in strong lines of the burdens that had to be borne. I have been struck,
too, with the large proportion of gray-haired men; and inquiries
have brought out the fact that with you the hair commonly begins
to turn some ten years earlier than with us.

Moreover, in every circle I have met men who had themselves suffered
from nervous collapse due to the stress of business, or named
friends who had either killed themselves by overwork or had been
permanently incapacitated or had wasted long periods in endeavors
to recover health.

I do but echo the opinion of all the observant persons I have spoken to
that immense injury is being done by this high-pressure life--the
physique is being undermined.

That subtle thinker and poet whom you have lately had to
mourn--Emerson,--says in his "Essay on the Gentleman," that the
first requisite is that he shall be a good animal.

The requisite is a general one--it extends to man, the father, the
citizen.

We hear a great deal about the "vile body"; and many are encouraged
by the phrase to transgress the laws of health. But Nature quietly
suppresses those who treat thus disrespectfully one of her highest
products and leaves the world to be peopled by the descendants of those
who are not so foolish.

Beyond these immediate mischiefs, there are remoter mischiefs. Exclusive
devotion to work has the result that amusements cease to please;
and when relaxation becomes imperative, life becomes dreary from
lack of its sole interest--the interest in business.

The remark current in England that when the American travels, his aim
is to do the greatest amount of sight-seeing in the shortest time, I find
current here also; it is recognized that the satisfaction of getting
on devours nearly all other satisfactions.
Ah, think, think only that every day, nay, every
hour, you are working to shape the future. Reflect that you may gladden
and beautify your lives, or embitter them, according as you now act. My
dear girls, bethink you that it is in your power to make your parents,
your family, yourselves, either very happy or very unhappy!"

The daughters were silent, and were penetrated by the deep emotion which
expressed itself in the words of their mother, in her pale countenance,
and in her tearful looks. They felt strongly the truth of all that she
had said. With a torrent of tears, Petrea ran out of the room; Sara
followed her silently; Eva threw herself caressingly on her mother's
neck; but Louise said:

"I have only spoken the truth to Sara. It is not my fault if it be
unpleasant for her to hear it."

"Ah, Louise!" returned her mother, "this is constantly said in the
world, and yet so much division and hatred prevail between those who say
it. It is the blind belief in our own faultlessness, it is the hard and
assuming spirit of correction, which excite the temper, and make the
truth unproductive of good. Why should we present truth in a disfiguring
dress, when she is in herself so pure and beautiful? I know, my dear
girl, that you only wish to do that which is right and good, and whoever
aims rightly at that object will not fail of the means also."

"Must I then dissimulate?" asked Louise. "Must I conceal my thoughts,
and be silent respecting that which I think wrong? That may indeed be
prudent, but it certainly is not Christian."

"Become Christian in temper, my child," said the mother, "and you will
easily discover the means of doing what is right in a proper and
effectual manner. You will learn to speak the truth without wounding; a
truly pure, truly affectionate spirit wounds no one, not even in
trifles. For that reason, one need not to be silent when one should
speak, but----"

"'_C'est le ton qui fait la chanson!_' Is it not so? he, he, he!"
interposed the shrill voice of Mrs. Gunilla, who had come in unobserved,
and who thus put an end to the discourse. Soon afterwards the Assessor
made his appearance, and they two fell into conversation, though not, as
commonly, into strife with each other. Mrs. Gunilla lamented to him
respecting Pyrrhus; she was quite in trouble about the little animal,
which had now for some time had a pain in the foot, which it always lay
and licked, and which, spite of that and of other means, got rather
worse than better. She did not know what she was to do with the little
favourite. The Assessor besought her, in the kindest manner, to allow
him to undertake his treatment. He said he had always been much more
successful in curing dogs than men, and that dogs were far more
agreeable, and far nicer patients than their masters. Mrs. Gunilla
thanked him much, and was heartily glad of his offer, and the following
morning, she said, Pyrrhus should be conveyed to him.

The family assembled themselves for tea, and the quick eyes of Mrs.
Gunilla soon discovered that all was not quite as it should be.

"Listen, now," said she, "my little Elise. I know that there will be
festivities, and balls, and banquets, given there at----_chose_! what do
they call it? and of course the young people here should all be at them
and figure a little. If there be any little embarrassments about the
toilet in which I can help, tell me candidly. Good heavens! one can
imagine that easily. Young girls!--a rosette is wanted here, and a
rosette is wanted there, and one thing and another--heart's-dearest! At
the Isle of France, the invariable pendulum (as had been remarked
by M.

Freycinet) made in one day, upon an average, thirteen or fourteen oscillations
more than it ought, supposing the depression to be 1.305, according
to the lunar theory.

Gunilla, "but I must tell you, my dear friend,
there is no rule without its exception, and if any trifles are wanted,
so--think on me."

Mrs. Gunilla was to-day in such a happy humour; she looked like somebody
who was determined to make some fellow-creature happy. The Assessor
could not get into dispute with her. She rejoiced herself in the
country, to which she should soon remove; in the spring which was at
hand, and in the greenness which was approaching. The Assessor rejoiced
himself not at all. "What had one to rejoice about in such a hateful
spring? It was quite impossible to live in such a climate, and it must
be the will of our Lord God that man should not live, or he would not
have sent such springs. How could people plant potatoes in ice? and how
otherwise could they be planted at all this year? And if people could
get no potatoes, they must die of hunger, which was then perhaps the
best part of the history of life."

On her side, Mrs. Gunilla bethought herself that she would willingly
live. "Our Lord God," she said, "would take care that people had
potatoes!" and then she looked with an expression of cordial sympathy on
the troubled and distressed countenances of the young girls.

"When Eva, dear, is as old as I," said she, patting her gently on her
white neck, "she will know nothing more of all that which so distresses
her now."

"Ah! to be sixty years old!" exclaimed Eva, smiling, though with a tear
in her eye.

"You'll get well on to sixty--well on; he, he, he, he!" said Mrs.
Gunilla, consolingly. "Heart's-dearest! it goes before one thinks of it!
But only be merry and cheerful. Amuse yourselves at----_chose_! what do
you call it? and then come and tell me all about it. Do that nicely, and
then I shall get my share of the fun though I am not there. That comes
of the so-to-be envied sixty years, Eva, dear! he, he, he, he!"

The sun set bright and glorious. Mrs. Gunilla went to the window, and
sent a little greeting towards the sun, whose beams, glancing through
the trees of the opposite churchyard, seemed to salute her in return.

"It looks as if one should have a fine day to-morrow," said Mrs. Gunilla
to herself, gently, and looking very happy.

People place youth and age opposite to each other, as the light and
shade in the day of life. But has not every day, every age, its own
youth--its own new attractive life, if one only sets about rightly to
enjoy them? Yes, the aged man, who has collected together pure
recollections for his evening companions, is many degrees happier than
the youth who, with a restless heart, stands only at the beginning of
his journey. No passions disturb the coffee-cup of the other--no
restless endeavours disturb the cheerful gossip of the evening twilight;
all the little comforts of life are then so thoroughly enjoyed; and we
can then, with more confidence, cast all our cares and anxieties on God.
We have then proved Him.

FOOTNOTES:

[8] Crown-banco, equal to one shilling and sixpence English money.

[9] A shilling Swedish is equal to about one farthing English.


CHAPTER VII.

DISENTANGLING.


"There are certainly too many bitter almonds in this almond-mass;
nothing tastes good to me this afternoon," said Elise, who set down a
glass of almond-milk, and sighed--but not for the almond-milk.

"Be pleased with us, dear mother," whispered Eva, tenderly; "we are all
friends again!"

The mother saw it in their beautiful beaming eyes; she read it in
Louise's quiet glance as she turned round from the table, where she was
helping Sara with her tunic, and looked at her mother. Elise nodded
joyfully both to her and Eva, and drank to them the glass of
almond-milk, which now appeared to have become suddenly sweet, so
pleased did she look as she again set down the glass.

"Mamma, dear," said Gabriele, "we must certainly do something towards
poor Petrea's toilet, otherwise she will not be presentable."

But Louise took Petrea's gauze-dress secretly in hand, and sate up over
it till midnight, and adorned it so with her own ribbons and lace that
it was more presentable than it had ever been before.

Petrea kissed her skilful hands for all that they had done. Eva--yet we
will, for the present, keep silent on her arrangements.

But dost thou know, oh, reader!--yes, certainly thou dost!--the zephyrs
which call forth spring in the land of the soul--which call forth
flowers, and make the air pure and delicious? Certainly thou knowest
them--the little easy, quiet, unpretending, almost invisible, and yet
powerful--in one word, human kindnesses.

Since these have taken up their abode in the Franks' family we see
nothing that can prevent a general joyful party of pleasure. But
yes!--it is true--


PETREA'S NOSE!

This was, as we have often remarked, large and somewhat clumsy. Petrea
had great desire to unform it, particularly for the approaching
festivities.

"What _have_ you done to your nose? What is amiss with your nose?" were
the questions which assailed Petrea on all sides, as she came down to
breakfast on the morning of the journey.

Half laughing and half crying, Petrea related how she had made use of
some innocent machinery during the night, by which she had hoped
somewhat to alter the form of this offending feature, the consequence of
which had unfortunately been the fixing a fiery red saddle across it,
and a considerable swelling beside.

"Don't cry, my dear girl," said her mother, bathing it with
oatmeal-water, "it will only inflame your nose the more."

"Ah," burst forth poor Petrea, "anybody is really unfortunate who has
such a nose as mine! What in the world can they do with it? They must go
into a convent."

"It is very much better," said the mother, "to do as one of my friends
did, who had a very large nose, much larger than yours, Petrea."

"Ah, what did she do?" asked Petrea, eagerly.

"She made herself so beloved, that her nose was beloved too," said her
mother. "Her friends declared that they saw nothing so gladly as her
nose as it came in at the door, and that without it she would have been
nothing."

Petrea laughed, and looked quite cheerful. "Ah," said she, "if my nose
can but be beloved, I shall be quite reconciled to it."

"You must endeavour to grow above it!" said the good, prudent mother,
jestingly, but significantly.


CHAPTER VIII.

THE DAY OF THE JOURNEY.


On the morning of the important day all was in lively motion. The
Assessor sent Eva a large bouquet of most remarkably beautiful natural
flowers, which she immediately divided among her sisters. The Judge
himself, in a frenzy of activity, packed the things of his wife and
daughters, and protested that nobody could do it better than he, and
that nobody could make so many things go into one box as he could. The
last was willingly conceded to him, but a little demur arose as to the
excellency of the packing. The ladies asserted that he rumpled their
dresses; the Judge asserted that there was no danger on that account,
that everything would be found remarkably smooth, and stood zealous and
warm in his shirt-sleeves beside the travelling-case, grumbling a little
at every fresh dress that was handed to him, and then exclaiming
immediately afterwards, "Have you more yet, girls? I have more room. Do
give me more! See now! that? and that? and that? and----now, in the name
of all weathers, is there no end of your articles? Give them here, my
girls! Let that alone, child! I shall soon lay it straight! What?
rumple them, shall I? Well, they can be unrumpled again, that's all! Are
there no smoothing-irons in the world? What? so, so, my girls! Have you
any more? I can yet put something more in."

They were to set off immediately after dinner, in order to be at
Axelholm, which lay about two miles[10] from the city, ready for the ball
in the evening. By dinner-time all boxes were packed, and all tempers
cleared, more especially that of the Judge, who was so contented with
his morning's work that he almost imparted his delight to those who at
first were not altogether satisfied with it.

Petrea ate nothing but a pancake, with a little snow milk to it, in
order that she might dance all the lighter.

"Above all things, my friends," prayed the Judge, "be precise, and be
ready at half-past three; the carriages come then to the door, do not
let me have to wait for you."

Precisely at half-past three the Judge went to the doors of his wife and
daughters.

"Mamma! girls! it is time to go!" said he. "The clock has struck
half-past three! The carriages are here!"

"Directly, directly!" was answered from all sides. The Judge waited; he
knew from experience what this "directly" meant.

In the fever of his punctuality his blood began to boil, and he walked
up and down the hall with great steps, talking with himself: "It is
shocking, though," argued he, "that they never are ready! but I won't be
angry! Even if they make me angry, I will not spoil their pleasure. But
patience is necessary, more than Job had!"

Whilst he was thus moralising with himself, he heard the voice of his
wife saying, with decision, in the library, "Come now, dear girls! In
heaven's name, don't keep the father waiting! I know, indeed, how it
annoys him----!"

"But he said nothing the day before yesterday," Petrea's voice was heard
to return, "though he had then to wait for us. (I can't think what I
have done with my gloves!)"

"And precisely on that account he shall not wait a moment longer for
us," said the mother; "and never again, if I can help it; so, if you are
not ready girls, I shall run away without you!"

The mother ran, and all the daughters ran merrily after her.

The father remarked with pleasure, that love has a far more effectual
power than fear, and all were soon seated in the carriage.

We will allow them to roll away, and will now pay a little visit to


LEONORE'S CHAMBER.

Leonore sate solitary. She supported her sick head on her hand. She had
impelled herself to answer kindly the leave-taking kiss of her mother
and sisters; she had seen how they sought to repress their joy before
her; and she had particularly remarked a sort of half-concealed roguish
joy in the glance which was exchanged between Eva and her mother, which
had pained her. She had heard their happy voices on the stairs, and then
the driving away of the carriages. Now they were gone; now all was still
and desolate in the house, and large tears traced their way down
Leonore's cheeks. She seemed to herself so forlorn, so uncared for, so
solitary in the world!

At that moment the door was softly opened, a smiling face looked in, and
a light fascinating figure sprang forward through the chamber towards
her, kissed her, laughed, and glanced with roguish and ardent affection
into her astonished face.

"Eva!" exclaimed Leonore, scarcely trusting her eyes; "Eva, are you
here? How! whither came you? Are you not gone with the others?"

What tends to confirm this hypothesis, he says, is, that all observations
show that an acceleration of the pendulum generally takes place
on volcanic ground and a retardation on such as is sandy and
argillaceous.

A very important question to ascertain is, whether the flattening
is exactly the same in both hemispheres.

From the observations of Captains Duperrey and Freycinet, it appears
that in the southern hemisphere it is 1.291, and in the northern
1.288; that is to say, it is sensibly the same, or 1.290 in both

.

* * * * *

HABITS OF PLANTS.

The following curious observations on the habits of plants, were made
by General Walker, in his address to the Agricultural Society
of St.
Helena, in February last:--"The functions of plants, as well as of
animals, depend upon the air in which they live. I have observed that
those of St.

Helena, which have been brought from another hemisphere, are very irregular
in their annual progress; many of them, in the development of their
foliage, have adopted the law of nature peculiar to the country into
which they have been transplanted. Others, more obstinate, remain faithful
to their own habits, and continue to follow the stated changes to which
they had been accustomed.

They all appear to maintain a struggle either before they adopt the
habits which belong to the seasons of their new country, or decide on
retaining their relations with the old.

In yielding to external circumstances, they appear to have different
tempers.

This appearance of contention is often observed in plants of the same
species; they seem to hesitate and deliberate, ere they adopt the mode
of performing the functions of life. At length when the decision is
made, apparently not without pain and effort, we are at a loss to
discover an adequate cause.

An oak, for instance, which loses its leaves in a St. Helena winter of
68 degrees, scarcely experiences the difference of temperature, which,
reasoning by analogy, could cause that change.

It would have continued to maintain inflexibility, in its original
climate, its old habits, though exposed to far greater irregularity
and severity of climate. But though the law is obeyed by many plants,
it does not determine the periodical changes of the whole, nor
do they all submit to it with equal readiness and regularity. It
would add, I conceive, to the natural history of vegetation, and improve
our knowledge of the geography of plants, were the facts concerning
their habits and changes, under different temperatures, carefully
collected."
* * * * *

MISCELLANIES.

* * * * *

HUMAN CREDULITY.

The wonderful miracles wrought by Bridget Bostock, of Cheshire, who
healed all diseases by prayer, faith, and an embrocation of fasting
spittle, induced multitudes to resort to her from all parts of the
country, and kept her salival glands in full employ.

Sir John Pryce, with a high spirit of enthusiasm, wrote to this woman
to make him a visit at Newton Hall, in order to restore to him his
third, a favourite, wife.

His letter will best tell the foundation on which he built his strange
hope, and every uncommon request.

_To Mrs. Bridget Bostock._
Madam,--Having received information, by repeated advices, both public
and private, that you have of late performed many wonderful cures, even
where the best physicians have failed; and that the means used appear
to be very inadequate to the effect produced; I cannot but look
upon you as an extraordinary and highly favoured person.

And why may not the same most merciful God, who enables you to restore
sight to the blind, hearing to the deaf, and strength to the same,
also enable you to raise the dead to life?

Now, having lately lost a wife, whom I most tenderly loved, my children
a most excellent step-mother, and our acquaintances a most dear and
valuable friend, you will lay us all under the highest obligations;
and I earnestly entreat you, for God Almighty's sake, that you will
put up your petitions to the Throne of Grace on our behalf, that
the deceased may be restored to us, and the late dame Eleanor Pryce
be raised from the dead.

If your personal attendance appears to you to be necessary, I will send
my coach and six, with proper servants to wait on you hither,
whenever you please to appoint.

Recompense of any kind that you may please to propose would be made with
the utmost gratitude; but I wish the bare mention of it is not offensive
to both God and you.

I am, madam,

Your most obedient, and very much afflicted, humble servant,
JOHN PRYCE.

THEOLOGICAL WIT."No, Leonore," continued she, "do not trouble yourself to be beautiful.
This, it is true, may at times be very pleasant, but it certainly is not
necessary to make us either beloved or happy. I am convinced that if you
were not in the least prettier than you are, yet that you might if you
would, in your own peculiar way, be as much in favour and as much
beloved as the prettiest girls in the world."

"Ah!" said Leonore, "if I were only beloved by my nearest connexions!
What a divine thing it must be to be beloved by one's own family!"

"But that you can be--that you will be, if you only will! Ah! if you
only were always as you are sometimes--and you are more and more so--and
I love you more and more--infinitely I love you!"

"Oh, beloved Eva," said Leonore, deeply affected, whilst she leaned
herself quietly on her sister, "I have very little deserved this from
you; but, for the future, I will be different--I will be such as you
would have me. I will endeavour to be good and amiable."

"And then you will be so lovely, so beloved, and so happy!" said Eva,
"that it would be a real delight. But now you must come down into
Louise's and my room. There is something there for you; you must change
the air a little. Come, come!"

"Ah, how charming!" was Leonore's exclamation as she entered Eva's
chamber; and in fact nothing could be imagined more charming than that
little abode of peace, adorned as it now was by the coquetry of
affection. The most delicious odour of fruit and flowers filled the air,
and the sun threw his friendly beams on a table near the sofa, on which
a basket filled with beautiful fruit stood enticingly in the midst of
many pretty and tastefully arranged trifles.

"Here, dear Leonore," said Eva, "you will remain during this time. It
will do you good to leave your room a little. And look, they have all
left you an offering! This gothic church of bronze is from Jacobi. It is
a lamp! do you see? Light comes through the church window;--how
beautiful! We will light it this evening. And this fruit here--do you
see the beautiful grapes? All these are a plot between Henrik and
Petrea. The copperplate engravings are from my father; Louise has worked
you the slippers; and the little lady, she----"

Leonore clasped her hands. "Is it possible," said she, "that you all
have thought so much about me! How good you are--ah, too good!"

"Nay, do not weep, sweet Leonore," said Eva; "you should not weep, you
should be joyful. But the best part of the entertainment remains yet
behind. Do you see this new novel of Miss Edgeworth's? Mamma has given
us this, for us to read together. I will read to you aloud till
midnight, if you will. A delicate little supper has been prepared for us
by Louise, and we shall sup up here. We'll have a banquet in our own
way. Take now one of those big grapes which grow two on one stem, and I
will take the other. The king's health! Oh, glorious!"

Whilst the two sisters are banqueting at their own innocent feast, we
will see how it goes on in the great company at


AXELHOLM.

Things are not carried on in so enviably easy and unconstrained a manner
at every ball as at that of the citizens in the good little city of
* * * ping, where one saw the baker's wife and the confectioner's wife
waltzing together, but altogether in a wrong fashion, to which the rest
only said, "It does not signify, if they only go on!" Oh, no! such
simplicity as that is very rarely met with, and least of all among those
of whom we write.

At Axelholm, as at other great balls, the rocky shores of
conventionality made it impossible to move without a thousand
ceremonies, proprieties, dubiosities, formalities, and all the rest,
which, taken together, make up a vast sum of difficulties. The great
ball at Axelholm was not without pretension, and on that account not
without its stiff difficulties. Among these may be reckoned that several
of the young gentlemen considered themselves too old, or too----to dance
at all, and that, in consequence, many of the dance-loving ladies could
not dance at all either, because, on account of the threatening
eye-glasses of the gentlemen, they had not courage to dance with one
another. Nevertheless the scene looked like one of pure delight. The
great saloon so splendidly lighted, and a vast assembly collected there!

It is now the moment just before the dancing begins; the gentlemen stand
in a great group in the middle of the room, spreading themselves out in
direct or wavy lines towards the circle of ladies. These sit, like
flowers in the garden beds, on the benches round the room, mostly in
bashful stillness; whilst a few, in the consciousness of zephyr-like
lightness, float about the room like butterflies. All look happy; all
talk one with another, with all that animation, that reciprocal
good-will, which the sight of so much beauty, united to the
consciousness that they themselves are wearing their best looks, as well
as the expectation of pleasure, infuses.

Now the music begins to sound; now young hearts beat with more or less
disquiet; now go the engaged ones, amid the jostlings of the servants,
who are perpetually soliciting the young ladies to partake of the now
disdained tea. There one saw several young girls numerously surrounded,
who were studying the promised dances which were inscribed on the ivory
of their fans, declining fervent solicitations for the third, fourth,
fifth--nay, even up to the twelfth dance; but, fascinatingly-gracious,
promising themselves for the thirteenth, which perhaps may never be
danced; whilst others in their neighbourhood sit quiet and undisturbed,
waiting for the first invitation, in order thereto to say a willing and
thankful yes. Among the many-surrounded and the much-solicited, we may
see Sara and even Louise. With these emulated the three Misses
Aftonstjerna--Isabella, Stella, and Aurora--who stood constantly round
the chair of the Countess Solenstråle, which was placed before the great
mirror at the far end of the saloon. Among those who sat expectantly, in
the most beautiful repose, we shall discover our Petrea, who
nevertheless, with her bandeau of pearls in her hair, and a certain
bloom of innocence and goodness in her youthful countenance, looked
uncommonly well. Her heart beat with an indescribable desire to be
engaged.

"Ah!" sighed she, as she saw two most elegant young men, the two
brothers B----, walking round the circle of ladies, with their
eye-glasses in their hands. "It's a hedge-hog, Una. The little gipsy-boy
found it this morning under a gorse-bush, among some leaves.
Hedgehogs go to sleep all the winter, rolled up like this in a ball;
and they store up a lot of food somewhere near in case they wake
up and get hungry during the winter; and when the spring comes they
wake quite up, and begin to move about.

That is why this one is really awake now, only he has rolled himself
up, and pretends to be asleep, because he's frightened."
"Oh, the funny little thing!" said Una, bending down to see if she could
catch a glimpse of the hedgehog's bright little eyes.

"What do you think I'm going to do with it?" asked Tom.

"Keep it?" suggested Una.

"No," said the boy, "I'm going to give it to you."
"Oh, Tom--what for?"

asked the little girl, trying to look very pleased and grateful,
but wondering whatever she was to do with such a prickly present.

"What for? Why, for you to have as a pet," said Tom.

"You're not half such a silly girl as I thought you were; and, of course,
you can't help not being English," he added magnanimously. "And, you
know, I do think it is awfully dull for you, shut up in that big
garden, when we're not there to play with you: and now you'll have the
hedgehog to play with."
"So I shall," said Una. "What--what shall I do with it, Tom?"
"Why, feed it," said the boy, "and teach it to know you and to
come when you call. You'll have to name it, Una, and teach it tricks
and all sorts of things," and poor Tom gave one big sigh as he thought
how he would have liked to keep that hedgehog for himself instead of
giving it to Una.

Una was too polite, however, to say she did not want the little
animal.

She knew that it was very kind of Tom to have given it to her, though she
had no idea how much he wanted it himself; and she asked him to come
home with her that afternoon and make a house for it in the garden,
so that it should not run away and get lost in the woods.

After all, Tom's present turned out a great success. It was the
first time Una had ever had a pet in her life, and she became so
fond of the little creature that she would spend hours playing with
it in the garden, tickling its little head with the tip of her finger,
and feeding it with dandelion flowers, which it loved.

It was through the hedgehog that rather a queer thing happened one day
in the garden.

I think I told you that Una's father went away somewhere by train once a
week, and usually came back either the next day or two or three
days later, but I don't think I told you that sometimes he brought
back gentlemen to stay with him; and occasionally these gentlemen
stayed until Monsieur Gen went away again the next week, though
more frequently they remained only one night at the Grange and went
away again the next day.

Now and then, however, they stayed much longer than that--for weeks
together indeed; and Una noticed that the ones who stayed longest always
looked very pale and thin, and very, very sad, as if they had had
much trouble.

But she did not see very much of any of her father's visitors--only
coming across one or another of them sometimes on the stairs or in
the garden; and the little Carews had never seen any of them, for
when they were playing there with Una the strange gentlemen did not
come into the garden.

"It gives me pleasure to dance with him," answered Sara, both with pride
and insolence, as she withdrew; and the mother, wounded and displeased,
returned to her seat.

The Countess Solenstråle lavished compliments on Elise on account of her
children. "They are positively the ornament of the room," said
she;--"_charmant!_ and your son a most prepossessing young man--so
handsome and _comme il faut_! A charming ball!"

Isabella Aftonstjerna threw beaming glances on the handsome Henrik.

"What madness this dancing is!" said Mr. Munter, as with a strong
expression of weariness and melancholy he seated himself beside Evelina.
"_Nay_, look how they hop about and exert themselves, as if without this
they could not get thin enough; then, good heavens! how difficult it
seems, and how ugly it is! As if this could give them any pleasure! For
some of them it seems as if it were day-labour, and as if it were a
frenzy to others; and for a third, a kind of affectation; nay, I must go
my ways, for I shall become mad or splenetic if I look any longer on
this super-extra folly!"

"If Eva Frank were dancing too, you would not think it so," said
Evelina, with a well-bred smile.

"Eva!" repeated he, whilst a light seemed to diffuse itself over his
countenance, and his eyes suddenly beamed with pleasure--"Eva! no! I
believe so too. To see her dance is to see living harmony. Ah! it
enlivens my mind if I only see her figure, her gait, her slightest
movement; and then to know that all this harmony, all this beauty, is
not mere paint--not mere outside; but that it is the true expression of
the soul! I find myself actually better when I am near her; and I have
often a real desire to thank her for the sentiments which she instils
into me. In fact, she is my benefactress; and I can assure you that it
reconciles me to mankind and to myself, that I can feel thus to a
fellow-creature. I cannot describe how agreeable it is, because commonly
there is so much to vex oneself about in this so-called masterpiece of
the Creator!"

"But, best friend," said Evelina, "why are you so vexed? Most people
have still----"

"Ah, don't go and make yourself an _ange de clémence_ for mankind," said
he, "in order to exalt secretly yourself over me, otherwise I shall be
vexed with you; and you belong to the class that I can best endure. Why
do I vex myself? What a stupid question! Why are people stupid and
wearisome, and yet make themselves important with their stupidity? And
wherefore am I myself such a melancholy personage, worse than anybody
else, and should have withal such a pair of quick eyes, as if only on
purpose to see the infirmities and perversions of the world? There may,
however, in my case be sufficient reason for all this. When one has had
the fancy to come into the world against all order and Christian usage;
has seen neither father nor mother beside one's cradle; heard nothing,
seen nothing, learned nothing, which is in the least either beautiful or
instructive--one has not entered upon life very merrily. And then, after
all, to be called Munter![11] Good heavens! Munter! Had I been called
Blannius, or Skarnius, or Brummerius, or Grubblerius, or Rhabarberius,
there might have been some sense in the joke; but Munter! I ask you now,
is it not enough to make a man splenetic and melancholy all the days of
his life? And then, to have been born into the world with a continual
cold, and since then never to have been able to look up to heaven
without sneezing--do you find that merry or edifying. Well, and then!
after I had worked my way successfully through the schools, the dust of
books, and the hall of anatomy, and had come to hate them all
thoroughly, and to love that which was beautiful in nature and in art,
am I to thank my stars that I must win my daily bread by studying and
caring for all that is miserable and revolting in the world, and hourly
to go about among jaundice, and colic, and disease of the lungs? On this
account I never can be anything but a melancholy creature! Yes, indeed,
if there were not the lilies on the earth, the stars in heaven, and
beyond all these some one Being who must be glorious--and were there not
among mankind the human-rose Eva--the beautiful, fascinating Eva,
then----"

He paused; a tear stood in his eye; but the expression of his
countenance soon was changed when he perceived no less than five young
girls--they danced now the "free choice"--and among them the three
enchanting Miss Aftonstjernas, who, all locked together, came dancing
towards him with a roguish expression. He cast towards them the very
grimmest of his glances, rose up suddenly, and hastened away.

Sara danced the second waltz with Schwartz, yet wilder than the first.
Elise turned her eyes away from her with inward displeasure; but
Petrea's heart beat with secret desire for a dance as wild, and she
followed their whirlings with sparkling eyes.

"Oh," thought she, "if one could only fly through life in a joyful whirl
like that!"

It was the sixth dance, and Petrea was sitting yet. She felt her nose
red and swollen. "See now!" thought she, "farewell to all hopes of
dancing! It must be that I am ugly, and nobody will look at me!" At the
same moment she was aware of the eye of her mother fixed upon her with a
certain expression of discomfort, and that glance was to her like a stab
at the heart; but the next moment her heart raised itself in opposition
to that depressing feeling which seemed about to overcome her. "It is
unpleasant," thought she, "but it cannot be altered, and it is no fault
of mine! And as nobody will give me any pleasure, I will even find some
for myself."

Scarcely had Petrea made this determination, than she felt herself quite
cheered; a spring of independence and freedom bubbled up within her; she
felt as if she were able even to take down the chandelier from the
ceiling, and all the more so when she saw so many life-enjoying people
skipping around her.

At this moment an old gentleman rose up from a bench opposite Petrea,
with a tea-cup in his hand. In a mania of officiousness she rushed
forward in order to assist him in setting it aside. He drew himself
back, and held the cup firmly, whilst Petrea, with the most firm and
unwearying "Permit me, sir," seemed determined to take it. The strife
about the cup continued amid the unending bows of the gentleman, and the
equally unending curtseys of Petrea, until a passing waltzing couple
gave a jostle, without the least ceremony whatever to the
compliment-makers, which occasioned a shake of the tea-cup, and revealed
to Petrea the last thing in the world which she had imagined, that the
cup was not empty! Shocked and embarrassed, she let go her hold, and
allowed the old gentleman, with what remained of his cup of tea, to go
and find out for himself a securer place. Petrea seated herself, she
hardly knew how, on a bench near an elderly lady, who looked at her very
good-naturedly, and who helped very kindly to wipe off the ablution of
tea which she had received. Petrea felt herself quite confidential with
this excellent person, and inquired from her what was her opinion of
Swedenborg, beginning also to give her own thoughts on spectral visions,
ghosts, etc. The lady looked at her, as if she thought she might be a
little deranged, and then hastened to change her place.

A stout military gentleman sat himself down ponderously, with a deep
sigh, on the seat which the old lady had left, as if he were saying to
himself, "Ah, thank God! here I can sit in peace!" But, no! he had not
sate there three minutes and a half when he found himself called upon by
Petrea to avow his political faith, and invited by her to unite in the
wish of speedy war with Russia. Lieutenant-Colonel Uh----turned rather a
deaf ear to the battery by which his neighbour assailed him, but for all
that he probably felt it not the less heavy, because after several
little sham coughs he rose up, and left our Petrea alone with her
warlike thoughts.

She also rose, from the necessity she felt of looking elsewhere for more
sympathy and interest.

"In heaven's name, dear Petrea, keep your seat!" whispered Louise, who
encountered her on her search for adventures.

Petrea now cast her eyes on a young girl who seemed to have had no
better dancing fortune than herself, but who seemed to bear it much
worse, appeared weary of sitting, and could hardly refrain from tears.
Petrea, in whose disposition it lay to impart to others whatever she
herself possessed--sometimes overlooking the trifling fact that what she
possessed was very little desired by others--and feeling herself now in
possession of a considerable degree of prowess, wished to impart some of
the same to her companion in misfortune, and seated herself by her for
that purpose.

"I know not a soul here, and I find it so horribly wearisome," was the
unasked outpouring of soul which greeted Petrea, and which went directly
to her sympathising heart.

Petrea named every person she knew in the company to the young
unfortunate, and then, in order to escape from the weight of the
present, began to unfold great plans and undertakings for the future.
She endeavoured to induce her new acquaintance to give her her _parole
d'honneur_ that she would sometime conduct a social theatre with her,
which would assist greatly to make social life more interesting; and
further than that, that they should establish together a society of
Sisters of Charity in Sweden, and make a pilgrimage to Jerusalem;
furthermore, that they would write novels together; and that on the
following day, or more properly in the night, they would rise at
half-past two o'clock, and climb to the top of a high mountain in order
to see the sun rise; and finally, after all these, and sundry other
propositions, Petrea suggested to her new acquaintance a thee-and-thou
friendship between them! But, ah! neither Petrea's great prowess, nor
her great plans; neither the social theatre, nor the pilgrimage to
Jerusalem, least of all the thee-and-thou friendship, availed anything
towards enlivening the churlish young girl. Petrea saw plainly that an
invitation to dance would avail more than all her propositions, so,
sighing deeply because she was not a man to offer so great a pleasure,
she rose up, and left the object of her vain endeavours.

She looked round for a new subject, and her eye fell on the Countess
Solenstråle. Petrea was dazzled, and became possessed of the frenzied
desire to become acquainted with her, to be noticed by her; in short, in
some kind of way to approach the sun of the ball, fancying thereby that
a little glory would be reflected upon herself. But how was she to
manage it? If the Countess would but let fall her handkerchief, or her
fan, she might dart forward and pick it up, and then deliver it to her
with a compliment in verse. Petrea, hereupon, began to improvise to
herself; there was something, of course, about the sun in it.
Undoubtedly this would delight the Countess, and give occasion to more
acquaintance, and perhaps--but, ah! she dropped neither handkerchief nor
fan, and no opportunity seemed likely to occur in which she could make
use of her poem with effect. In the mean time she felt drawn as by a
secret influence (like the planet to the sun) ever nearer and nearer to
the queen of the saloon. The Aftonstjernas were now standing, beaming
around her, bending their white and pearl-ornamented necks to listen to
her jesting observations, and between whiles replying with smiles to the
politeness and solicitations of elegant gentlemen. It looked magnificent
and beautiful, and Petrea sighed from the ardent longing to ascend to
the _haute volée_.

At this moment Jacobi, quite warm, came hastening towards her to engage
her for the following quadrille.

Petrea joyfully thanked him; but suddenly reddening to the resemblance
of a peony with her mania of participation, she added, "Might I accept
your invitation for another person? Do me the great pleasure to ask that
young girl that sits there in the window at our left."

"But why?" asked Jacobi; "why will not you?"

"I earnestly beseech you to do it!" said Petrea. "It would give me
greater pleasure to see her dancing than if I danced myself."

Jacobi made some friendly objections, but did in the end as she
requested.

It was a great pleasure to Petrea to perceive the influence of this
engagement on her young friend. But Fate and the Candidate seemed
determined to make Petrea dance this quadrille; and a young officer
presented himself before her in splendid uniform, with dark eyes, dark
hair, large dark moustache, martial size, and very martial mien. Petrea
had no occasion, and no disposition either, to return anything but a
"yes" to this son of Mars. In fact, she never expected to receive a more
honourable invitation; and a few minutes later she found herself
standing close beside the chair of the Countess Solenstråle, dancing in
the same quadrille with the Aftonstjernas, and _vis-à-vis_ with the
Candidate. Petrea felt herself highly exalted, and would have been
perfectly prosperous had it not been for her restless demon, which
incessantly spurred her with the desire of coming in closer contact with
the beautiful, magnificent lady to whom she stood so near. To tread upon
her foot or her dress, might, it is true, have furnished an easy
occasion for many fine and reverential excuses; but, at the same time,
this would be neither polite nor agreeable. To fall in some kind of way
before her feet, and then, when graciously raised by the Countess, to
thank her in a verse, in which the _sun_ played a conspicuous part,
would have been incontestibly better; but now--Petrea must dance on!

Was it that our Petrea really was so addled (if people will graciously
allow us such an expression) that she had no right power over her limbs,
or did it happen from want of ballast, in consequence of the slender
dinner she had eaten, or was it the result of her usual distraction--we
know not; but this much is certain, that she in _chassée_-ing on the
right hand, on which she had to pass her _vis-à-vis_, made an error, and
came directly up to him. He withdrew to the other side, but Petrea was
already there: and as the Candidate again withdrew to the right, there
was she again; and amid all this _chassée_-ing her feet got so entangled
with his, that as he made a despairing attempt to pass her, it so
happened that both fell down in the middle of the quadrille!

When Petrea, with tears in her eyes, again stood upright, she saw before
her the eye-glass gentlemen, the two brothers B., who were nearly dying
with laughter. A hasty glance convinced Petrea that her mother saw
nothing of it; and a second glance, that she had _now_ attracted the
attention of the Countess Solenstråle, who was smiling behind her fan.
The first observation consoled her for the last; and she fervently
assured Jacobi, who was heartily distressed on her account, that she had
not hurt herself; that it signified nothing; that it was her fault,
etc., etc.; cast a tranquil glance on the yet laughing gentlemen, and
_chasséed_ boldly back again. But what, however, made the deepest
impression on Petrea, was the conduct of her partner, and his suddenly
altered behaviour. He brought the continued and unbecoming merriment of
the brothers B. to an end by one determined glance; and he who hitherto
had been parsimonious of words, and who had only answered all her
attempts at being entertaining by a yes or a no, now became quite
conversable, polite, and agreeable, and endeavoured in every possible
way to divert her attention from the unpleasant accident which had just
occurred, engaging her moreover for the _anglaise_ after supper.

Petrea understood his kindness; tears came into her eyes, and her heart
beat for joy at the thought of hastening to her mother after the
quadrille, and saying, "Mamma, I am engaged for the _anglaise_ after
supper."

But no thought, no feeling, could remain in tranquillity with the poor
little "Chaos;" so many others came rushing in, that the first were
quite effaced. Her first impression of the kindness of Lieutenant Y.
was, "how good he is!" the second was, "perhaps he may endure me!" And
hereupon a flood of imagined courtesy and courtship poured in, which
almost turned her head. But she would not marry, heaven forbid! yet
still it would be a divine thing to have a lover, and to be oneself "an
object" of passion, like Sara and Louise. Perhaps the young Lieutenant
Y. might be related to the Countess Solenstråle, and, oh heavens! how
well it would sound when it was said, "A nephew of the Countess
Solenstråle is a passionate admirer of Petrea Frank!" What a coming
forth that would be! A less thing than that might make one dizzy. Petrea
was highly excited by these imaginings, and was suddenly changed by them
into an actual coquette, who set herself at work by all possible means
to enslave "her object;" in which a little, and for the moment very
white, hand (for even hands have their moments), figuring about the
head, played a conspicuous part. Petrea's amazing animation and
talkativeness directed the eye-glass of her mother--for her mother was
somewhat short-sighted--often in this direction, and called forth
glances besides from Louise, which positively would have operated with a
very subduing effect, had not Petrea been too much excited to remark
them. The observations and smiles of her neighbours Petrea mistook for
tokens of applause; but she deceived herself, for they only amused
themselves with the little coquetting, but not very dangerous lady.
Lieutenant Y., nevertheless, seemed to find pleasure in her liveliness,
for when the quadrille was ended, he continued a dispute which had
commenced during it, and for this purpose conducted her into one of the
little side rooms, which strengthened her in the idea of having made a
conquest. Isabella Aftonstjerna was singing there a little French song,
the refrain of which was--

    Hommage à la plus belle,
    Honneur au plus vaillant!

The world was all brightness to Petrea: the song carried her back to the
beautiful days of knighthood: Lieutenant Y. appeared to her as the ideal
of knightly honour, and the glass opposite showed her own face and nose
in such an advantageous light, that she, meeting herself there all
beaming with joy, fancied herself almost handsome. A beautiful rose-tree
was blossoming in the window, and Petrea, breaking off a flower,
presented it to the Lieutenant, with the words--

    Honneur au plus vaillant.

Petrea thought that this was remarkably striking and apropos, and
secretly expected that her knight would lay the myrtle-spray with which
he was playing at her feet, adding very appropriately--

    Hommage à la plus belle.

"Most humble thanks!" said Lieutenant Y., taking the rose with
misfortune-promising indifference. But Fate delivered Petrea from the
unpleasantness of waiting in vain for a politeness she desired, for
suddenly there arose a disturbance in the ball-room, and voices were
heard which said, "She is fainting! Gracious heaven! Sara!"

Myrtle-spray, knight, conquest, all vanished now from Petrea's mind, and
with a cry of horror she rushed from Lieutenant Y. into the ball-room at
the very moment when Sara was carried out fainting. The violent dancing
had produced dizziness; but taken into a cool room, and sprinkled with
eau de Cologne and water, she soon recovered, and complained only of
horrible headache. This was a common ailment of Sara's, but was quickly
removed when a certain remedy was at hand.

"My drops!" prayed Sara, in a faint voice.

"Where? where?" asked Petrea, with a feeling as if she would run to
China.

"In the little box in our chamber," said Sara.

Quick as thought sped the kind Petrea across the court to the east wing.
She sought through the chamber where their things were, but the box was
not to be found. It must have been left in the carriage. But where was
the carriage? It was locked up in the coach-house. And where was the key
of the coach-house?

Great was Petrea's fatigue before she obtained this; before she reached
the coach-house; and then before, with a lantern in her hand, she had
found the missing box. Great also, on the other hand, was her joy, as
breathless, but triumphant, she hastened up to Sara with the little
bottle of medicine in her hand, and for reward she received the not less
agreeable commission of dropping out sixty drops for Sara. Scarcely,
however, was the medicine swallowed, when Sara exclaimed with violence:

"You have killed me, Petrea! You have given me poison! It is
unquestionably Louise's elixir!"

It was so! The wrong bottle had been brought, and great was the
perplexity.

"You do everything so left-handedly, Petrea!" exclaimed Sara, in
ill-humour; "you are like the ass in the fable, that would break the
head of his friend in driving away a fly!"

These were hard words for poor Petrea, who was just about to run off
again in order to redeem her error. This, added to other agitation of
mind, brought tears to her eyes, and blood to her head. Her nose began
violently to bleed. Louise, excited against Sara by her severity to
Petrea, and some little also by her calling her elixir poison, threw
upon her a look of great displeasure, and devoted herself to the weeping
and bleeding Petrea.

Whether it was the spirit of anger that dispersed Sara's headache, or
actually Louise's elixir (Louise was firmly persuaded that it was the
latter), we know not; but certain it was that Sara very soon recovered
and returned to the company, without saying one consoling word to
Petrea.

Petrea was in no condition to appear at the supper-table, and Louise
kindly remained with her. Aunt Evelina, Laura, Karin, and even the lady
of the War-Councillor herself, brought them delicacies. Amid so much
kindness, Petrea could not do otherwise than become again tranquil and
lively. She should, she thought, after all, dance the _anglaise_ after
supper with "le plus vaillant," as she called the Lieutenant, who had
truly captivated her evidently not steeled heart.

The _anglaise_ had already begun as the sisters entered the ball-room.
The Candidate hastened to meet them quite in an uneasy state of mind; he
had engaged Louise for this dance, and they now stood up together in the
crowd of dancers. Petrea expected, likewise, that "le plus vaillant"
would rush up to her and seize her hand; but as she cast a hasty glance
around, she perceived him, not rushing towards her, but dancing with
Sara, who was looking more beautiful and brilliant than ever. The rose
which Petrea had given him--faithless knight!--together with the
myrtle-sprig on which she had speculated, were both of them placed in
Sara's bosom. The eyes of "le plus vaillaut" were incessantly riveted
upon "la plus belle," as Sara was then unanimously declared to be. The
glory of the Aftonstjernas paled in the night, as they were too much
heated by dancing, but Sara's star burned brighter and brighter. She was
introduced to the Countess Solenstråle, who paid her charming
compliments, and called her "la reine du bal," at which the
Aftonstjernas looked displeased.

"Thousand devils, how handsome she is!" exclaimed the old gentleman who
had striven with Petrea about the tea-cup, and who now, without being
aware of it, trod upon her foot as he thrust himself before her to get a
better view of "la reine du bal."

Overlooked, humiliated, silent, and dejected, Petrea withdrew into
another room. The scenes of the evening passed in review before her
soul, and appeared now quite in an altered light. The mirror which a few
hours before had flattered her with the notion that she might be called
_la plus belle_, now showed her her face red and unsightly; she thought
herself the most ridiculous and unfortunate of human beings. She felt at
this moment a kind of hostility against herself. She thought on
something which she was preparing for Sara, and which was to be an
agreeable surprise to her, and which was to be made known to her in a
few days--she thought of this, and in that moment of trouble the thought
of it, like a sunbeam on dark clouds, brightened the night in her soul.
The thought of gratifying one, who on this evening had so deeply
wounded her, gave a mild and beneficial turn to her mind.

After supper, a balcony in the saloon adjoining the ball-room was
opened, in order somewhat to cool the heated atmosphere of the room.

Two persons, a lady and gentleman, stepped into the balcony; a light
white shawl was thrown over the lady's shoulders; stars garlanded her
dark hair; stars flashed in her black eyes, which glanced fiercely
around into free space.

There lay over the landscape the deliciously mysterious half-darkness of
a May-night, a magical veil which half hides and half reveals its
beauty, and which calls forth mysterious forebodings. A mighty and
entrancing revelation of the gloriousness of life seemed to sing in the
wind, which passed tranquilly murmuring through space, shone in the
stars, and wandered high above earth.

"Ah, life! life!" exclaimed she, and stretched forth her arms towards
space, as if she would embrace it.

"Enchanting girl!" said he, while he seized her hand, "my life belongs
to you!"

"Conduct me forth into free, fresh life," said she, without withdrawing
her hand, and looking haughtily at him all the while, "and my hand
belongs to you! But remember you this, that I will be free--free as the
wind which now kisses your forehead, and lifts those topmost branches of
the tree! I love freedom, power, and honour! Conduct me to these, help
me to obtain these, and my gratitude will secure to you my love; will
fetter me to you with stronger bonds than those of ceremony and
prejudice, to which I only submit out of regard to those who otherwise
would weep over me, and whom I would not willingly distress more than
there is need for. It shall not bind us more than we ourselves wish.
Freedom shall be the knitting and the loosening of our bond!"

"Beautiful woman!" answered he, "raised above the hypocrisy of
weakness--above the darkness of prejudice--I admire you and obey you!
Only to such a woman can my will submit! My beautiful scholar is become
my teacher! Well, then, let the hand of the priest unite us; my hand
shall conduct you up to that brilliant throne which your beauty and your
talents deserve! I will only elevate you in order, as now, to fall
before your feet the most devoted of your servants!"

He dropped upon one knee before her; and she, bending herself towards
him, let her lips touch his forehead. He threw his arms round her, and
held her for one moment bent towards him. A supercilious, scornful
expression, unobserved by her, played upon his lips.

"Release me, Hermann! some one comes," said she; he did so, and as she
raised her proud neck against his will, a dark flash of indignation
burned in her eyes.

They withdrew, and another couple stepped out into the balcony.

He. Wait, let me wrap my cloak better round you; the wind is cool.

She. Ah, how beautiful to feel how it wraps us both! Do you see how we
are here standing between heaven and earth, separated from all the
world?

He. I do not see it--I see my lovely world in my arms! I have you,
Laura! Laura, tell me, are you happy?

She. Ah, no!

He. How?

She. Ah, I am not happy because I am too happy! I fancy I never can have
deserved this happiness. I cannot conceive how it came to my share. Ah,
Arvid! to live thus with you, with my mother, my sister, all that I most
love--and then to be yours ever, ever!

He. Say eternally, my Laura! Our union belongs as much to heaven as to
earth, here as there; to all eternity I am yours, and you are mine!

She. Hush, my Arvid! I hear my mother's voice--she calls me. Let us go
to her.

They returned into the room, and presently another couple stepped on the
balcony.

He. Cousin Louise, do you like evening air? Cousin Louise, I fancy, is
rather romantic. Cousin, do you like the stars? I am a great friend of
the stars too; I think on what the poet sings:

    ----silently as Egypt's priests
    They move.

Look, Cousin Louise, towards the corner, in the west there lies
Oestanvik. If it would give you any pleasure to make a little tour
there, I would beg that I might drive you there in my new landau. I
really think, Cousin Louise, that Oestanvik would please you: the
peaches and the vines are just now in full bloom; it is a beautiful
sight.

A deep sigh is heard.

She. Who sighs so?

A Voice. Somebody who is poor, and who now, for the first time, envies
the rich.

He. Oh rich! rich! God forbid! rich I am not exactly. One has one's
competency, thank God! One has wherewith to live. I can honestly
maintain myself and a family. I sow two hundred bushels of wheat; and
what do you think, Cousin Louise--but where is Cousin Louise?

A Voice. It seemed to her, no doubt, as if a cold wind came over here
from Oestanvik.

At the moment when the gentlemen returned to the room, a girl came into
the balcony. She was alone. The misfortunes of the evening depressed her
heart, and were felt to be so much more humiliating because they were of
such a mean kind. Some burning tears stole quickly and silently over her
cheeks. The evening wind kissed them gently away. She looked up to
heaven; never had it seemed to her so high and glorious. Her soul raised
itself, mounted even higher than her glance, up to the mighty friend of
human hearts; and He gave to hers a presentiment that a time would come,
when, in his love, she would be reconciled to and forget all adversities
of earth.

       *       *       *       *       *

The days at Axelholm wore on merrily amid ever-varying delights. Petrea
wrote long letters, in prose and in verse, to her sisters at home, and
imparted to them all that occurred here. Her own misfortunes, which she
even exaggerated, she described in such a comic manner that those very
things which were at first distressing to her, were made a spring of
hearty merriment both to herself and to her family.

She received one day a letter from her father, which contained the
following words:

           "My good Child,

      "Your letters, my dear child, give me and your sisters great
      pleasure; not merely on account of the lively things which they
      contain, but more especially on account of your way of bearing
      that which is anything but lively. Continue to do thus, my child,
      and you--my heart rejoices in the thought--will advance on the way
      to wisdom and happiness, and you will have joyfully to acknowledge
      the blessed truth which the history of great things, as well as of
      small, establishes, that there is nothing evil which may not be
      made conducive to good; and thus our own errors may be made steps
      on our way to improvement.

      "Greet your sisters cordially from their and your tenderly devoted

                              "Father."

Petrea kissed these lines with tears of grateful joy. She wore them for
several days near her heart; she preserved them through her whole life
as one of the endeared means by which she had gone happily through the
chromatic scale of existence.

Louise was joked much about Cousin Thure; Cousin Thure was joked much
about Louise; it pleased him very much to be joked about her, to be told
that Oestanvik wanted a mistress, that he himself wanted a pretty wife,
and that without doubt Louise Frank was one of the most sensible as well
as one of the prettiest girls in the country; and more than this, was
besides of such a respectable family! The Landed-proprietor received
already felicitations on his betrothal.

What the bride-elect, however, thought on the matter was more difficult
to fathom. She was certainly always polite to Cousin Thure; still this
politeness seemed expressive rather of indifference than friendship; and
she declined, with a decision amazing to many people, his pressing and
often repeated solicitations to make an excursion to Oestanvik in his
new landau, drawn by what he styled "his foxes--his four horses in one
rein." Many people asserted that the agreeable and cordial Jacobi was
much nearer to Louise's heart than the rich Landed-proprietor! but even
towards Jacobi her conduct was so equal, so tranquil, so unconstrained,
that nobody could exactly tell how it might be. Nobody knew so well as
we do, that Louise considered it consistent with the dignity of woman to
show only perfect indifference to the attentions or _doux-propos_ of
men, until they had been openly and fully declared. Louise despised
coquetry so far as to dread anything which bordered on the very limits
of it. Her young female friends joked with her upon her strict notions
on this head, and fancied that she would remain unmarried.

"That may be," said Louise, calmly.

They told her one day of a gentleman who said "I will not stand up
before any girl who is not some little of a coquette."

"Then he may remain sitting," answered Louise, with much dignity.

Louise's views of the dignity of woman, her grave and decided
principles, and her manner of expressing them, amused her young friends,
whilst at the same time they inspired for her a true esteem, and gave
occasion for many little contentions and discussions, in which Louise
intrepidly, though not without some little warmth, maintained the rights
of the cause. These contentions, however, which began in merriment, did
not always terminate so.

A young and rather coquettish lady was one day wounded by the severity
with which Louise spoke of the coquetry of her sex, and particularly of
married ladies, and in revenge she used an expression which excited
Louise's astonishment and anger. An explanation followed between the
two, the result of which was not only their perfect estrangement, but an
altered state of mind in Louise which she in vain endeavoured to
conceal.

During the first days of her stay at Axelholm she had been uncommonly
joyous and lively; now she was quiet, thoughtful, often absent, and
towards the Candidate, as it seemed, less friendly than formerly, whilst
she lent a more willing ear to the Landed-proprietor, although she still
resolutely withstood his proposal of a drive to Oestanvik.

On the evening of the day after this explanation, Elise was engaged in a
lively conversation with Jacobi on the balcony.

"And if," said he, "I endeavour to win her heart, would her
parents--would her mother see it without displeasure? Ah, speak candidly
with me; the well-being of my life depends upon it."

"You have my accordance, my good wishes, Jacobi," returned Elise. "I say
to you what I have already said to my husband, that I should willingly
call you son."

"Oh!" exclaimed Jacobi, deeply moved, and falling on one knee, whilst he
pressed her hand to his lips--"oh that my whole life might evidence to
you my gratitude and my love--!"

At this very moment, Louise, who had been seeking her mother, approached
the balcony; she saw Jacobi's action, and heard his words: she withdrew
quickly, as if she had been stung by a snake.

I took him at his word. We changed our quarters to his father's house,
a very neat little cottage, about a quarter of a mile from the town.
He afterwards rendered me many services in going to and fro from
Passy to Paris; and, as he promised, brought me my servant.

When the poor fellow arrived, his arm was in a sling. He had been wounded
by a musket shot, received in defence of the Princess. The history
of his disaster was this:

On the night of the riot, as he was going from the Pont Royal to
the apartment of Her Highness, he detected a group of villains under
her windows.

Six of them were attempting to enter by a ladder.

He fired, and two fell.

While he was reloading, the others shot at him.

Had he not, in the flurry of the moment, fired both his pistols at
the same time, he thinks he should not have been wounded, but might
have punished the assailant. One of the men, he said, could have been
easily taken by the national guard, who so glaringly encouraged the
escape that he could almost swear the guard was a party concerned.

The loss of blood had so exhausted him that he could not pursue the
offender himself, whom otherwise he could have taken without any
difficulty.

As the employing of my servant had only been proposed, and the sudden
interruption of my conversation with Her Highness by the riot had prevented
my ever communicating the project to him, I wondered how he got into
the business, or ascertained so soon that the apartment of the
Princess was in danger.

He explained that he never had heard of its being so; but my own coachman
having left me at the palace that day, and not hearing of me for some
time, had driven home, and, fearing that my not returning arose
from something which had happened, advised him to go to the Pont
Royal and hear what he could learn, as there was a report of many
persons having been murdered and thrown over the bridge.

My man took the advice, and armed himself to be ready in case of
attack.
It was between one and two o'clock after midnight when he went. The
first objects he perceived were these miscreants attempting to scale the
palace.

He told me that the Queen had been most grossly insulted; that the
gates of the Tuileries had been shut in consequence; that a small
part alone remained open to the public, who were kept at their
distance by a national ribbon, which none could pass without being
instantly arrested.

This had prevented his apprising the Princess of the attempt which
he had accidentally defeated, and which he wished me to communicate to
her immediately. I did so by letter, which my good driver carried
to Paris, and delivered safe into the hands of our benefactress.

The surprise of the Princess on hearing from me, and her pleasure at
my good fortune in finding by accident such means, baffles all
description.
Though she was at the time overwhelmed with the imminent dangers which
threatened her, yet she still found leisure to show her kindness to those
who were doing their best, though in vain, to serve her. The following
letter, which she sent me in reply, written amidst all the uneasiness
it describes, will speak for her more eloquently than my praises:

"I can understand your anxiety. It was well for you that you were
unconscious of the dreadful scenes which were passing around you on that
horrid day. The Princesse de Tarente, Madame de Tourzel, Madame de
Mockau, and all the other ladies of the household owed the safety
of their lives to one of the national guards having given his national
cockade to the Queen. Her Majesty placed it on her head, unperceived
by the mob.

One of the gentlemen of the King's wardrobe provided the King and
the Princesse Elizabeth with the same impenetrable shield. Though
the cannibals came for murder, I could not but admire the enthusiastic
deference that was shown to this symbol of authority, which instantly
paralyzed, the daggers uplifted for our extermination.

"Merlin de Thionville was the stoic head of this party. The Princesse
Elizabeth having pointed him out to me, I ventured to address him
respecting the dangerous situation to which the Royal Family
were daily exposed. I flattered him upon his influence over the majority
of the faubourgs, to which only we could look for the extinction of these
disorders. He replied that the despotism of the Court had set a bad
example to the people; that he felt for the situation of the royal
party as individuals, but he felt much more for the safety of the
French nation, who were in still greater danger than Their Majesties
had to dread, from the Austrian faction, by which a foreign army
had been encouraged to invade the territory of France, where they
were now waiting the opportunity of annihilating French liberty forever!

"To this Her Majesty replied, 'When the deputies of the Assembly
have permitted, nay, I may say, encouraged this open violation of the
King's asylum, and, by their indifference to the safety of all those
who surround us, have sanctioned the daily insults to which we
have been, and still are, exposed, it is not to be wondered, at that
all Sovereigns should consider it their interest to make common
cause with us, to crush internal commotions, levelled, not only against
the throne, and the persons of the Sovereign and his family, but against
the very principle of monarchy itself.'
"Here the King, though much intimidated for the situation of the Queen
and his family, for whose heads the wretches were at that very moment
howling in their ears, took up the conversation.

"'These cruel facts,' said he, 'and the menacing situation you even now
witness, fully justify our not rejecting foreign aid, though God knows
how deeply I deplore the necessity of such a cruel resource! But,
when all internal measures of conciliation have been trodden
under foot, and the authorities, who ought to check it and protect us
from these cruel outrages, are only occupied in daily fomenting the
discord between us and our subjects; though a forlorn hope,
what other hope is there of safety?
I foresee the drift of all these commotions, and am resigned; but
what will become of this misguided nation, when the head of it shall
be destroyed?'
"Here the King, nearly choked by his feelings, was compelled to pause for
a moment, and he then proceeded.

"'I should not feel it any sacrifice to give up the guardianship of the
nation, could I, in so doing, insure its future tranquillity; but I
foresee that my blood, like that of one of my unhappy brother
Sovereigns,--[Charles the First, of England.]--will only open the
flood-gates of human misery, the torrent of which, swelled with
the best blood of France, will deluge this once peaceful realm.'
"This, as well as I can recollect, is the substance of what passed
at the castle on this momentous day.

Our situation was extremely doubtful, and the noise and horrid riots
were at times so boisterous, that frequently we could not, though so
near them, distinguish a word the King and Queen said; and yet, whenever
the leaders of these organized ruffians spoke or threatened, the most
respectful stillness instantly prevailed.

"I weep in silence for misfortunes, which I fear are inevitable! The
King, the Queen, the Princesse Elizabeth and myself, with many others
under this unhappy roof, have never ventured to undress or sleep in
bed, till last night. None of us any longer reside on the ground
floor.

"By the very manly exertions of some of the old officers incorporated
in the national army, the awful riot I have described was overpowered,
and the mob, with difficulty, dispersed. Among these, I should
particularize Generals de Vomenil, de Mandat, and de Roederer. Principally
by their means the interior of the Tuileries was at last cleared,
though partial mobs, such as you have often witnessed, still
subsist.

"I am thus particular in giving you a full account of this last revolutionary
commotion, that your prudence may still keep you at a distance from the
vortex. Continue where you are, and tell your man servant how much I
am obliged to him, and, at the same time, how much I am grieved at his
being wounded! I knew nothing of the affair but from your letter and
your faithful messenger. He is an old pensioner of mine, and a good
honest fellow. You may depend on him. Serve yourself, through
him, in communicating with me. Though he has had a limited education,
he is not wanting in intellect. Remember that honesty, in matters of such
vital import, is to be trusted before genius.

"My apartment appears like a barrack, like a bear garden, like anything
but what it was! Numbers of valuable things have been destroyed, numbers
carried off. Still, notwithstanding all the horrors of these last days,
it delights me to be able to tell you that no one in the service of
the Royal Family failed in duty at this dreadful crisis. I think we may
firmly rely on the inviolable attachment of all around us. No jealousy,
no considerations of etiquette, stood in the way of their exertions to
show themselves worthy of the situations they hold. The Queen showed the
greatest intrepidity during the whole of these trying scenes.

"At present, I can say no more. Petion, the Mayor of Paris, has just been
announced; and, I believe, he wishes for an audience of Her Majesty,
though he never made his appearance during the whole time of the
riots in the palace.

Adieu, mia cara Inglesina!"
The receipt of this letter, however it might have affected me to hear what
Her Highness suffered, in common with the rest of the unfortunate
royal inmates of the Tuileries, gave me extreme pleasure from the
assurance it contained of the firmness of those nearest to
the sufferers.
I was also sincerely gratified in reflecting on the probity and
disinterested fidelity of this worthy man, which contrasted him, so
strikingly and so advantageously to himself, with many persons of
birth and education, whose attachment could not stand the test of the
trying scenes of the Revolution, which made them abandon and betray,
where they had sworn an allegiance to which they were doubly bound by
gratitude.

My man servant was attended, and taken the greatest care of. The Princess
never missed a day in sending to inquire after his health; and,
on his recovery, the Queen herself not only graciously condescended
to see him, but, besides making him a valuable present, said many
flattering and obliging things of his bravery and disinterestedness.

I should scarcely have deemed these particulars honourable as they are
to the feelings of the illustrious personages from whom they
proceeded--worth mentioning in a work of this kind, did they not give
indications of character rarely to be met with (and, in their case, how
shamefully rewarded!), from having occurred at a crisis when their minds
were occupied in affairs of such deep importance, and amidst the
appalling dangers which hourly threatened their own existence.

Her Majesty's correspondence with foreign Courts had been so much
increased by these scenes of horror, especially her correspondence with
her relations in Italy, that, ere long, I was sent for back to
Paris.

SECTION XV.

Journal of the Princess resumed and concluded:

"The insurrection of the 20th of June, and the uncertain state of
the safety of the Royal Family, menaced as it was by almost daily
riots, induced a number of well-disposed persons to prevail on General
La Fayette to leave his army and come to Paris, and there personally
remonstrate against these outrages.

Had he been sincere he would have backed the measure by appearing
at the head of his army, then well-disposed, as Cromwell did when he
turned out the rogues who were seeking the Lord through the blood
of their King, and put the keys in his pocket. Violent disorders require
violent remedies. With an army and a few pieces of cannon at the door of
the Assembly, whose members were seeking the aid of the devil, for the
accomplishment of their horrors, he might, as was done when the same
scene occurred in England in 1668, by good management; have averted the
deluge of blood. But, by appearing before the Assembly isolated, without
'voila mon droit,' which the King of Prussia had had engraven on his
cannon, he lost the opinion of all parties.

[In this instance the general grossly committed himself, in the opinion
of every impartial observer of his conduct. He should never have shown
himself in the capital, but at the head of his army. France, circumstanced
as it was, torn by intestine commotion, was only to be intimidated by
the sight of a popular leader at the head of his forces.
Usurped authority can only be quashed by the force of legitimate authority.
La Fayette being the only individual in France that in reality possessed
such an authority, not having availed himself at a crisis like the one
in which he was called upon to act, rendered his conduct doubtful, and
all his intended operations suspicious to both parties, whether his
feelings were really inclined to prop up the fallen kingly authority,
or his newly-acquired republican principles prompted him to become the
head of the democratical party, for no one can see into the hearts of
men; his popularity from that moment ceased to exist.]
"La Fayette came to the palace frequently, but the King would never see
him. He was obliged to return, with the additional mortification
of having been deceived in his expected support from the national
guard of Paris, whose pay had been secretly trebled by the National
Assembly, in order to secure them to itself. His own safety, therefore,
required that he should join the troops under his command. He left many
persons in whom he thought he could confide; among whom were some
who came to me one day requesting I would present them to the Queen without
loss of time, as a man condemned to be shot had confessed to his
captain that there was a plot laid to murder Her Majesty that very
night.

"I hastened to the royal apartment, without mentioning the motive; but
some such catastrophe was no more than what we incessantly expected,
from the almost hourly changes of the national guard, for the real purpose
of giving easy access to all sorts of wretches to the very rooms of
the unfortunate Queen, in order to furnish opportunities for committing
the crime with impunity.

"After I had seen the Queen, the applicants were introduced, and, in
my presence, a paper was handed by them to Her Majesty. At the moment
she received it, I was obliged to leave her for the purpose of watching
an opportunity for their departure unobserved. These precautions
were necessary with regard to every person who came to us in the
palace, otherwise the jealousy of the Assembly and its emissaries and
the national guard of the interior might have been alarmed, and we
should have been placed under express and open surveillance. The
confusion created by the constant change of guard, however, stood us in
good stead in this emergency. Much passing and repassing took place
unheeded in the bustle.

"When the visitors had departed, and Her Majesty at one window of the
palace, and I at another, had seen them safe over the Pont Royal, I
returned to Her Majesty. She then graciously handed me the paper which
they had presented.

"It contained an earnest supplication, signed by many thousand good citizens,
that the King and Queen would sanction the plan of sending the Dauphin
to the army of La Fayette. They pledged themselves, with the assistance
of the royalists, to rescue the Royal Family. They, urged that if once
the King could be persuaded to show himself at the head of his army,
without taking any active part, but merely for his own safety and that
of his family, everything might be accomplished with the greatest
tranquillity.

"The Queen exclaimed, 'What! send my child! No! never while I breathe!

[Little did this unfortunate mother think that they, who thus pretended
to interest themselves for this beautiful, angelic Prince only a few
months before, would, when she was in her horrid prison after the
butchery of her husband, have required this only comfort to be
violently torn from her maternal arms!
Little, indeed, did she think, when her maternal devotedness thus
repelled the very thought of his being trusted to myriads of sworn
defenders, how soon he would be barbarously consigned by the infamous
Assembly as the foot-stool of the inhuman savage cobbler, Simon,
to be the night-boy of the excrements of the vilest of the works
of human nature!]
Yet were I an independent Queen, or the regent of a minority, I
feel that I should be inclined to accept the offer, to place myself
at the head of the army, as my immortal mother did, who, by that
step, transmitted the crown of our ancestors to its legitimate
descendants. It is the monarchy itself which now requires to be
asserted. Though D'ORLEANS is actively engaged in attempting the
dethronement of His Majesty, I do not think the nation will submit
to such a Prince, or to any other monarchical government, if the
present be decidedly destroyed.
"'All these plans, my dear Princess,' continued she, 'are mere
castles in the air. The mischief is too deeply rooted. As they have
already frantically declared for the King's abdication, any strong
measure now, incompetent as we are to assure its success, would at
once arm the advocates of republicanism to proclaim the King's
dethronement.
"'The cruel observations of Petion to His Majesty, on our ever
memorable return from Varennes, have made a deeper impression than
you are aware of. When the King observed to him, "What do the French
nation want?"--"A republic," replied he.There is no want of rays of light on earth; they penetrate its misty
atmosphere in manifold directions, although human perception is not as
much aware of them at one time as at another. The words of the Assessor
made at this moment an indescribable impression on Petrea. She wept from
the sweet emotion excited by the description of a condition which was so
perfect, and of endeavours which were so holy. It appeared to her as if
she knew her own vocation, her own path through life; one which would
release her soul from all trifles, all vanities, all disquiets, and
which would speed her on to light and peace. Whilst these thoughts, or
rather sentiments, swelled in her breast, she looked through her tears
on her companion, as he sate there with his expressive countenance and
his large beautiful eyes fixed on the scene before him, and she saw in
him, not Jeremias Munter, but a wise hermit, with a soul full of sublime
and holy knowledge. She longed to throw herself at his feet, and beseech
his blessing; to propose to him that he should remain in this solitude,
in this hut, with her; that he should teach her wisdom; and she would
wait upon him as a daughter, or as a servant, would rise with him and
pray at sunrise, and do in all things like the Essenes. Thus would they
die to the world, and live only for heaven.

Overpowered by her excited feelings, surrendered to the transports of
the moment, and nearly choked with tears, Petrea sank on the breast of
Jeremias, stammering forth her undefined wishes.

If a millstone had fallen round his neck, our good Assessor could not
have been more confounded than he was at that moment. Deeply sunk in his
own thoughts, he had quite forgotten that Petrea was there, till
reminded of her presence in this unexpected manner. But he was a man,
nevertheless, who could easily understand the excitement of mind in a
young girl, and with a pure fervour of eye, whilst a good-humoured
satire played about his mouth, he endeavoured to tranquillise her
over-wrought feelings. Beautiful, then, was the discourse he held with
her on all that which calms and sanctifies life; on all that on which
man may found his abode whether in the desert or in the human crowd. He
spoke words then which Petrea never forgot, and which often, in a future
day, broke the chaotic state of her soul like beams of pure light.

In the mean time the tempest had dispersed itself, and the Assessor
began to think of a return; for Petrea thought nothing about it, but
would willingly have seen herself compelled to pass the night in the
gloomy wood. But now the thought of relating her adventures at home
attracted her, and before she got out of the wood these adventures were
increased, since fate presented her with the good fortune of assisting,
with the help of her companion, an old woman, who had fallen with her
bundle of sticks, upon her legs again, and of carrying the said bundle
to her cottage, and of lighting her fire for her; with releasing two
sparrows which a boy had made captive; and, last of all, with releasing
the Assessor himself from a thorn-bush, which, as it appeared, would
have held him with such force as vexed even himself. Petrea's hands bled
in consequence of this operation, but that only made her the livelier.

When they came out of the wood, the rain had ceased altogether, the wind
had abated, and the setting sun illumined the heavens, and diffused over
the landscape a peculiar and beautiful radiance. The countenance of
Jeremias Munter was cheerful; he listened to the ascending song of the
lark, and said, "That is beautiful!" He looked upon the rain-drops which
hung on the young grass, and saw how heaven reflected itself in them,
and smiled, and said, "That is pure indeed!" Petrea gave to little
children that she met with all her savings from the feast at Axelholm,
and would willingly also have given them some of her clothes, had she
not had the fear of Louise and her mother before her eyes. She wished in
her bravery for more adventures, and more particularly for a longer way
than it at this time appeared to be; she thought she arrived at home too
soon; but the Assessor thought not, neither did the rest of the party,
who were beginning to be very uneasy on account of their long absence.
In the mean time Petrea and her companion had become very good friends
on the walk; Petrea was complimented for her courage, and Henrik
pathetically declaimed in her praise--

    Not every one such height as Xenophon can gain,
    As scholar and as hero, a laurel-wreath obtain;

and they laughed.

FOOTNOTES:

[12] half-dramatic poem, remarkable for its wit and humour, from the pen
of the Swedish poet Fahlcrantz.


CHAPTER X.

FIRESIDE SCENES.


"From home may be good, but at home is best!" said Elise from the bottom
of her heart, as she was once more in her own house, and beside her own
husband.

The young people said nothing in opposition to this sentiment as they
returned to their comfortable every-day life, which they now enlivened
with recollections and relations out of the lately-past time. They hoped
that Louise would become pleasant and contented with her calm activity
in the house and family as formerly, but it was not so; a gnawing pain
seemed to consume her; she became perceptibly thinner; her good humour
had vanished, and her eyes were often red with weeping. In vain her
parents and sisters endeavoured, with the tenderest anxiety, to fathom
the occasion of the change; she would confess it to no one. That the
root of her grief lay at her heart she would not deny, but she appeared
determined to conceal it from the eye of day. Jacobi also began to look
pale and thin, since he lamented deeply her state of feeling, and her
altered behaviour, especially towards himself, which led him to the
belief that he unconsciously had wounded her, or in some other way that
he was the cause of her displeasure; and never had he felt more than now
what a high value he set upon her, nor how much he loved her. This
tension of mind, and his anxiety to approach Louise, and bring back a
friendly understanding between them, occasioned various little scenes,
which we will here describe.


FIRST SCENE.

Louise sits by the window at her embroidery-frame: Jacobi seats himself
opposite to her.

Jacobi (sighing). Ah, Mamselle Louise!

Louise looks at her shepherdess, and works on in silence.

Jacobi. Everything in the world has appeared to me for some time
wearisome and oppressive.

Louise works on, and is silent.

Jacobi. And you could so easily make all so different. Ah, Louise! only
one kind word, one friendly glance!--Cannot you bestow one friendly
glance on him who would gladly give everything to see you happy?
[_Aside._ She blushes--she seems moved--she is going to speak! Ah, what
will she say to me!]

Louise. One, two, three, four, five, six, seven, eight, nine, ten
stitches to the nose--the pattern is here not very distinct.

Jacobi. You will not hear me, will not understand me; you play with my
distress! Ah, Louise!

Louise. I want some more wool;--I have left it in my room. [She goes.]


SECOND SCENE.

The family is assembled in the library; tea is just finished. Louise, at
Petrea's and Gabriele's urgent request, has laid out the cards on a
little table to tell them their fortunes. The Candidate seats himself
near them, and appears determined to amuse himself with them, and to be
lively; but "the object" assumes all the more her "cathedral air." The
Landed-proprietor steps in, bows, snorts, and kisses the hand of the
"gracious aunt."

Landed-proprietor. Very cold this evening; I fancy we shall have frost.

Elise. It is a gloomy spring. We have lately read a most affecting
account of the famine in the northern provinces. It is the misfortune of
these late springs.

Landed-proprietor. Oh, yes, the famine up there. No, we'll talk of
something else--that's too gloomy. I've had my peas covered with straw.
Cousin Louise, are you fond of playing Patience? I am very fond of it
too; it is so composing. At my seat at Oestanvik I have little, little
patience-cards. I fancy really that they would please my cousin.

The Landed-proprietor seats himself on the other side of Louise: the
Candidate gives some extraordinary shrugs.

Louise. This is not patience, but a little witchcraft, by which I read
Fate. Shall I prophesy to you, Cousin Thure?

Landed-proprietor. Oh, yes! prophesy something to me. Nothing
disagreeable! If I hear anything disagreeable in an evening, I always
have bad dreams at night. Prophesy me prettily--a little wife--a wife as
lovely and as amiable as Cousin Louise.

The Candidate (with a look as if he would send the Landed-proprietor
head-over-heels to Oestanvik). I don't know whether Mamselle Louise
likes flattery.

Landed-proprietor (who seems as if he neither heard nor saw his rival).
Cousin Louise, are you fond of blue?

Louise. Blue? That is truly a lovely colour; but yet I prefer green.

Landed-proprietor.. Nay, that is good! that is excellent! At Oestanvik
my dressing-room furniture is blue, beautiful light blue silk damask;
but in my sleeping-room I have green moreen. I fancy really, Cousin
Louise, that----

The Candidate coughs, and then rushes out of the room. Louise looks
after him, sighs, and then examines the cards, in which she finds so
many misfortunes for Cousin Thure that he is quite terrified: the peas
frosted, conflagration in the dressing-room, and last of all a
rejection! The Landed-proprietor declares, notwithstanding, that he
finds nothing of this unpleasant. The sisters smile, and make remarks.


THIRD SCENE.

The family assembled after supper:

The Assessor puts the question--What is the bitterest affliction?

Jacobi. Unreturned love.

Petrea. Not to know what one shall be.

Eva. To have offended some one that one loves beyond reconciliation.

The Mother. I am of Eva's opinion; I think nothing can be more painful.

Louise. Ah! there is yet something more painful than that--something
more bitter--and that is to lose one's faith in those whom one has
loved; to doubt--(Louise's lip trembles, she can say no more, becomes
pale, rises, and goes out quickly; a general sensation ensues).

The Father. What is amiss with Louise? Elise, we must know what it is!
She should, she must tell us! I cannot bear any longer to see her thus;
and I will go this moment and speak with her, if you will not rather do
it. But you must not be satisfied till you know her very inmost
feelings. The most horrible thing, I think, is mystery and vapours!

The Mother. I will go directly to her. I have now an idea what it is,
dearest Ernst; and if I am somewhat long with her, let the others go to
bed; I shall then find you alone. [She goes out.]


FOURTH SCENE.

_The Mother and Daughter._

The daughter on her knees, her face buried in her hands; the mother
goes softly up to her and throws her arms around her.

Mother. Louise, my good girl, what is amiss with you? I have never seen
you thus before. You must tell me what is at your heart--you must!

Louise. I cannot! I ought not!

Mother. You can! you ought! Will you make me, will you make all of us
wretched by going on in this way? Ah, Louise, do not let false shame, or
false tenderness mislead you. Tell me, do you break any oath, or violate
any sacred duty, by confessing what it is which depresses you?

Louise. No oath; no sacred duty--and yet----yet----

Mother. Then speak, in heaven's name, my child! Unquestionably some
unfounded suspicion is the cause of your present state. What do the
words mean with which you left us this evening? You weep! Louise, I
pray, I beseech of you, if you love me, conceal nothing from me! Who is
it that you love, yet can no more have faith in--no longer highly
esteem? Answer me--is it your mother?

Louise. My mother! my mother! Ah, while you look on me thus I feel a
pain, and yet a confidence! Ah, my God! all may be an error--a miserable
slander, and I----Well then, it shall out--that secret which has gnawed
my heart, and which I conceived it my duty to conceal! But forgive me,
my mother, if I grieve you; forgive me if my words disturb your peace;
forgive me, if in my weakness, if in my doubt I have done you injustice,
and remove the grief which has poisoned my life! Ah, do you see, mother,
it was mine, it was my sisters' happiness, to consider you so
spotless--so angelically pure! It was my pride that you were so, and
that you were my mother! And now----

Mother. And now, Louise?

Louise. And now it has been whispered to me----Oh, I cannot speak the
words!

Mother. Speak them--I demand it! I desire it from you! We both stand
before the Judgment-seat of God!

Louise. I have been led to believe that even my mother was not
blameless--that she----

Mother. Go on, Louise!

Louise. That she and Jacobi loved one another--that evil tongues had not
blamed them without cause, and that still--I despised these words, I
despised the person who spoke them! I endeavoured to chase these
thoughts as criminal from my soul. On this account it happened that I
went one day to find you--and I found Jacobi on his knee before you--I
heard him speaking of his love. Now you know all, my mother!

Mother. And what is your belief in all this?

Louise. Ah, I know not what I ought to believe! But since that moment
there has been no peace in my soul, and I have fancied that it never
would return--that I should never lose the doubt which I could make
known to no one.

Mother. Let peace return to your soul, my child! Good God! how
unfortunate I should be at this moment if my conscience were not pure!
But, thank heaven, my child, your mother has no such fault to reproach
herself with; and Jacobi deserves your utmost esteem, your utmost
regard. I will entirely and freely confess to you the entire truth of
that which has made you so uneasy. For one moment, when Jacobi first
came to us, a warmer sentiment towards me awoke in his young,
thoughtless heart, and in part it was returned by me. But you will not
condemn me on account of an involuntary feeling which your father looked
on with pardoning eyes. In a blessed hour we opened to each other our
hearts, and it was his love, his strength and gentleness, which gave me
power to overcome my weakness. Jacobi, at the same moment, woke to a
consciousness of his error, struggled against it, and overcame it. We
separated soon after, and it was our mutual wish not to meet again for
several years. In the mean time Henrik was committed to his care, and
Jacobi has been for him an exemplary friend and instructor. Three years
later, when I again met him, I extended my hand to him as a sister; and
he----yes, my dear girl! and I err greatly if he did not then begin in
his heart to love me as a mother. But that which then had its beginning,
has since then had its completion--it was in the character of a son that
you saw him kneel to me; thanking me that I would favour his love to my
daughter--to my Louise, who, therefore, has so unnecessarily conjured up
a spectre to terrify herself and us all.

In the latter part of this conversation the mother spoke in a quiet
jesting tone, which, perhaps, did more even than her simple explanation
to reassure the heart of her daughter. She pressed her hands on her
heart, and looked thankfully up to heaven.

"And if," continued her mother, "you yet entertain any doubt, talk with
your father, talk with Jacobi, and their words will strengthen mine. But
I see you need it not--your heart, my child, is again at peace!"

"Ah, thank God! thank God!" exclaimed Louise, sinking on her knees
before her mother, and covering her hands and even her dress with
kisses. "Oh, that I dared look up again to you, my mother! Oh, can you
forgive my being so weak: my being so easy of belief? Never, never shall
I forgive myself!"

Louise was out of herself, her whole frame trembled violently; she had
never before been in a state of such agitation. Her mother was obliged
to apply remedies both for mind and body, tender words and soothing
drops--to tranquillise her excited state. She besought her therefore to
go to rest, seated herself beside her bed, took her hands in hers, and
then attempted to divert her mind from the past scene, endeavouring with
the utmost delicacy to turn her mind on the Candidate and on the
Landed-proprietor as lovers. But Louise had only one thought, one
sentiment--the happy release from her doubt, and thankfulness for it.
When her mother saw that she was calmer, she embraced her, "And now go
to sleep, my dear girl," said she; "I must now leave you, in order to
hasten to one who waits impatiently for me, and that is your father. He
has been extremely uneasy on your account, and I can now make him easy
by candidly communicating all that has passed between us. For the rest I
can assure you that you have said nothing that can make us uneasy. That
I was calumniated by one person, and am so still, he knows as well as I
do. He has assisted me to bear it calmly, he is truly so superior, so
excellent! Ah, Louise, it is a great blessing when husband and wife,
parents and children, cherish an entire confidence in each other! It is
so beautiful, so glorious, to be able to say everything to each other in
love!"


FIFTH SCENE.

The garden. It is morning! the larks sing, the jonquils fill the air
with odour; the bird's cherry-tree waves in the morning breeze; the
cherry blossoms open themselves to the bees which hum about in their
bosom. The sun shines on all its children.

Louise is walking in the middle alley, Father Noah's sermon in her hand,
but with her eyes fixed on the little poem appended to it, which by no
means had anything to do with Father Noah. The Candidate comes towards
her from a cross walk, with a gloomy air, and with a black pansy in his
hand.

The two meet, and salute each other silently.

Jacobi. Might I speak one moment with you? I will not detain you long.

Louise bows her head, is silent, and blushes.

Jacobi. In an hour's time I shall take my departure, but I must beseech
of you to answer me one question before I say farewell to you!

Louise. You going! Where? Why?

Jacobi. Where, is indifferent to me, so that I leave this place; why,
because I cannot bear the unkindness of one person who is dear to me,
and who, I once thought, cherished a friendship for me! For fourteen
days you have behaved in such a way to me as has embittered my life; and
why? Have I been so unfortunate as to offend you, or to excite your
displeasure? Why then delay explaining the cause to me? Is it right to
sentence any one unheard, and that one a friend--a friend from
childhood? Is it right--pardon me, Louise--is it Christian, to be so
severe, so immovable? In the sermons which you are so fond of rending,
do you find nothing said of kindness and reconciliation!

Jacobi spoke with a fervour, and with such an almost severe seriousness,
as was quite foreign to his gentle and cheerful spirit.

"I have done wrong," replied Louise, with a deep emotion, "very wrong,
but I have been misled; at some future time, perhaps, I may tell you
how. Since last evening, I know how deceived I have been, how I have
deceived myself; and now God be thanked and praised, I know that nobody
is to blame in this affair but myself. I have much, very much, to
reproach myself with, on account of my reserve towards my own family,
and towards you also. Forgive me, best Jacobi," continued she, offering
her hand with almost humility; "forgive me, I have been very unkind to
you; but believe me," added she, "neither have I been happy either!"

"Thanks! thanks, Louise!" exclaimed Jacobi, grasping her hand, and
pressing it to his breast and to his lips; "oh, how happy this kindness
makes me! Now I can breathe again! Now I can leave you with a cheerful
heart!"

"But why will you leave us?" asked she, in a half-discontented tone.

"Because," answered Jacobi, "it would not give me pleasure to witness a
betrothal which will soon be celebrated; because, from your late
behaviour, I must be convinced you cannot entertain any warmer
sentiments towards me."

"If that were the case," replied she, in the same tone as before, "I
should not have been depressed so long."

"How!" exclaimed Jacobi, joyfully. "Ah, Louise, what words! what bold
hopes may they not excite! Might I mention them to you? might I venture
to say to you what I some time have thought, and still now think?"

Louise was silent, and Jacobi continued:

"I have thought," said he, "that the humble, unprovided-for Jacobi could
offer you a better fortune than your rich neighbour of Oestanvik. I have
hoped that my love, the true dedication of my whole life, might make you
happy; that a smaller portion of worldly wealth might satisfy you, if it
were offered you by a man who know deeply your worth, and who desired
nothing better than to be ennobled by your hand. Oh, if this beloved
hand would guide me through life, how bright, how peaceful would not
life be! I should fear neither adversity nor temptation! and how should
I not endeavour to be grateful to Providence for his goodness to me! Ah,
Louise! it is thus that I have thought, and fancied, and dreamed! Oh,
tell me, was it only a dream, or may not the dream become a reality?"

Louise did not withdraw the hand which he had taken, but looked upon the
speaker with infinite kindness.

"One word," besought Jacobi, "only one word! Might I say _my_ Louise?
Louise--mine?"

"Speak with my parents," said Louise, deeply blushing, and turning aside
her head.

"My Louise!" exclaimed Jacobi, and, intoxicated with tenderness and joy,
pressed her to his heart.

"Think of my parents," said Louise, gently pushing him back; "without
their consent I will make no promise. Their answer shall decide me."

"We will hasten together, my Louise," said he, "and desire their
blessing."

"Go alone, dear Jacobi," said Louise. "I do not feel myself calm enough,
nor strong enough. I will wait your return here."

       *       *       *       *       *

With this fifth scene we conjecture that the little drama has arrived at
the desired conclusion, and therefore we add no further scene to that
which naturally follows.

As the Candidate hastened with lover's speed to Louise's parents he
struck hard against somebody in the doorway, who was coming out. The two
opponents stepped back each a few paces, and the Candidate and the
Landed-proprietor stared in astonishment on each other.

"Pardon me," said the Candidate, and was advancing; but the
Landed-proprietor held him back, whilst he inquired with great
earnestness, and with a self-satisfied smile, "Hear you, my friend: can
you tell me whether Cousin Louise is in the garden? I came this moment
from her parents, and would now speak with her. Can you tell me where
she is?"

"I--I don't know!" said Jacobi, releasing himself, and hastening with a
secret anxiety of mind up to her parents.

In the mean time the Landed-proprietor had caught a glimpse of "Cousin
Louise's" person in the garden, and hastened up to her.

It was, in fact, no surprise to Louise, when, after all the preliminary
questions, "Cousin, do you like fish? do you like birds?" there came at
last the principal question, "Cousin, do you like me?"

To this question, it is true, she gave a somewhat less blunt, but
nevertheless a decided negative reply, although it was gilded over with
"esteem and friendship."

The Candidate, on his side, in the fulness and warmth of his heart, laid
open to Louise's parents his love, his wishes, and his hopes. It is true
that Jacobi was now without any office, as well as without any property;
but he had many expectations, and amid these, like a sun and a support,
his Excellency O----. The Judge was himself no friend to such supports,
and Elise did not approve of long engagements: but then both of them
loved Jacobi; both of them wished, above all things, the true happiness
and well-being of their daughter; and so it happened that, after much
counsel, and after Louise had been questioned by her parents, and they
found that she had sincerely the same wishes as Jacobi, and that she
believed she should be happy with him, and after Jacobi had combated
with great fervency and effect every postponement of the
betrothal--that, after all this had been brought to a fortunate issue,
he received a formal yes, and he and Louise, on the afternoon of the
same day, whose morning sun had seen their explanation, were betrothed.

Jacobi was beyond description happy; Louise tranquil but gentle. Henrik
declared that her Majesty appeared too merciful. Perhaps all this
proceeded from her thoughts being already occupied with the increasing
and arranging of Jacobi's wardrobe. She began already to think about
putting in hand a fine piece of linen-weaving. She actually had
consented to the quick betrothal, principally, as she herself confessed
to Eva, "in order to have him better under her hands."

Good reader--and if thou art a Candidate, good Candidate--pardon "our
eldest" if she gave her consent somewhat in mercy. We can assure thee,
that our Jacobi was no worse off on that account; so he himself seemed
to think, and his joy and cordiality seemed to have great influence in
banishing "the cathedral" out of Louise's demeanour.

This view of the connexion, and the hearty joy which Louise's brother
and sisters expressed over this betrothal, and which proved how beloved
Jacobi was by them all, smoothed the wrinkles from the brow of the
Judge, and let Elise's heart feel the sweetest satisfaction. Henrik,
especially, declared loudly his delight in having his beloved friend and
instructor for a brother-in-law--an actual brother.

"And now listen, brother-in-law," said he, fixing his large eyes on
Louise; "assume your rights as master of the house properly, brother
dear; and don't let the slippers be master of the house. If you marry a
queen, you must be king, you understand that very well, and must take
care of your majesty; and if she look like a cathedral, why then do you
look like the last judgment, and thunder accordingly! You laugh; but
you must not receive my advice so lightly, but lay it seriously to
heart, and----but, dear friend, shall we not have a little bowl this
evening? shall we not, mamma dear? Yes, certainly we will! I shall have
the honour of mixing it myself. Shall we not drink the health of your
majesties? I shall mix a bowl--sugar and oranges!--a bowl! a bowl!"

With this exclamation Henrik rushed with outstretched arms to the door,
which at that moment opened, and he embraced the worthy Mrs. Gunilla.

"He! thou--good heaven! Best-beloved!" exclaimed she, "he, he, he, he!
what is up here? He never thought, did he, that he should take the old
woman in his arms! he, he, he, he!"

Henrik excused himself in the most reverential and cordial manner,
explained the cause of his ecstasy, and introduced to her the
newly-betrothed. Mrs. Gunilla at first was astonished, and then affected
to tears. She embraced Elise, and then Louise, and Jacobi also. "God
bless you!" said she, with all her beautiful quiet cordiality, and then,
somewhat pale, seated herself silently on the sofa, and seemed to be
thinking sorrowfully how often anxious, dispiriting days succeed the
cheerful morning of a betrothal. Whether it was from these thoughts, or
that Mrs. Gunilla really felt herself unwell, we know not, but she
became paler and paler. Gabriele went out to fetch her a glass of water,
and as she opened the door ran against the Assessor, who was just then
entering.

With a little cry of surprise she recovered from this unexpected shock.
He looked at her with an astonished countenance, and the next moment was
surrounded by the other young people.

"Now, see, see! what is all this?" exclaimed he; "why do you overwhelm
me thus? Cannot one move any longer in peace? I am not going to dance,
Monsieur Henricus! Do not split my ears, Miss Petrea! What? betrothed!
What? Who? Our eldest? Body and bones! let me sit down and take a pinch
of snuff. Our eldest betrothed! that is dreadful! Usch!--usch! that is
quite frightful! uh, uh, uh, uh! that is actually horrible! Hu, u, u,
hu!"

The Assessor took snuff, and blew his nose for a good while, during
which the family, who knew his way so well, laughed heartily, with the
exception of Louise, who reddened, and was almost angry at his
exclamations, especially at that of horrible.

"Nay," said he, rising up and restoring the snuff-box again to his
pocket, "one must be contented with what cannot be helped. What is
written is written. And, as the Scripture says, blessed are they who
increase and multiply the incorrigible human race, so, in heaven's name,
good luck to you! Good luck and blessing, dear human beings!" And thus
saying, he heartily shook the hands of Jacobi and Louise, who returned
his hand-pressure with kindness, although not quite satisfied with the
form of his good wishes.

"Never in all my life," said Henrik, "did I hear a less cheerful
congratulation. Mrs. Gunilla and good Uncle Munter to-day might be in
melancholy humour: but now they are sitting down by each other, and we
may hope that after they have had a comfortable quarrel together, they
will cheer up a little."

But no; no quarrel ensued this evening between the two. The Assessor had
tidings to announce to her which appeared difficult for him to
communicate, and which filled her eyes with tears--Pyrrhus was dead!

"He was yesterday quite well," said the Assessor, "and licked my hand as
I bade him good night. To-day he took his morning coffee with a good
appetite, and then lay down on his cushion to sleep. As I returned home,
well pleased to think of playing with my little comrade, he lay dead on
his cushion!"

Mrs. Gunilla and he talked for a long time about the little favourite,
and appeared in consequence to become very good friends.

Jeremias Munter was this evening in a more censorious humour than
common. His eyes rested with a sad expression on the newly betrothed.

"Yes," said he, as if speaking to himself, "if one had only confidence
in oneself; if one was only clear as to one's own motives--then one
might have some ground to hope that one could make another happy, and
could be happy with them."

"One must know oneself thus well, so far," said Louise, not without a
degree of confidence, "that one can be certain of doing so, before one
would voluntarily unite one's fate with that of another."

"_Thus well!_" returned he, warmly. "Yes, prosit! Who knows thus well?
You do not, dear sister, that I can assure you. Ah!" continued he, with
bitter melancholy, "one may be horribly deceived in oneself, and by
oneself, in this life. There is no one in this world who, if he rightly
understand himself, has not to deplore some infidelity to his
friend--his love--his better self! The self-love, the miserable egotism
of human nature, where is there a corner that it does not slide into?
The wretched little _I_, how it thrusts itself forward! how thoughts of
self, designs for self, blot actions which otherwise might be called
good!"

"Do you then acknowledge no virtue? Is there, then, no magnanimity, no
excellence, which you can admire?" asked some one. "Does not history
show us----"

"History!" interrupted he, "don't speak of history--don't bring it
forward! No, if I am to believe in virtue, it is such as history cannot
meddle with or understand; it is only in that which plays no great part
in the world, which never, never could have been applauded by it, and
which is not acted publicly. Of this kind it is possible that something
entirely beautiful, something perfectly pure and holy, might be found. I
will believe in it, although I do not discover it in myself. I have
examined my own soul, and can find nothing pure in it; but that it _may_
be found in others, I believe. My heart swells with the thought that
there may exist perfectly pure and unselfish virtue. Good heaven, how
beautiful it is! And wherever such a soul may be found in the world, be
it in palace or in hut, in gold or in rags, in man or in woman, which,
shunning the praise of the world, fearing the flattery of its own heart,
fulfils unobserved and with honest zeal its duties, however difficult
they may be, and which labours and prays in secrecy and stillness--such
a being I admire and love, and set high above all the Cæsars and Ciceros
of the world!"

During this speech the Judge, who had silently risen from his seat,
approached his wife, laid his hand gently on her shoulder, and looked
round upon his children with glistening eyes.

"Our time," continued the Assessor, with what was an extraordinary
enthusiasm for him, "understands but very little this greatness. It
praises itself loudly, and on that account it is the less worthy of
praise. Everybody will be remarkable, or at least will appear so.
Everybody steps forward and shouts I! I! Women even do not any longer
understand the nobility of their incognito; they also come forth into
notoriety, and shout out their _I!_ Scarcely anybody will say, from the
feeling of their own hearts, _Thou!_--and yet it is this same _Thou_
which occasions man to forget that selfish _I_, and in which lies his
purest part; his best happiness! To be sure it may seem grand, it may be
quite ecstatic, even if it be only for a moment, to fill the world with
one's name; but as, in long-past times, millions and millions of men
united themselves to build a temple to the Supreme, and then themselves
sank silently, namelessly, to the dust, having only inscribed His name
and His glory; certainly that was greater, that was far worthier!"

"You talk like King Solomon himself, Uncle Munter!" exclaimed Petrea,
quite enraptured. "Ah, you must be an author: you must write a book
of----"

"Write!" interrupted he, "on what account should I write? Only to
increase the miserable vanity of men? Write!--Bah!"

"Every age has its wise men to build up temples," said Henrik, with a
beautiful expression of countenance.

"No!" continued the Assessor, with evident abhorrence, "I will not
write! but I will live! I have dreamed sometimes that I could live----"

He ceased; a singular emotion was expressed in his countenance; he
arose, and took up a book, into which he looked without reading, and
soon after stepped quietly out of the house.

The entertainment in the family this evening was, spite of all that had
gone before, very lively; and the result, which was expressed in jesting
earnestness, was, that every one, in the spirit which the Assessor had
praised, should secretly labour at the temple-building, every one with
his own work-tool, and according to his own strength.

The Judge walked up and down in the room, and took only occasional part
in the entertainment, although he listened to all, and smiled
applaudingly. It seemed as if the Assessor's words had excited a
melancholy feeling in him, and he spoke warmly in praise of his friend.

"There does not exist a purer human soul than his," said he, "and he
has thereby operated very beneficially on me. Many men desire as much
good, and do it also; but few have to the same extent as he the pure
mind, the perfectly noble motive."

"Ah! if one could only make him happier, only make him more satisfied
with life!" said Eva.

"Will you undertake the commission?" whispered Petrea, waggishly.

Rather too audible a kiss suddenly turned all eyes on the Candidate and
Louise; the latter of whom was punishing her lover for his daring by a
highly ungracious and indignant glance, which Henrik declared quite
pulverised him. As they, however, all separated for the night, the
Candidate besought and was permitted, in mercy, a little kiss, as a
token of reconciliation and forgiveness of his offence regarding the
great one.

"My dear girl," said the mother to Louise as the two met, impelled by a
mutual desire to converse together that same night in her boudoir, "how
came Jacobi's wooing about so suddenly? I could not have believed that
it would have been so quickly decided. I am perfectly astonished even
yet that you should be betrothed."

"So am I," replied Louise; "I can hardly conceive how it has happened.
We met one another this morning in the garden; Jacobi was gloomy, and
out of spirits, and had made up his mind to leave us because he fancied
I was about to be betrothed to Cousin Thure. I then besought him to
forgive my late unkindness, and gave him some little idea of my
friendliness towards him; whereupon he spoke to me of his own feelings
and wishes so beautifully, so warmly, and then--then I hardly know how
it was myself, he called me _his_ Louise, and I--told him to go and
speak with my parents."

"And in the mean time," said the mother, "your parents sent another
wooer to their daughter, in order for him to receive from her a yes or
no. Poor Cousin Thure! He seemed to have such certain hope. But I trust
he may soon console himself! But do you know, Louise, of late I have
fancied that Oestanvik and all its splendour might be a little
captivating to you! And now do you really feel that you have had no loss
in rejecting so rich a worldly settlement?"

"Loss!" repeated Louise, "no, not now, certainly; and yet I should say
wrong if I denied that it has had temptations for me; and for that
reason I never would go to Oestanvik, because I knew how improper it
would be if I allowed it to influence me, whilst I never could endure
such a person as Cousin Thure; and, besides that, I liked Jacobi so
much, and had done so for many years! Once, however, the temptation was
very powerful, and that was on our return from Axelholm. As I rode along
in Cousin Thure's easy landau, it seemed to me that it must be very
agreeable to travel through life so comfortably and pleasantly. But at
that time I was very unhappy in myself; life had lost its best worth for
me; my faith in all that I loved most was poisoned! Ah! there arose in
me then such a fearful doubt in all that was good in the world, and I
believed for one moment that it would be best to sleep out life, and
therefore the easy rocking of the landau seemed so excellent. But now,
now is this heavy dream vanished! now life is again bright, and I
clearly see my own way through, it. Now I trouble myself no more about a
landau than I do about a wheelbarrow; nay, I would much rather now that
my whole life should be a working day, for which I could thank God! It
is a delight to work for those whom one highly esteems and loves; and I
desire nothing higher than to be able to live and work for my own
family, and for him who is to-day become my promised husband before
God!"

"God will bless you, my good, pure-hearted girl!" said the mother,
embracing her, and sweet affectionate tears were shed in the still
evening.


CHAPTER XI.

YET MORE WOOING.


Early on the following morning Eva received a nosegay of beautiful
moss-roses, among which was a letter to herself; she tore it open, and
red the following words:

      "I have dreamed that I could live; and truly a life more beautiful
      and more perfect than any romance makes one dream of. Little Miss
      Eva, whom I have so often carried in my arms--good young girl,
      whom I would so willingly sustain on my breast through, life, thou
      must hear what I have dreamed, what I sometimes still dream.

      "I dreamed that I was a rough, unsightly rock, repulsive and
      unfruitful. But a heart beat in the rock--a chained heart. It beat
      against the walls of its prison till it bled, because it longed to
      be abroad in the sunshine, but it could not break its bonds. I
      could not free myself from myself. The rock wept because it was so
      hard, because it was a prison for its own life. There came a
      maiden, a light gentle angel, wandering through the wood, and laid
      her warm lily-white hand on the rock, and pressed her pure lips
      upon it, breathing a magical word of freedom. The rocky wall
      opened itself, and the heart, the poor captive heart, saw the
      light! The young girl went into the chamber of the heart, and
      called it her home; and suddenly beautiful roses, which diffused
      odours around, sprang forth from that happy heart towards its
      liberator, whilst the chambers of the heart vaulted itself high
      above her into a temple for her, clothing its walls with fresh
      foliage and with precious stones, upon which the sunbeams played.

      "I awoke from a sense of happiness that was too great to be borne
      on earth; I awoke, and ah! the roses were vanished, the lovely
      girl was vanished, and I was once again the hard, unsightly, and
      joyless rock. But do you see, young maiden, the idea will not
      leave me, that those roses which I saw in my dream are hidden in
      me; that they may yet bloom, yet rejoice and make happy. The idea
      will remain with me that this reserved, melancholy heart might yet
      expand itself by an affectionate touch; that there are precious
      stones within it, which would beam brightly for those who called
      them forth into light.

      "Good young maiden, will you not venture on the attempt? Will you
      not lay your warm hand on the rock? Will you not breathe softly
      upon it? Oh, certainly, certainly under your touch it would
      soften--it would bring forth roses for you--it would exalt itself
      into a temple for you, a temple full of hymns of thanksgiving,
      full of love!

      "I know that I am old, old before my time; that I am ugly and
      disagreeable, unpleasant, and perhaps ridiculous; but I do not
      think that nature intended me to be so. I have gone through life
      in such infinite solitude; neither father nor mother, brother nor
      sister, have followed my path; no sunshine fell upon my childhood
      or my youth; I have wandered solitarily through life, combating
      with difficulties. Once I bound myself to a friend--he deserted
      me, and thence grew the rock about my heart; thence became my
      demeanour severe, unattractive, and rough. Is it to remain so
      always? Will my life never bloom upon earth? Will no breath of
      heaven call forth my roses?

      "Do you fear my melancholy temperament? Oh, you have not seen how
      a glance, a word of yours chases every cloud from my brow; not
      because you are beautiful, but because you are good and pure. Will
      you teach me to be good? I will learn willingly from you! From you
      I would learn to love mankind, and to find more good in the world
      than I have hitherto done. I will live for you, if not for the
      world. By my wish the world should know nothing of me till the
      cross upon my grave told 'here rests----'

      "Oh, it is beautiful to live nameless under the poisoned glance of
      the world; poisoned, whether it praise or blame; beautiful, not to
      be polluted by its observation, but more beautiful to be
      intimately known to one--to possess one gentle and honest friend,
      and that one a wife! Beautiful to be able to look into her pure
      soul as in a mirror, and to be aware there of every blot on one's
      own soul, and to be able thus to purify it against the day of the
      great trial.

      "But I speak only of myself and my own happiness. Ah, the
      egotist--the cursed egotist! Can I make you happy also, Eva? Is it
      not audacity in me to desire--ah, Eva, I love you inexpressibly!

      "I leave the egotist in your hand: do with him what you will, he
      will still remain

                              "Yours."

This letter made Eva very anxious and uneasy. She would so willingly
have said yes, and made so good a man happy, but then so many voices
within her said no!

She spoke with her parents, with her brother and sisters. "He is so
good, so excellent!" said she. "Ah, if I could but properly love him!
But I cannot--and then he is so old; and I have no desire to marry; I am
so happy in my own home."

"And do not leave it!" was the unanimous chorus of all the family. The
father, indeed, was actually desperate with all this courtship; and the
mother thought it quite absurd that her blooming Eva and Jeremias Munter
should go together. No one voice spoke for the Assessor but the little
Petrea's, and a silent sigh in Eva's own bosom. The result of all this
consideration was, that Eva wrote with tearful eyes the following answer
to her lover:

      "My best, my truly good Friend!

      "Ah! do not be angry with me that I cannot become for you that
      which you wish. I shall certainly not marry. I am too happy in my
      own home for that. Ah! this to be sure is egotistical, but I
      cannot do otherwise. Forgive me! I am so very much, so heartily
      attached to you; and I should never be happy again if you love not
      hitherto as formerly

      "Your little            "Eva."

In the evening Eva received a beautiful and costly work-box, with the
following lines:

      "Yes, yes, I can very well believe that the rough rock would be
      appalling. You will not venture to lay your delicate white hand
      upon it, little Miss Eva; will not trouble yourself to breathe
      warmth upon my poor roses! Let them then remain in their grave!

      "I shall now make a journey, nor see you again for a year and a
      day. But, good heavens! as you have given me a basket,[13] you
      shall receive in return a little box. I bought it for my--bride,
      Eva! Yet now, after all, Eva shall have it; shall keep it for my
      sake. She may return it when I cease to be

                              "Her true and devoted Friend."

"Do you think she is sorry for what she has done?" asked the Judge
anxiously from his wife, as he saw Eva's hot tears falling on the
work-box;--"but it cannot be helped. She marry! and that too with
Munter! She is indeed nothing but a child! But that is just the way;
when one has educated one's daughters, and taught them something of good
manners, just when one has begun to have real pleasure in them, that one
must lose them--must let them go to China if the lover chance to be a
Chinese! It is intolerable! It is abominable! I would not wish my worst
enemy the pain of having grown-up daughters. Is not Schwartz already
beginning to draw a circle about Sara? Good gracious! if we should yet
have the plague of another lover!"

FOOTNOTES:

[13] To say that "a gentleman has received a basket," is the same as
saying he is a rejected lover.--M. H.


CHAPTER XII.

MORE COURTSHIP STILL.


Judge Frank had, unknown to himself, spoken a striking word. It was true
that Schwartz had drawn ever narrower and darker circles around Sara,
and at the very time when she would appear free from his influence her
temper became more uncertain and suspicious. The mother, uneasy about
this connexion, no longer allowed her to be alone with him during the
music lesson, and this watchfulness excited Sara's pride, as well as the
grave yet gentle remonstrances which were made on account of her
behaviour were received with much impatience and disregard. The Judge
was the only person before whom Sara did not exhibit the dark side of
her character. His glance, his presence, seemed to exercise a certain
power over her; besides which, she was, perhaps, more beloved by him
than by all the other members of the family, with the exception of
Petrea.

One evening, Sara sate silent by one of the windows in the library,
supporting her beautiful head on her hand. Petrea sate at her feet on a
low stool; she also was silent, but every now and then looked up to Sara
with a tender troubled expression, whilst Sara sometimes looked down
towards her thoughtfully, and almost gloomily.

"Petrea," said she, quickly, "what would you say if I should leave you
suddenly to go into the wide world, and should never return?"

"What should I say?" answered Petrea, with a violent gush of tears: "ah,
I should say nothing at all, but should lie down and die of grief!"

"Do you really love me then so, Petrea?" asked she.

"Do I love you!" returned Petrea; "ah, Sara, if you go away, take me
with you as maid, as servant--I will do everything for you!"

"Good Petrea!" whispered Sara, laying her arm round her neck, and
kissing her weeping eyes, "continue to love Sara, but do not follow
her!"

"It seems terribly sultry to me this evening!" said Henrik, wearily: "we
cannot manage any family assembling to-night; not a bit of music; not a
bit of entertainment. The air seems as if an earthquake were at hand. I
fancy that Africa sends us something of a tempest. Petrea is weeping
like the cataract of Trollhätten; and there go the people in
twos-and-twos and weep, and set themselves in corners and whisper and
mutter, and kiss one another, from my God-fearing parents down to my
silly little sisters! The King and Queen, they go and seat themselves
just has it happens, on living or dead things; they had nearly seated
themselves on me as I sate unoffensively on the sofa; but I made a turn
about _tout d'un coup_.--Betrothed! horribly wearisome folks! Are they
not, Gabriele? They cannot see, they cannot hear; they could not speak,
I fancy, but with one another!"

A light was burning in Sara's chamber far into the night. She was busied
for a long time with her journal; she wrote with a flying but unsteady
hand.

"So, to-morrow; to-morrow all will be said, and I----shall be bound.

"I know that is but of little importance, and yet I have such a horror
of it! Oh, the power of custom and of form.

"I know very well whom I could love; there is a purity in his glance, a
powerful purity which penetrates me. But how would he look on me if he
saw----

"I must go! I have no choice left! S. has me in his net--the money which
I have borrowed from him binds me so fast!--for I cannot bear that they
should know it, and despise me. I know that they would impoverish
themselves in order to release me, but I will not so humiliate myself.

"And why do I speak of release? I go hence to a life of freedom and
honour. I bow myself under the yoke but for a moment, only in order to
exalt myself the more proudly. Now there is no more time to tremble and
to waver--away with these tears! And thou, Volney, proud, strong
thinker, stand by me! Teach me, when all others turn away, how I may
rely on my own strength!"

Sara now exchanged the pen for the book, and the hour of midnight struck
before she closed it, and arose tranquil and cold in order to seek the
quiet of sleep.

       *       *       *       *       *

The earthquake of which Henrik had spoken came the next day, the signal
of which was a letter from Schwartz to the Judge, in which he solicited
the hand of Sara. His only wealth was his profession; but with this
alone he was convinced that his wife would want nothing: he was just
about to undertake a journey through Europe, and wished to be
accompanied by Sara, of whose consent and acquiescence he was quite
sure.

A certain degree of self-appreciation in a man was not at any time
displeasing to Judge Frank, but this letter breathed a supercilious
assurance, a professional arrogance, which were extremely repugnant to
him. Besides this, he was wounded by the tone of pretension in which
Schwartz spoke of one who was as dear to him as his own daughter; and
the thought of her being united to a man of Schwartz's character was
intolerable to him. He was almost persuaded that Sara did not love him,
and burned with impatience to repel his pretensions, and to remove him
at the same time from his house.

Elise agreed perfectly in the opinion of her husband, but was less
confident than he regarding Sara's state of feeling with respect to the
affair. She was summoned to their presence. The Judge handed to her
Schwartz's letter, and awaited impatiently her remarks upon it. Her
colour paled before the grave and searching glance which was riveted
upon her, but she declared herself quite willing to accept Schwartz's
proposal.

Astonishment and vexation painted themselves on the countenance of her
adopted father.

"Ah, Sara," said the mother, after a short silence, "have you well
considered this? Do you think that Schwartz is a man who can make a wife
happy?"

"He can make me happy," returned Sara; "happy according to my own mind."

"You can never, never," said the mother, "enjoy domestic happiness with
him!"

"He loves me," returned Sara, "and he can give me a happiness which I
never enjoyed here. I lost early both father and mother, and in the home
into which I was received out of charity, all became colder and colder
towards me!"

"Ah, do not think so, Sara!" said the mother. "But even if this were
the case, may not some little of it be your own fault? Do you really do
anything to make yourself beloved? Do you strive against that which
makes you less amiable?"

"I can renounce such love," said Sara, "as will not love me with my
faults. Nature gave me strong feelings and inclinations, and I cannot
bring them into subjection."

"You will not, Sara," was the reply.

"I cannot! and it may be that I will not," said she, "submit myself to
the subjugation and taming which has been allotted as the share of the
woman. Why should I? I feel strength in myself to break up a new path
for myself. I will lead a fresh and an independent life! I will live a
bright artiste-life, free from the trammels and the Lilliputian
considerations of domestic life. I will be free! I will not, as now, be
watched and suspected, and be under a state of espionage! I will be free
from the displeasure and blame which now dog my footsteps! This
treatment it is, mother, which has determined my resolution."

"If," answered the mother, in a tremulous voice, and deeply affected by
Sara's words and tone, "I have erred towards you--and I may have done
so--I know well that it has not been from temper, or out of want of
tenderness towards you. I have spoken to and warned you from the best
conviction; I have sincerely endeavoured and desired that which is best
for you, and this you will some time or other come to see even better
than now.[14] You will perhaps come to see that it would have been good
for you if you had lent a more willing ear to my maternal counsellings;
will perhaps come to deplore that you rewarded the love I cherished for
you with reproaches and bitterness!"

"Then let me go!" said Sara, with gentler voice; "we do not accord well
together. I embitter your life, and you make--perhaps you cannot make
mine happy. Let me go with him who will love me with all my faults, who
can and will open a freer scope to my powers and talents than I have
hitherto had."

"Ah, Sara," returned Elise, "will you obtain in this freer field a
better happiness than can be afforded you by a domestic circle, by the
tenderness of true friends, and a happy domestic life?"

"Are you then so happy, my mother?" interrupted Sara with an ironical
smile, and a searching glance; "are you then so happy in this circle,
and this domestic life, which you praise so highly, that you thus repeat
what has been said on the subject from the beginning of the world. Those
perpetual cares in which you have passed your days, those trifling cares
and thoughts for every-day necessities, which are so opposite to your
own nature, are they then so pleasant, so captivating? Have you not
renounced many of your beautiful gifts--your pleasure in literature and
music--nay, in short, what is the most lovely part of life, in order to
bury yourself in concealment and oblivion, and there, like the silkworm,
to spin your own sepulchre of the threads which another will wind off?
You bow your own will continually before that of another; your innocent
pleasures you sacrifice daily either to him or to others: are you so
very happy amid all these renunciations?"

The Judge rose up passionately; went several times up and down the room,
and placed himself at last directly opposite to Sara, leaning his back
to the stove, and listening attentively for the answer of his wife.

"Yes, Sara, I am happy!" answered she, with an energy very unusual in
her; "yes, I am happy! Whenever I make any sacrifice, I receive a rich
return. And if there be moments when I feel painfully any renunciation
which I have made, there are others, and far more of them, in which I
congratulate myself on all that I have won. I am become improved through
the husband whom God has given to me; through my children, through my
duties, through the desires and the wants which I have overcome at his
side--yes, Sara, above all things, through him, his affection, his
excellence, am I improved, and feel myself happier every day. Love,
Sara, love changes sacrifice into pleasure, and makes renunciation
sweet! I thank God for my lot, and only wish that I were worthier of
it!"

"It may be!" said Sara, proudly; "every one has his own sphere. But the
tame happiness of the dove suits not the eagle!"

"Sara!" exclaimed the Judge, in a tone of severe displeasure.

The mother, unable longer to repress the outbreak of excited feeling,
left the room with her handkerchief to her eyes.

"For shame, Sara," said the Judge with severe gravity, and standing
before her with a reproving glance, "for shame! this arrogance goes too
far!"

She trembled now before his eye as she had done once before; a
remembrance from the days of her childhood awoke within her; her eyelids
sunk, and a burning crimson covered her face.

Geologists tell us that, minor considerations waived, the character of a
stream can be discerned as well anywhere along its course as at its
source. Whether this be true or not, anything that can be said of the
fundamental principles of liberty, upon which our national fabric has
been built, can be said with even increased emphasis of the free
States of the Netherlands.

From the Dutch our free America has secured the inspiration of her
chartered liberties. Of the Dutch, then, we can appropriately say, as
Lafayette once said of free America, "They are a lesson to oppressors,
an example to the oppressed, and a sanctuary for the rights of
mankind."

We are here to-night to glorify the Dutch. Fortunately for us, to do this
we have not by the addition of so much as a jot or a tittle to magnify
history. The facts are sufficient to justify our boast and fortify
our pride.

We need to detract nothing from other nationalities that have contributed
much to the formation of our modern national conglomerate, although it
is easily seen that the superior qualities of other nations have had a
large infusion of Dutch virtue. All that we claim is that no nation
under the heavens can make such an exhibit of marvellous success against
adverse circumstances as does Holland. From the days when Julius Cæsar
mentions their bravery under the name of Batavians, to the notable time
when, voluntarily assuming the title of reproach, they became "the
beggars of the sea," and for nearly a century fought for their
chartered rights against the most powerful and unscrupulous of foes,
the Dutch have shown the most splendid of human virtues in most
conspicuous light.

In doing this they have made a noble name for themselves, and furnished
the worthiest of examples for all the nations of the earth. This is not
the time nor the place to deal with mere facts of history. Yet I
take it that even this jolly assembly will take pleasure in the
mention of the deeds that have now become eternally historic.

Who that knows anything of the son of Charles V, who in 1555 made promises
to Holland that he never meant to keep, and for years after sought in
every way to break; who that has ever read of this fanatical, heartless,
cruel, and despotic Philip II of Spain, or of that wonderful, pure,
magnanimous, noblest Dutchman of all, William of Orange, or of that
fickle and false Margaret of Parma, the wicked sister in Holland, who
lived to execute the will of a wicked brother in Spain, or of those
monsters at the head of Spanish armies, Alva, Requesens, and Don
Juan; who that has been fired by the sieges of Leyden and Haarlem,
by the assassinations concocted in the Council of Blood, by the
patient, faithful, undying patriotism of the Netherlanders in
protesting for the truth of God and the rights of man, will need
any response to the toast "a lesson to oppressors"?

A little land, fighting for the right, succeeded in overcoming the
power of the mightiest nation of Europe.

"Truth crushed to earth will rise again."
When once we consider the earnestness for civil and religious liberty,
the record of no nation can stand comparison with that of Holland.
Some of the English Puritans fled across the Atlantic from
persecutions very slight compared with those inflicted upon Dutchmen
by Philip, here to found a New England.

Those who did not flee remained in old England, fought a few battles, and
tried to establish a commonwealth, which in less than fifteen years
ended disastrously, because the founders were unfit for government.

But these Puritans of Holland, to their everlasting praise be it
remembered, battled for their homes, lives, and liberty for eighty
years. For four-fifths of a century they faced not only the best and
bravest soldiers of Europe, but they faced, along with their wives, their
children, and their old folk, the flame, the gibbet, the flood, the
siege, the pestilence, the famine, "and all men know, or dream,
or fear of agony," all for one thing--to teach the oppressor that
his cause must fail.

It is difficult, sitting around a comfortable board at a public
dinner, to make men realize what their forefathers suffered that the
heritage of priceless liberty should be their children's pride.
But read Motley, or the recent and remarkably well-written volumes
of Douglas Campbell, and you will see that every atrocity that Spanish
hatred, religious intolerance, and mediæval bigotry could invent, every
horror that ever followed in the train of war, swept over and desolated
Holland. And yet, to teach a lesson to oppressors, they endured, they
fought, they suffered, they conquered; and when they conquered, the whole
world was taught the lesson--worth all the Dutchmen's agony to teach
it--that the children of a heavenly Father are born free and equal,
and that it is neither the province of nation or church to coerce
them into any religious belief or doctrine whatsoever.

The principle of Protestantism was won in the eighty-year war of the
Netherlanders. During all this time the Dutch were notably giving a
lesson to oppressors. But then and afterward they furnished a brilliant
and commendable example to the oppressed. Though they fought the wrong,
they never opposed the truth. They were fierce, but never fanatical.
They loved liberty, but they never encouraged license; they believed in
freedom and the maintenance of chartered rights, but they never
denied their lawful allegiance to their governor, nor refused
scriptural submission to the powers ordained of God. The public documents
throughout the eighty years of war invariably recognized Philip as lawful
king. Even the University of Leyden, founded as a thanksgiving offering
for their successful resistance to the Spanish siege, observed the
usual legal fiction, and acknowledged the King as ruler of the
realm. And, although the Dutch had abundant reason to be vindictive, once
the opportunity offered, the desire for persecution vanished.
William the Silent, as early as 1556, in a public speech before the
regent and her council, says, "Force can make no impression on one's
conscience." "It is the nature of heresy," he goes on to say (would we
had the spirit of William in our churches to-day)--"it is the nature
of heresy, if it rests it rusts: he that rubs it whets it." His was an
age when religious toleration, except as a political necessity,
was unknown.

Holland first practised it, then taught it to the world. No less in her
example to the oppressed than in her warning to oppressors, is Holland
conspicuous, is Holland great.

During the reign of William of Orange, first a Romanist, then a
Calvinist, never a bigot, always gentle, at last a Christian, in Holland
and in Zeeland, where for years he was almost military dictator, these
principles of tolerance were put to severest test. Fortunately for the
world, they were sufficiently strong to stand the strain. The people about
him had been the sad victims of a horrible persecution which had
furrowed their soil with graves, and filled their land with widows
and orphans.

We know what is human nature.
But Dutch nature is a little more generous than ordinary human nature. A
Dutchman's heart is big, a Dutchman travels on a broad-gauge track;
a Dutchman can forgive and forget an injury; a Dutchman has no fears
and few frowns; a Dutchman is never icebergy, nor sullen, nor revengeful.
He may make mistakes from impulse, he never wounds with intention;
he will never put his foot twice in the same trap, nor will he take any
pleasure in seeing his enemy entrapped. All of a Dutchman's faults come
from an over-indulgence of a Dutchman's virtues. He is not cold, nor
calculating, nor cruel. Generally happy himself, he desires others to be
happy also. If he cannot get on with people, he lets them alone. He does
not seek to ruin them.

Such are traits of the Dutch character. When, after driving out the awful,
vindictive, bloodthirsty Spaniards, the Dutch came into power, it was
but natural to think of retaliation: banish the Papists, or persecute
the Anabaptists, suppress their paganism, or crush their fanaticism,
would have been most natural. Against any such ideas the nation as a whole
set its face like a wall of adamant. Very soon the sober convictions
of the people were triumphant. And after the most atrociously cruel
war, in which these men had suffered untold agonies, they became an
example to the oppressed, the like of which the world had never witnessed
since the Son of God and Saviour of men cried out from his cross,
"Father, forgive them: they know not what they do." When the union was
formed between Holland and Zeeland, it was provided that no inquisition
should be made into any man's belief or conscience, nor should any man
by cause thereof suffer injury or hindrance. Toleration for the
oppressor by the oppressed, full forgiveness of enemies by the victors,
became thus the corner-stone of the republic, under which all sects
of Christians, the Roman Catholic Church, Jews, Turks, infidels, and
even heretics, throve and prospered.

Now, do you need anything said after thus showing Holland to have been
the teacher of a lesson to oppressors, and the example to the oppressed,
to show that she has ever been the sanctuary for the rights of
mankind?

In the nature of things, she could not have been otherwise. The little
country of Holland, that in 1555, on the accession of Philip II
to the sovereignty, was the richest jewel in his crown, and of the
five millions poured annually into his treasury contributed nearly
half, emerged as a republic out of the war with Spain of eighty
years' duration, and remained for two full centuries the greatest
republic in the world.

She has been the instructor of the world in art, in music, in science;
has outstripped other nations in the commercial race; had wealth
and luxury, palaces and architectural splendor, when England's
yeomanry lived in huts and never ate a vegetable; discovered oil-painting,
originated portrait and landscape-painting, was foremost in all the
mechanical arts; invented wood-engraving, printing from blocks,
and gave to the world both telescope and microscope, thus furnishing
the implements to see the largest things of the heavens above, and
the smallest of both earth beneath and waters under the earth.

The corner-stone was liberty, and especially religious liberty and
toleration.

As such Holland could not have been other than the sanctuary
for the rights of mankind. The great number of Englishmen in the Netherlands,
and the reciprocal influence of the Netherlands upon these Englishmen--an
influence all too little marked by English historians--prepared the
way for transplanting to this country the seeds from which has sprung
the large tree beneath the bounteous shade of which nearly seventy
millions of people take shelter to-day, and, while they rest, rejoice in
full security of their rights and their freedom.

Two hundred years ago, the English courtiers about Charles II,
regardless of the fact that the Netherlands had been the guide and the
instructor of England in almost everything which had made her materially
great, regarded the Dutchman as a boor, plain and ill-mannered, and
wanting in taste, because as a republican the Hollander thought it
a disgrace to have his wife or his daughter debauched by king or
noble.
From the aristocratic point of view, the Dutchman was not altogether
a gentleman. To-day we have some representatives of the Charles II
courtiers, who affect to ape the English, and would, no doubt, despise
the Dutch. But he who appreciates the genuine meaning of a man, born
in the image and living in the fear of his God, has nothing but
direst disgust for a dude, nothing but the rarest respect for a
Dutchman.

MARION J. VERDERY

THE SOUTH IN WALL STREET 
[Speech of Marion J.

Verdery at the third annual banquet of the Southern Society of New
York, February 22, 1889. The President, John C. Calhoun, presided, and
in introducing Mr. Verdery, said:
"The next toast is 'The South in Wall Street.' What our friend Mr.
Verdery has to say in response to this toast I'm sure I don't know;
but if he proposes to tell us how there is any money for the South
in Wall Street--to give us a straight tip on the market--he may be
sure of a very attentive audience.

Now, Mr. Verdery, if you will tell us what to do to-morrow, we
will all of us cheerfully give you half of what we make--that is, of
course, if you will guarantee us against loss.".]

MR. CHAIRMAN AND GENTLEMEN:--When Colonel Fellows concluded his speech
and sat down next to me, after he had by his matchless oratory
electrified this audience and had immersed me in the flood of his
eloquence, both literally and figuratively, for in the graceful
swing of his gestures, he turned over a goblet of water in my lap
[laughter], I felt very much as the little boy did who had stood
at the head of his spelling-class for three weeks, and then was
stumped by the word kaleidoscope.

He thought for a moment or two, and then seriously said, "he didn't believe
there was a boy on earth who could spell it." I did not believe, after
Colonel Fellows finished, that there was another man on earth who
could follow him. [Applause.]
Mr.

Chairman, in the course of my experience I never knew of but one absolutely
straight tip in Wall Street. To that, you and this Society are
perfectly welcome.

If you act on it, I will cheerfully guarantee you against loss, without
exacting that you shall divide with me the profits. It is a point that
the late Mr. Travers gave our friend Henry Grady. [Laughter.] They
had been to attend a national convention at Chicago, and on returning
were seriously disappointed because of the failure to have nominated
their chosen candidate.

As they came across the ferry in the gray light of the morning, Grady,
who was seeking consolation, said: "Mr.

Travers, what is the best thing I can buy in Wall Street?" The noted wit
of the Stock Exchange replied: "The best thing you can buy is a
ticket back to Atlanta."

[Laughter.]
Two old darkies, lounging on a street corner in Richmond, Va., one
day, were suddenly aroused by a runaway team that came dashing
toward them at breakneck speed.

The driver, scared nearly to death, had abandoned his reins, and was
awkwardly climbing out of the wagon at the rear end. One of the old
negroes said: "Brer' Johnson, sure as you born man, de runaway
horse am powerful gran' and a monstrous fine sight to see."

Johnson shook his head doubtfully, and then replied, philosophically,
"Dat 'pends berry much, nigger, on whedder you be standin' on de corner
obsarvin' of him, or be gittin' ober de tail-board ob de waggin." And
likewise, it strikes me that any keen enjoyment to be gotten out of
after-dinner speaking is peculiarly contingent--"'pendin' berry much
on whedder you is standin' off lookin' on, or gittin' ober de tail-board
of de waggin." [Laughter.]
If Wall Street is all that spiteful cynics and ignorant fanatics
say of it--if we are to admit that it is a den of thieves, where only
falsehood, treachery, and iniquitous schemes are propagated; if there is
any ground for believing that all the exchanges are side-shows to
hell [laughter], and their members devils incarnate [laughter], I
fail to appreciate any advantage to the South in being there, and
in no place where her presence could not be counted a credit would
I assist in discovering her.

But if, on the other hand, we repudiate such wholesale abuse of the place,
and insist, for truth's sake, upon an acknowledgment of facts as
they exist, then the South can well afford to be found in Wall Street,
and if prominent there we may proudly salute her.

Wall Street is the throbbing heart of America's finance. It is a common
nursery for an infinite variety of enterprises, all over our land.

Innumerable manufactories, North, South, East, and West, have drawn their
capital from Wall Street.

The industrial progress and material development of our blessed
Southland is being pushed forward vigorously to-day by the monetary
backing of Wall Street. The vast fields of the fertile West, luxurious
in the beauty and rich in the promise of tasselled corn and bearded
grain, are tilled and harvested by helpful loans from Wall Street.

Old railroads, run down in their physical condition and thereby seriously
impaired for public service, are constantly being rehabilitated with
Wall Street money, while eight out of every ten new ones draw the
means for their construction and equipment from this same source of
financial supply.

To all attacks recklessly made on the methods of Wall Street, it seems
to me there is ample answer in this one undeniable fact--the daily
business done there foots up in dollars and cents more than the
total trade of any whole State of the Union, except New York; and,
although the great bulk of transactions are made in the midst of
intense excitement, incident to rapid and sometimes violent fluctuation
of values, and, although gigantic trades are made binding by only
a wink or a nod, nine hundred and ninety-nine times out of a thousand,
the contracting parties stand rigidly by their bargains, prove they
good or bad.

[Applause.]

So much for the heroic integrity of the so-called bulls and bears.

Out in the broader realm of commercial vocation, and through the wider
fields of pastoral pursuit, it occurs to me this lesson might be learned
without any reduction of existing morality. [Applause.]
In Wall Street the brainiest financiers are congregated.

Vigorous energy, unremitting industry, clear judgment, and
unswerving nerve are absolutely essential to personal success. In the
light of those requirements, we venture to ask what place has the
South taken.

Honorable Abram S. Hewitt in his speech before this Society one year ago,
said: "If by some inscrutable providence this list of gentlemen [meaning
members of the Southern Society] were suddenly returned to the homes
which I suppose will know them no longer, there would be in
this city what the quack medicine men call 'a sense of goneness,' and
I think we should have to send to the wise men of the East, Dr.
Atkinson, for example, to tell us how to supply the vacuum." Taking my
cue from that generous compliment, I venture to suggest that if
the South should suddenly withdraw from Wall Street, it would
occasion such a contraction of the currency in that district as
would demand even a more liberal policy than Secretary Fairchild
has practised in purchasing Government bonds.

[Applause and laughter.] The aggregate wealth of Southerners in
Wall Street to-day is over $100,000,000 and the great bulk of that
vast amount has been accumulated within the last twenty years. That
is to say, "The South in Wall Street," has made at least $4,000,000
annually since the war.

Under all the circumstances, who will dispute the magnificence of that
showing? It must be remembered that the great majority of Southern men
on entering Wall Street were poor; so poor, indeed, that they
might almost have afforded to begin their career on the terms that I
once heard of a man in South Carolina proposing to some little
negroes.

He told them if they would pick wild blackberries from morning till night
he would give them half they gathered. [Laughter.] The Southerners
of Wall Street, with but very few exceptions, entered that great
field of finance with but one consolation, and that was the calm
consciousness of being thoroughly protected against loss from the
simple fact that they had nothing to lose.

[Applause and laughter.]

A hundred millions of dollars is no small pile when stacked up beside--nothing.
Of course we are not called upon to analyze this fortune, nor do I mean
to imply that it is evenly divided.

Some of us it must be admitted spoil the average dreadfully, but
we all may get the same satisfaction out of it that the childless
man derived, who said that he and his brother together had three
boys and two girls.

[Laughter.]

The South is a power in Wall Street.

She is identified with the management of many leading financial
institutions, and has also founded private banking-houses and built up
other prosperous business establishments on her own account. It would
be in bad taste to mention names unless I had the roll of honor
at hand and could read it off without exception. The President of the
Cotton Exchange and nearly forty per cent. of its members are Southerners.
One of the oldest and strongest firms on the Produce Exchange is
essentially Southern. That private banking-house in Wall Street, which
has stood longest without any change in the personnel of its
partnership, and which ranks to-day with the most reputable and
successful establishments of its kind, is Southern in every branch
of its membership.

Seven of the National Banks have Southern men for Presidents, and
the list of Southern cashiers and tellers is long and honorable.
It was a Southern boy who, ten years ago, counted himself lucky on getting
the humble place of mail carrier in one of the greatest banking houses
of America. That very boy, when not long since he resigned to enter
business on his own account, was filling one of the most responsible
positions and drawing the third largest salary in that same great
establishment.

Another instance of signal success is told in this short story: Less than
six years ago a young Georgian tacked up a cheap little sign on the door
of a sky-lit room in the "Evening Post" building. To-day his is the
leading name of one of the most conspicuous houses in the Street, and the
rent of his present quarters is more per month than the first office he
occupied cost for a whole year. One of the most famous Southern leaders
in Wall Street to-day [John H.

Inman] was so little known when he first attracted attention there that
many people assumed he must in some way be connected with a certain great
ocean steamship line, simply because he bore the same name. To-day
it is just as often supposed that the steamship line is an offshoot
from him, because it bears his name. A great Italian painter once
vitalized a canvas with the expression of his poetic thought and
called it "Aurora." In looking at that masterpiece of art I have
sometimes been reminded of this distinguished Southerner.
Immediately after the war the South was enveloped in darkness. Out
of that gloom this man emerged and came here to the East, where the
sun shines first in the morning. Judging him to-day by the record he
has made, we are warranted in saying that on coming here he adopted
Usefulness as his chariot, and that thereto he harnessed the
spirited steeds of Enterprise, Progress, and Development.

To-day we see him driving that triumphal car through the land of his
birth, and making the sunlight of prosperity to shine there.
But I know that won't do; you must soon leave us again; and
then, when you have finished your studies, you must have your own
house."

"And then, mother, you shall come to me!" This had been years before,
and still was Henrik's favourite theme, and the mother listened
willingly to it.

Several poems which Henrik wrote about this time seemed to indicate the
most decided poetical talent, and gave his mother and sisters the
greatest delight, whilst they excited, at the same time, great attention
among the friends of the family. The Judge alone looked on gloomily.

"You will spoil him," exclaimed he one evening to his wife and
daughters, "if you make him fancy that he is something extraordinary,
before he is in anything out of the common way. I confess that his
poetising is very much against my wish. When one is a man, one should
have something much more important to do than to sigh, and sing about
this and that future life. If he were likely to be a Thorild,[15] or any
other of our greatest poets----but I see no signs of that! and this
poetasterism, this literary idleness, which perpetually either lifts
young people above the clouds, or places them under the earth, so that
for pure cloud and dust they are unable to see the good noble gifts of
actual life--I would the devil had it! The direction which Henrik is now
taking grieves me seriously. I had rejoiced myself so in the thought of
his being a first-rate miner; in his being instrumental in turning to
good account our mines, our woods and streams, those noblest foundations
of Sweden's wealth, and to which it was worth while devoting a good
head; and now, instead of that, he hangs his on one side; sits with a
pen in his hand, and rhymes 'face' and 'grace,' 'heart' and 'smart!' It
is quite contrary to my feelings! I wish Stjernhök would come here soon.
Now there's a fellow! he will turn out something first-rate! I wish he
were coming soon; perhaps he might influence Henrik, and induce him to
give up this verse-making, which, perhaps, at bottom, is only vanity."

Elise and the daughters were silent. For a considerable time now, Elise
had accustomed herself to silence when her husband grumbled. But
often--whenever it was necessary--she would return to the subject of his
discontent at a time when he was calm, and then, talk it over with him;
and this line of tactics succeeded admirably. She made use of them on
the present occasion.

"Ernst," said she to him in the evening, "it grieves me that you are so
displeased with Henrik's poetical bent. Ah! it has delighted me so much,
precisely because I fancied that it is real, and that in this case it
may be as useful as any other can be. Still I never will encourage
anything in him which is opposed to your wishes."

"My dear Elise," returned he mildly, "manage this affair according to
your own convictions and conscience. It is very probable that you are
right, and that I am wrong. All that I beseech of you is, that you watch
over yourself, in order that affection to your first-born may not
mislead you to mistake for excellence that which is only mediocre, and
his little attempts for masterpieces. Henrik may be, if he can, a
distinguished poet and literary man; but he must not as yet imagine
himself anything; above all things, he must not suppose it possible to
be a distinguished man in any profession without preparing himself by
serious labour, and without first of all becoming a thinking being. If
he were this, I promise you that I should rejoice over my son, let him
be what profession he would--a worker in thought or a worker in
mountains. And for this very reason one must be careful not to value too
highly these poetical blossoms. If vanity remains in him he never will
covet serious renown in anything."

"You are right, Ernst," said his wife, with all the cordiality of inward
conviction.

       *       *       *       *       *

Henrik also longed earnestly for Stjernhök's arrival. He wished to show
him his work; he longed to measure his new historical and philosophical
knowledge against that of his friend; he longed, in one word, to be
esteemed by him; for Henrik's gentle and affectionate nature had always
felt itself powerfully attracted by the energetic and, as one may say,
metallic nature of the other, and ever since the years of their boyhood
had the esteem and friendship of Stjernhök been the goal of Henrik's
endeavours, and of his warm, although till now unattainable, wishes.
Stjernhök had hitherto always behaved towards Henrik with a certain
friendly indifference, never as a companion and friend.

Stjernhök came. He was received by the whole family with the greatest
cordiality, but by no one with a warmer heart than Henrik.

There was even externally the greatest dissimilarity between these two
young men. Henrik was remarkable for extraordinary, almost feminine
beauty; his figure was noble but slender, and his glance glowing though
somewhat dreamy. Stjernhök, some years Henrik's senior, had become early
a man. All with him was muscular, firm, and powerful; his countenance
was intelligent without being handsome, and a star as it were gleamed in
his clear, decided eye; such a star as is often prophetic of fate, and
over whose path fortunate stars keep watch.

Some days after Stjernhök's arrival Henrik became greatly changed. He
had become quiet, and there was an air of depression on his countenance.
Stjernhök now, as he had always done, did not appear unfriendly to
Henrik, but still paid but little attention to him. He occupied himself
very busily, partly with trying chemical experiments with Jacobi and the
ladies, and partly in the evening, and even into the night, in making
astronomical observations with his excellent telescope. One of the
beaming stars to which the observations of the young astronomer were
industriously directed was called afterwards in the family Stjernhök's
star. All gathered themselves around the interesting and well-informed
young man. When tender mash through a colander, and put the purée back
on the stove. When it boils stir in a very heaping tablespoonful of
potato flour mixed with a little cold water, and let it cook for a few
minutes. Remove from the fire, stir in a wine glass of sherry.
Turn into a mould, set it on the ice until the next day and serve
with cream.

APPLES STEWED IN BUTTER.

Take half a dozen good, tart cooking apples--greenings or Newtown pippins;
peel, cut in slices about a quarter of an inch thick and core them.

Melt an ounce of butter in a spider, and lay in the slices of apples
with a quarter of a pound of granulated sugar and the juice of a
lemon, stew gently over a moderate fire.

When done arrange them nicely on a dish, melt a generous tablespoonful
of currant jelly in the spider, and when ready to serve mix with it
half a glass of Madeira or sherry; pour over the apples and serve.

TO STEAM APPLES.

Pare and core some good cooking apples, place them in an earthen or granite
ware dish that fits in a steamer.

Have water boiling in the steamer, set the dish over it, stretch a
towel over the top, put on the cover and fold the ends of the towel over
it. Steam the apples until tender--about twenty minutes. Take the
apples out, measure the juice in the pan and add to it an equal
quantity of sugar, flavor with a little lemon juice, cook until thick,
put the apples in a glass dish and pour the syrup over them. It will
be a jelly when cold. Serve with cream.

SCALLOPED APPLES.

Pare, core and cut in slices some good, tart cooking apples, put a layer
in a baking dish with sugar, cinnamon and a grating of lemon rind,
dot with tiny lumps of butter, then another layer of apples, sugar,
etc., and so on until the dish is full. Add a very little water and the
juice of a lemon, and use a little more sugar and butter on top
than on the other layers. Bake until the apples are thoroughly cooked.
Cover until nearly done, when the cover should be removed to allow
them to brown.
Serve hot with cream or hard sauce.

BANANA FRITTERS.

Half a pint of sweet milk, a scant half pint of flour, two rounded
teaspoonfuls of baking powder and a small pinch of salt, stir all
together; this should make a batter as thick as that of cake. Roll the
pieces of fruit in it with a fork, and drop quickly into boiling
fat.
The batter should be prepared just as it is wanted and not allowed
to stand. Cut three medium-sized bananas into three pieces each and
divide each slice lengthwise so that the fruit will be thin enough
to cook thoroughly while the batter is browning.

This recipe will make eighteen small fritters. Put them on a hot platter--do
not pile up--and serve immediately with a fruit sauce.

BAVARIAN CHERRY CAKE.

Half a pound of fine, juicy black cherries, five tablespoonfuls of fine
bread crumbs, five tablespoonfuls of powdered sugar, five eggs and one
ounce of sweet chocolate grated. Put the grated chocolate in a mixing
bowl, break an egg into it and add one tablespoonful of bread crumbs
and one of sugar, beat light and break another egg into it, adding another
tablespoonful of bread crumbs and one of sugar.

Then separate the three remaining eggs, the yolks from the whites, adding
one yolk at a time alternately with bread crumbs and sugar until
all are used. Add the cherries. Beat the three whites of eggs to a stiff
froth and fold it in lightly.

Butter thick a cake mould, sift dried bread crumbs over it, turn the
cake into it and bake about three-quarters of an hour in a moderate oven.
Test it as other cake. In Bavaria it is served cold, but I think
it would also be nice hot with fruit sauce.

       CRANBERRY BAVARIAN CREAM.

Stew one quart of cranberries; while hot rub through a sieve; measure
out half a pint, and add to it a half cup of granulated sugar. Have a
quarter of a box of gelatine soaked in a quarter of a cup of water one
hour, set the bowl over steam entirely to dissolve the gelatine,
then add the cranberries. Turn it into an earthenware bowl, set in
a pan of ice water and beat until it is perfectly cold and begins to
thicken, then add half a cup of rich milk and beat again, and at the
last add half a cup of whipped cream. Beat it thoroughly and turn it
into a mould and set on the ice to congeal. Serve with cream. Do
not use a tin mould for cranberries.

A MOULD OF FRESH FRUIT.

Take enough fresh, ripe currants and raspberries to make half a
cupful of juice of each, and press through a sieve fine enough
to retain the seeds; or the fruit may be strained and squeezed through
cheese cloth.
Take also enough ripe cherries to make a cupful of juice and mix all
together. Put a quart of boiling water in a saucepan over the fire with
four ounces of sugar and two ounces of almonds blanched and cut
fine.

Mix five ounces of arrowroot or the same quantity of potato flour with
the cold fruit juices, stir it into the boiling water and let it boil
about five minutes, turn it into a wet mould, and when cold set on
the ice. This should be made the day before it is to be served.
Serve with cream.

A DESSERT OF MIXED FRUIT.

Peel some sweet, juicy oranges, removing all the white, bitter skin,
cut in thin slices and put a layer at the bottom of a glass dish,
sprinkle with sugar, then put a layer of freshly grated cocoanut and a
layer of bananas, cut in thin slices, and repeat, beginning again
with oranges, until the bowl is full, finishing with a layer of
cocoanut.

Pour over it any juice that may have run from the oranges, and if liked
a glass or two of sherry may be added. Serve very cold.

GOOSEBERRY PUDDING.

Use either ripe or unripe English gooseberries for this pudding, stem and
pick off the flower, wash and cover with water and cook until tender,
strain through a sieve. Return to the fire, let it come to a boil,
sweeten to taste, flavor with cinnamon and some almonds blanched and cut
fine. Stiffen with potato flour as in other fruit puddings--a tablespoonful
to a quart of the purée--and mould and serve in the same way.

       PINEAPPLE MERINGUE.

Half a large or one small pineapple grated, two ounces of butter, three
of granulated sugar, an ounce and a half of grated bread crumbs, the yolks
of three eggs and the whites of four. Cream the butter and sugar, add the
yolks and one white of egg beaten well together, then the fruit
and bread crumbs; turn into a pudding dish and bake twenty minutes.

Beat three whites of eggs to a stiff froth and add three-quarters of
a cup of granulated sugar to it, flavor with a few drops of almond extract,
spread over the pudding, set the dish in a pan of warm water in
the oven and bake about ten or fifteen minutes.

Test with a straw; when it comes out clean it is done. Serve cold.

PRUNE SOUFFLÉ.

Soak three-quarters of a pound of prunes in water to cover them
over night, cook until soft in the water they were soaked in, drain,
take out the stones and press through a purée sieve. Add half a cup of
granulated sugar and the whites of three eggs beaten to a stiff froth.
Bake in a pudding dish twenty minutes. Serve in the dish in which it
is baked, cold, with cream.

PRUNE MOULD.

Prepare a prune purée as above and to the same quantity have a third
of a box of gelatine soaked in a little of the water the prunes
were cooked in, and dissolved over the teakettle.

Stir quickly into the purée, then add three whites of eggs beaten to a
stiff froth. Wet a mould and pour the mixture into it; set on the ice to
congeal. Turn out on a glass dish and serve with cream.

STEWED DRIED FIGS.

Wash and cut in half two dozen dried figs, slice very thin one small
lemon, add to the figs, put in a saucepan and pour over them cold water
almost to cover. Let them cook until the lemon is clear. Sweeten to
taste.

RHUBARB MERINGUE.

Take three cups of stewed rhubarb, put in a saucepan over the fire,
sweeten to taste, and when hot add two ounces of butter and three
ounces of bread crumbs dried and rolled fine, the juice and rind of
half a lemon. Remove from the fire and stir in three egg yolks, turn
it into a pudding dish, set aside while preparing the meringue. Beat
the whites of three eggs to a stiff froth, add three-quarters of a
cup of granulated sugar and pour over the rhubarb. Set the pudding dish
in a pan of hot water in the oven and bake ten or fifteen minutes. Test
with a broom straw; when it comes out of the meringue clean it is
done.

Serve cold with cream.

SCALLOPED RHUBARB.

A dozen large stalks of young rhubarb, washed and scraped and cut in
thin slices, half a loaf of bakers' stale bread grated, four heaping
tablespoonfuls of granulated sugar, one generous tablespoonful of
butter, and the grated rind of a large lemon.

       Butter a pudding dish, divide the ingredients into four parts, begin
with the rhubarb and finish with bread crumbs.

Sprinkle the sugar and grated lemon peel over the rhubarb and cut the
butter in tiny bits over the bread crumbs, dredge the top with sugar.
Bake three-quarters of an hour in a moderate oven and serve hot with
cream or hard sauce.

RICE AND DATE PUDDING.

Half a cup of rice washed and boiled in water, one pound of dates, washed
first in cold then in hot water, stoned and chopped a little, one
pint of milk, two eggs, two tablespoonfuls of granulated sugar, and a
little salt. Butter well a pudding dish, lay in half the dates, then
over them half the rice, then dates again with a layer of rice on
top.

Beat the eggs light, add to them the milk, sugar and salt, and pour
over the rice and fruit and bake from twenty-five to thirty minutes.

Serve cold, with cream.

RICE AND FIG PUDDING
may be made according to the preceding recipe, steaming or stewing
the figs a little and chopping slightly.

       RICE AND RAISIN PUDDING.

Soak the raisins, seed them and stew a little, and follow the
same recipe.

RICE AND PRUNE PUDDING.

Soak the prunes over night, stew and stone and slightly chop them and
proceed as in the other puddings. Any kind of dried or fresh fruit may
be used for this very wholesome and nutritious pudding.

       

RICE FLOUR PUDDING.

Take a quart of milk, leaving out enough to mix with three ounces of
rice flour, put the rest in a saucepan over the fire.

When it boils add one ounce and a half of sugar, one-half ounce
of sweet and a few bitter almonds, blanched and pounded, or
chopped very fine, one ounce of butter, and a small piece of vanilla
bean if convenient, if not flavor at the last with vanilla extract.

       Mix the three ounces of rice flour with milk, reserved from the
quart, and stir into the pudding.

Beat one egg yolk with half a cup of cream and stir in just before
removing from the fire. Turn into a mould that has been dipped in cold
water and serve very cold with fruit sauce.

RICE SOUFFLÉ COLD.

Put into a double boiler a quarter of a pound of well washed rice,
a pint and a third of milk, a small tablespoonful of butter, and
cook until the rice is so stiff that it no longer adheres to the
sides of the pan.

Soak a heaping tablespoonful of gelatine in two tablespoonfuls of
water fifteen minutes.

Put a pint of thin cream or rich milk in a saucepan over the fire with
two ounces of blanched and pounded almonds; while it is coming to a
boil beat two egg yolks and two tablespoonfuls of granulated sugar together
until light, then add the gelatine to the milk on the stove.
When it has dissolved pour a little of the cream into the eggs and
sugar, mix well, then turn it back into the saucepan, and stir all
rapidly together until it begins to thicken, remove at once from the
fire, add to the rice and beat until smooth. Rinse a mould with cold
water, turn the soufflé into it and set on ice until it is wanted.
Turn it out on a glass dish and serve with or without a fruit sauce.

RICE PUDDING.--No. 1.

Take a quarter of a pound of rice, wash well in cold and then scald
in boiling water, drain and put on in a quart of sweet milk in a double
boiler, cook one hour and a half. A little before it is done stir in
an ounce and a half of butter, one ounce of sugar, a little grated lemon
peel, a few sweet and bitter almonds blanched and chopped very fine
or pounded in a mortar. Don't stir too much, but keep the rice grains
whole. When done dip a mould in cold water and turn the rice into it.

Set it on the ice and serve very cold with a fruit sauce.

RICE PUDDING.--No. 2.

Put a scant half cup of rice to soak in water for an hour, then boil in
salted boiling water for twenty minutes. While it is cooking put
three cups of rich milk and half a cup of sugar in a saucepan on
the stove, mix a tablespoonful of corn starch with a little cold
milk, stir with the milk and sugar and let it come to a boil, then
add a cupful of the hot boiled rice and stir until it thickens like
custard. Turn it into a pudding dish, flavor with vanilla or anything
liked and bake slowly until a delicate brown. Serve cold in the
dish in which it is baked, with brandy peaches or any fruit
liked.

RICE OMELETTE SOUFFLÉ.
Boil a quarter of a pound of well-washed Carolina rice in a pint
and a half of milk until stiff. Stir in two ounces of butter, half
a pint of cream and four egg yolks beaten light with two ounces of
granulated sugar and vanilla to taste, add a quarter of a pound of
citron cut fine and two ounces of almonds blanched and pounded fine
in a mortar. Stir all well together, adding at the last four whites
of eggs beaten very stiff. Put in a pudding dish and bake until
firm--about half an hour.
Serve immediately in the dish in which it was baked.
STRAWBERRY SHORTCAKE.--No. 1.
Puff paste makes a delicious strawberry shortcake. Roll thin, as
for pie crust, and line three layer cake tins and bake. Put a quart
of fresh, ripe strawberries stemmed in a bowl, sweeten them, cover
and stand the bowl on the shelf over the range, stir occasionally
and mash slightly with the back of a spoon. When serving time comes
lay one of the shells on the dish in which it is to be served, and
pour a third of the berries over it, then put on a second and a
third, decorate the top layer with whipped cream and serve with
cream. It should be served immediately after the berries are added
to the crust that it may be crisp. Both berries and shells should
be cold.

STRAWBERRY SHORTCAKE.--No. 2.
Make a biscuit dough in the proportion of a pint of flour, a heaping
teaspoonful of baking powder and half a teaspoonful of salt, a
tablespoonful of butter and enough milk to mix it. Roll about an
inch thick, cut it round or oblong and bake in a quick oven about
fifteen minutes. Cut around the edge and pull gently apart, butter
slightly, have the berries prepared as for Shortcake No. 1. Put the
crust on the serving dish, pour half the berries over it, put on
the top and pour the remainder of the berries over it. Serve with
cream.

LADIES' LOCKS FILLED WITH STRAWBERRIES.
Roll the puff paste thin, cut in strips an inch wide and about
twelve inches long; wind these around the forms overlapping the
paste as it is wound. Brush over with beaten egg and bake on the
forms. When baked slip the forms out, fill with strawberries prepared
as for strawberry shortcake.

STRAWBERRIES SCALLOPED.
Equal quantities of fresh strawberries and bakers' stale bread
grated.
Begin with a layer of the berries, sprinkle well with sugar, then
a layer of bread crumbs, dot with bits of butter, then another layer
of fruit and sugar; finish with bread crumbs and butter, sprinkle
a little sugar over the top and bake half an hour in a good oven.
Serve hot with cream. Currants and raspberries, either separately
or mixed, and blackberries also make excellent puddings.
CURRANT PUDDING.
Stem and wash some currants, mash through a sieve, add as much water
as there is currant juice and sweeten to taste. To one quart of
liquid take two ounces of Groult's potato flour. Mix the potato
flour with a little of the cold fruit juice, put the rest over the
fire, and when it comes to a boil stir in the flour and let it cook
for a few minutes. It will become clear. Turn it into a mould that
has been dipped in cold water, and set it when cool on the ice until
the next day. Turn out carefully and serve with cream.
STEWED DATES.
Break the dates apart, wash in cold, then in hot water, drain them
and cover with cold water; cook until tender--a very few minutes--take
out the fruit, add a little sugar to the water and boil five minutes,
pour over the dates and set away to get cold.

STUFFED DATES.
Wash the dates as in the other recipes, drain in a colander and
shake from time to time until they are dry.This morning I took out your breakfast-cup,
and kissed that part of the edge on which the gold was worn off.

"We will again read books together, and think about and talk about them
together. We will again go out together and enjoy all the freshness and
quiet of the woods. And would it not be a blessed thing to wander thus
calmly through life, endeavouring to improve ourselves, and to make all
those around us happier; to admire the works of God, and humbly to thank
Him for all that he has given to us and others? Should we not then have
lived and flourished enough on earth? Truly I know that a life quiet as
this might not satisfy every one; neither can it accord with all seasons
of life. Storms will come;--even I have had my time of unrest, of
suffering, and of combat. But, thank God! that is now past, and the
sensibility which destroyed my peace is now become as a light to my
path; it has extended my world; it has made me better: and now that I no
longer covet to enjoy the greater and stronger pleasures of life, I
learn now, each passing day, to prize yet higher the treasures which
surround me in this quiet every-day life. Oh, no one can be happy on
earth till he has learned the worth of little things, and to attend to
them! When once he has learned this, he may make each day not only
happy, but find in it cause of thankfulness. But he must have
peace--peace both within himself and without himself; for peace is the
sun in which every dewdrop of life glitters!

"Would that I could but call back peace into a heart which--but I must
prepare you for a change, for a great void in the house. You will not
find Petrea here. You know the state of things which so much distressed
me for some time. It would not do to let it go on any longer either for
Louise or Jacobi's sake, or yet for her own, and therefore Petrea must
go, otherwise they all would have become unhappy. She herself saw it;
and as we had tidings of Jacobi's speedy arrival here, she opened her
heart to her parents. It was noble and right of her, and they were as
good and prudent as ever; and now our father has gone with her to his
friend Bishop B. May God preserve her, and give her peace! I shed many
tears over her; but I hope all may turn out well. Her lively heart has a
fresh-flowing fountain of health in it; and certainly her residence in
the country, which she likes so much, new circumstances, new
interests----

"I was interrupted: Jacobi is come! It is a good thing that Petrea is
now whiling away her time in the shades of Furudal; good for her poor
heart, and good too for the betrothed pair, who otherwise could not have
ventured to have been happy in her presence. But now they are entirely
so.

"Now, after six years' long waiting, sighing, and hoping, Jacobi sees
himself approaching the goal of his wishes--marriage and a parsonage!
And the person who helps him to all this, to say nothing of his own
individual deserts, is his beloved patron the excellent Excellency
O----. Through his influence two important landed-proprietors in the
parish of Great T. have been induced to give their votes to Jacobi, who,
though yet young, has been proposed; and thus he will receive one of the
largest and most beautiful livings in the bishopric, and Louise will
become a greatly honoured pastor's wife--'provost's wife' she herself
says prophetically.

"The only _but_ in this happiness is, that it will remove Jacobi and
Louise so far from us. Their highest wish had been to obtain the rural
appointment near this city; and thus we might in that case have
maintained our family unbroken, even though Louise had left her home;
but--'but,' says our good, sensible 'eldest,' with a sigh, 'all things
cannot be perfect here on earth.'

"The day of nomination falls early in the spring; and Jacobi, who must
enter upon his office immediately after his appointment, wishes to
celebrate his marriage at Whitsuntide, in order that he may conduct his
young wife into his shepherd's hut along flower-bestrewn paths, and by
the song of the lark. Mrs. Gunilla jestingly beseeches of him not to
become too nomadic: however, this is certain, that no living being has
more interest about cows and calves, sheep and poultry, than Louise.

"The future married couple are getting their whole household in order
beforehand; and Gabriele heartily amuses herself with such fragments of
their entertaining conversation as reach her ear, while they sit on the
sofa in the library talking of love and economy. But it is not talking
_alone_ that they do, for Jacobi's heart is full of warm human love; and
our father has not the less imparted to all his children somewhat of his
love for the general good, although Gabriele maintains that her portion
thereof is as yet very small.

"It gives one great pleasure to see the betrothed go out to make
purchases, and then to see them return so cordially well pleased with
all they have bought. Louise discovers something so unsurpassably
excellent in everything with which she furnishes herself, whether it be
an earthen or a silver vessel. When I look at these two, like a pair of
birds carrying together straws to their nest, and twittering over them,
I cannot help thinking that it must be a greater piece of good fortune
to come to the possession of a humbly supplied habitation which one has
furnished oneself, than to that of a great and rich one for which other
people have cared. One is, in the first place, so well acquainted with,
so on thee-and-thou terms with one's things; and certainly nobody in
this world can be more so than Louise with hers.

"We are all of us now working most actively for the wedding, but still
our father does not look with altogether friendly eyes on an occasion
which will withdraw a daughter from his beloved circle. He would so
gladly keep us all with him, for which I rejoice and am grateful.
Apropos! we have a scheme for him which will make him happy in his old
age, and our mother also. You remember the great piece of building-land
overgrown with bushes, which the people had not understanding enough
either to build upon or to give up to us, this we intend--but we will
talk about it mouth to mouth. Petrea has infected us all, even 'our
eldest,' with her desire for great undertakings; and then--truly it is a
joy to be able to labour for the happiness of those who have laboured
for us so affectionately and unweariedly.

"Now something about friends and acquaintance.

"All friends and acquaintance ask much after you. Uncle Jeremias
wrangles because you do not come, all the time he breakfasts with us
(generally on Wednesday and Saturday mornings), and while he abuses our
rusks, but notwithstanding devours a great quantity of them. For some
time he has appeared to me to have become more amiable than formerly;
his temper is milder, his heart always was mild. He is the friend and
physician of all the poor. A short time ago he bought a little villa, a
mile distant from the city; it is to be the comfort of his age, and is
to be called 'The Old Man's Rose,'--does not that sound comfortable?

"Annette P. is very unhappy with her coarse sister-in-law. She does not
complain; but look, complexion, nay, even her whole being, indicate the
deepest discontent with life; we must attract her to us, and endeavour
to make her happier.

"Here comes Gabriele, and insists upon it that I should leave some room
for her scrawl. A bold request! But then who says no to her? Not I, and
therefore I must make a short ending.

"If a certain Baron Rutger L. be introduced to you when you return, do
not imagine that he is deranged, although he sometimes seems as if he
were so. He is the son of one of my father's friends; and as he is to be
educated by my father for a civil post, he is boarded in our family. He
is a kind of '_diamant brute_,' and requires polishing in more senses
than one; in the mean time I fancy his wild temper is in a fair way of
being tamed. One word from our mother makes impression upon him; and he
is actually more regardful of the ungracious demeanour of our little
lady, than of the moral preaching of our eldest. He is just nineteen.
Old Brigitta is quite afraid of him, and will hardly trust herself to
pass him lest he should leap over her. Oh, how happy she, like everybody
else, will be to see you back again! She fears lest you should get
married, and stop in 'the hole,' as she calls Stockholm.

"Henrik will remain with us over Christmas, but you must come and help
to enliven him; he is not so joyous as formerly. I fancy that the
misunderstanding between him and Stjernhök distresses him. Ah! why would
not these two understand one another! For the rest, many things are now
at stake for Henrik; God grant that all may go well, both on his account
and mamma's!

"We shall not see Petrea again till after Louise's marriage. When shall
we all be again all together at home? Sara! ah? it is now above four
years since we heard anything of her, and all inquiry and search after
her has been in vain. Perhaps she lives no longer! I have wept many
tears over her; oh! if she should return! I feel that we should be
happier together than formerly; there was much that was good and noble
in her, but she was misled--I hear my mother's light steps, and that
predicts that she has something good for me----

"Ah, yes! she has! she has a letter from you, my Eva! You cannot fix the
day of your return, and that is very sad--but you come soon! You love
Stockholm; so do I also; I could embrace Stockholm for that reason.

"I am now at the very edge of my paper. Gabriele has bespoken the other
side. I leave you now, in order to write to _her_ who left us with
tears, but who, as I cordially hope, will return to us with smiles."

      FROM GABRIELE.

                                                     In the Morning.

      "I could not write last evening, and am now up before the sun in
      order to tell you that nothing can console me for Petrea's
      absence, excepting your return. We are all of us terribly longing
      after 'our Rose.' I know very well who beside your own family
      longs for this same thing.

      "I must tell you that a little friendship has been got up between
      Uncle Jeremias and me. All this came about in the fields, for he
      is never particularly polite within doors; whilst in a walk, the
      beautiful side of his character always comes out. Petrea and I
      have taken such long excursions with him, and then he was mild and
      lively; then he botanised with us, told us of the natural families
      in the vegetable kingdom, and related the particular life and
      history of many plants. Do you know it is the most agreeable
      thing in the world to know something of all this; one feels
      oneself on such familiar terms with these vegetable families. Ah!
      how often when I feel thus am I made aware how indescribably rich
      and glorious life is, and I fancy that every one must live happily
      on earth who has only eyes and sense awakened to all that is
      glorious therein, and then I can sing like a bird for pure
      life-enjoyment. In the mean time, Uncle Jeremias and I cultivate
      flowers in the house quite enthusiastically, and intend at
      Christmas to make presents of both red and white lilacs; but,
      indeed, I have almost a mind to cry that the nose of my Petrea
      cannot smell them.

      "But I must come to an end, for you must know that occasionally I
      have undertaken to have a watchful eye over the breakfast-table,
      and therefore I go now to look after it. Bergström has fortunately
      done all this, so that I have nothing now to do; next I must go
      and look after my moss-rose, and see whether a new bud has yet
      made its appearance; then I shall go and see after mamma; one
      glance must I give through the window to the leaves in the garden,
      which nod a farewell to me before they fall from the twigs; and to
      the sun also, which now rises bright and beaming, must I send a
      glance--a beam from the sun of my eyes and out of the depth of my
      thankful heart; and therefore that I may be able, for the best
      well-being of the community, to attend to all these important
      matters, I must say to you, farewell! to you who are so dear to
      me."


CHAPTER II.

PETREA TO LEONORE.


                                              From the Inn at D----.

      "It is evening, and my father is gone out in order to make
      arrangements for our to-morrow's voyage. I am alone: the mist
      rises thick without, before the dirty inn-windows; my eyes also
      are misty; my heart is heavy and full, I must converse with you.

      "Oh, Leonore! the bitter step has thus been taken--I am separated
      from my own family, from my own home; and not soon shall I see
      again their mild glances, or hear your consoling voice! and all
      this--because I have not deserved--because I have destroyed the
      peace of my home! Yes, Leonore! in vain will you endeavour to
      excuse me, and reconcile me with myself! I know that I am
      criminal--that I have desired, that I have wished, at least, for a
      moment--oh, I would now press the hem of Louise's garment to my
      lips and exclaim 'Forgive, forgive! I have passed judgment on
      myself--I have banished myself; I fly--fly in order no more to
      disturb your happiness or his!'

      "I was a cloud in their heaven; what should the cloud do there?
      May the wind disperse it! Oh, Leonore, it is an indescribably
      bitter feeling for a heart which burns with gratitude to be able
      to do nothing more for the object of its love than to keep itself
      at a distance, to make itself into nothing! But rather
      that--rather a million-times hide myself in the bosom of the
      earth, than give sorrow either to him or to her! Truly, if thereby
      I could win anything for them; if I could moulder to dust like a
      grain of corn, and then shoot forth for them into plentiful
      blessing--that would be sweet and precious, Leonore! People extol
      all those who are able to die for love, for honour, for religion,
      for high and noble ends, and wherefore? Because it is, indeed, a
      mercy from God to be able so to die--it is life in death!

      "I know a life which is death--which, endured through long
      clinging years, would be a burden to itself, and a joy to no one.
      Oh, how bitter! Wherefore must the craving after happiness, after
      enjoyment, burn like an eternal thirst in the human soul, if the
      assuaging fountain, Tantalus like----?

      "Leonore, my eyes burn, my head aches, and my heart is wildly
      tempested! I am not good--I am not submissive--my soul is a
      chaos--a little earth on forehead and breast, that might be good
      for me.


                                            On board the Steam-boat.

      "Thanks, Leonore, thanks for your pillow; it has really been an
      ear-comfort for me.[16] Yesterday I thought that I was in the
      direct way to become ill. I shivered; I burned; my head ached
      fearfully: I felt as if torn to pieces. But when I laid my head
      upon your little pillow, when my ear rested upon the delicate
      cover which you had ornamented with such exquisite needlework,
      then it seemed to me as if your spirit whispered to me out of it;
      a repose came over me; all that was bad vanished so quickly, so
      wonderfully; I slept calmly; I was quite astonished when they woke
      me in the morning to feel that, bodily, I was quite well, and
      mentally like one cured. This has been done by your pillow,
      Leonore. I kissed it and thanked you.

      "It is related in the Acts of the Apostles that they brought the
      sick and laid them in the way on which the holy men went, that at
      least their shadows might fall upon them, and make them sound. I
      have faith in the power of such a remedy; yes, the good, the holy,
      impart somewhat of their life, of their strength, to all that
      belong to them: I have found that to-night.

      "We went on board. The 'Sea-Witch' thundered and flew over the
      sea. I know that she conveyed me away from you all, and leaning
      over the bulwarks I wept. I felt then a pair of arms tenderly and
      gently surrounding me; they were my father's! He wrapped a warm
      cloak around me, and leaning on his breast, I raised my head. The
      morning was clear; white flame-like clouds chased by the morning
      wind flew across the deep blue; the waves beat foaming against the
      vessel; green meadows, autumnally beautiful parks, extended
      themselves on either side of us; space opened itself. I stood with
      my face turned towards the wind and space, let the sea-spray wet
      my lips and my eyelids, a soft shudder passed through me, and I
      felt that life was beautiful. Yes, in the morning hour, filled
      with its beaming-light, in this pure fresh wind, I felt the evil
      demons of my soul retreat, and disperse themselves like mist and
      vapour. I drank in the morning winds; I opened my heart to life; I
      might also have opened my arms to them, and at the same time to
      all my beloved ones, that thus I might have expressed to them the
      quiet prediction of my heart, that love to them will heal me, will
      afford me strength some time or other to give them joy.


                                            The second day on board.

      "I should like to know whether a deep heart-grief would resist the
      influence of a long voyage. There is something wonderfully
      strengthening, something renovating in this life, this voyaging,
      this fresh wind. It chases the dust from the eyes of the soul;
      one sees oneself and others more accurately, and gets removed from
      one's old self. One journeys in order to stand upon a new shore,
      and amid new connexions. One begins, as it were, anew.

      "We had a storm yesterday, and with the exception of my father, I
      was the only passenger who remained well, and on this account I
      could help the sufferers. It is true it was not without its
      discomforts; it is true that I reeled about sometimes with a glass
      of water, and sometimes with a glass of drops in the hand; but I
      saw many a laughable scene; many an odd trait of human nature. I
      laughed, made my own remarks, forgot myself, and became friendly
      with all mankind. Certainly it would be a very good thing for me
      to be maid-servant on board a steam-boat.

      "Towards evening, the storm, as well within as without the vessel,
      abated itself. I sate solitary on dock till midnight. The waves
      still foamed around the agreeably rocking vessel; the wind
      whistled in the rigging; and the full moon, heralded by one bright
      little star, rose from the sea, and diffused her mild wondrous
      light over its dark expanse. It was infinitely glorious! Nameless
      thoughts and feelings arose in me, full of love and melancholy,
      and yet at the same time elevating and strengthening; a certain
      longing after that for which I knew no name. I desired I knew not
      what.

      "But I fear and know that which I do not desire. I fear the quiet
      measured life into which I am about again to
      enter--conventionalities, forms, social life, all this cramps my
      soul together, and makes it inclined to excesses. Instead of
      sitting in select society, and drinking tea in 'high life,' would
      I rather roam about the world in Viking expeditions--rather eat
      locusts with John the Baptist in the wilderness, and go hither and
      thither in a garment of camel's hair; and after all, such apparel
      as this must be very convenient in comparison with our patchwork
      toilet. Manifold are the changing scenes of life, and how shall I
      find my way, and where shall I find my place in the magic circle
      of the world. Forgive me, Leonore, that I talk so much about
      myself. Thou good one, thou hast spoiled me in this respect.

      "We reached Furudal to-day in the afternoon.


                                                            Furudal.

      "Here are we on land; I would that I were at sea! I come even now
      from the sitting-room, and in the sitting-room I always suffer
      shipwreck. An evil genius always makes me say or do something
      there unbecoming. This evening I entangled the reel of the
      Bishop's lady, and told a stupid anecdote about a relation of
      hers. I wished to be witty, and I succeeded badly, as I always do.

      "They are very neat people here. The Bishop is a small pale man,
      with something angelic in voice and expression, but--he will not
      have much time to bestow on me; he lives in his books and his
      official duties, and moreover he is almost always in the city; and
      his lady, who remains here perpetually, has very delicate health;
      but I will wait upon her, and read aloud to her, and that will
      give me pleasure. I only hope she may endure me.

      "Both husband and wife were amiable towards my father's daughter,
      but I very well believe that they did not find me very loveable.
      Intolerably hot, too, was their blessed drawing-room, and I was
      tanned with the wind, and as red as a peony. Such things as these
      are enough to make one a little desperate; all these things are
      trifles, yet they are nevertheless annoying; and then it is
      depressing, everlastingly to displease exactly where one wishes
      most to please!

             *       *       *       *       *

      "I have unpacked the trunk which you all so carefully packed for
      me; and now new and newly-repaired articles of clothing flew into
      my arms one after another. Oh, sisters! it was you who have thus
      brought my toilet in order for the whole winter! How good you are!
      I recognised Louise's hand again. Oh, I must weep, my beloved
      ones!--my home!


                                                    Some days later.

      "The pine-trees rustle fresh and still. I have been
      out;--mountains, woods, solitude with nature--glorious!

      "Oh, Leonore, I will begin a new life; I will die to my ancient
      self, to vanity, to error, to self-love. Every flattering token of
      remembrance--notes, keepsakes--be they from man or woman, I have
      destroyed. I send you herewith a little sum of money, which I
      received for ornaments and for some of my own manufactures, which
      I sold. Buy something with it which will give pleasure to Louise
      and Jacobi; but do not let them surmise, I earnestly beseech you,
      that it comes from Petrea. If I could only sell myself for a
      respectable price, and make them rich, then----

      "I shall have a deal of time for myself here, and I know how I
      shall employ it. I will go out a great deal. I will wander through
      wood and field, in storm, snow, and every kind of weather, till I
      am, at least, bodily weary. Perhaps then it may be calmer in the
      soul! I desire no longer to be happy. What does it matter if one
      is not happy, if one is only pure and good? Were the probation-day
      of life only not so long! Leonore, my good angel, pray for me!

      "May all be happy!

           "Greet all tenderly from your

                              "Petrea.

      "P. S.--My nose makes its compliments to Gabriele, and goes in the
      accompanying picture to pay her a visit. She must not imagine that
      I am cast down. I send also a little ballad or romance; the wood
      sung it to me last evening, and every harmonious sound, which life
      in my soul sings, must--go home! Oh, how I love you all!"

       *       *       *       *       *

And now, whilst our Petrea appears in rural solitude to prepare herself
for a new life, whilst the snow fell upon the earth in order to prepare
it for now springs, we turn back to our well-known home in the town, and
describe the occurrences there.

FOOTNOTES:

[16] Poor Petrea makes a little pun here. The Swedish word örongodt
(pillow) meaning literally good for the ear.--M. H.


CHAPTER III.

A CONVERSATION.


Jacobi had left. October was come, with its storms and its long
twilight, which is so dark and heavy for all such as have it not cheered
by kindly glances and bright thoughts.

One evening, as Henrik came down to tea, he was observed to look
uncommonly pale, and in answer to the inquiry of his sisters as to the
cause, he replied that he had headache, and added, half in jest, half in
earnest, that it would be very beautiful to be only once freed from this
heavy body--it was so sadly in one's way!

"How you talk!" said Louise; "at all events, it is right to treat it
well and rationally; not to go sitting up all night and studying so that
one has headache all day!"

"Thank your majesty most submissively for the moral!" said Henrik; "but
if my body will not serve my soul, but will subject it, I have a very
great desire to contend with it, and to quarrel with it!"

"The butterfly becomes matured in the chrysalis," said Gabriele, smiling
sweetly, whilst she strewed rose-leaves upon some chrysalises which were
to sleep through the winter on her flower-stand.

"Ah, yes," replied Henrik; "but how heavily does not the shell press
down upon the wings of the butterfly! The earthly chrysalis weighs upon
me! What would not the soul accomplish? how could it not live and enjoy,
were it not for this? In certain bright moments, what do we not feel and
think? what brilliancy in conception! what godlike warmth of feeling in
the heart!--one could press the whole world to one's bosom at such a
time, seeing, with a glance, through all, and penetrating all as with
fire. Oh, there is then an abundance, a clearness! Yes, if our Lord
himself came to me at such a moment, I should reach forth my hand to him
and say, 'Good day, brother!'"

"Dear Henrik!" said Louise, somewhat startled, "now I think you do not
rightly know what you say."

"Yes," continued he, without regarding the interruption, "so can one
feel, but only for a moment; in the next, the chrysalis closes heavily
again its earthly dust-mantle around our being, and we are stupified and
sleep, and sink deep below that which we so lately were. Then one sees
in books nothing but printed words, and in one's soul one finds neither
feeling nor thought, and towards man, for whom so shortly before the
very heart seemed to burn, one feels oneself stiff and disinclined. Ah,
it were enough to make one fall into despair!"

"It would be far better," said Louise, "that such people went to sleep,
and then they would get rid of headache and heaviness."

"But," said Henrik, smiling, "that is a sorrowful remedy according to my
notions. It is horrible to require so much sleep! How can any one who is
a seven-sleeper become great? 'Les hommes puissans veillent et veulent,'
says Balzac with reason; and because my miserable heavy nature requires
so much sleep, so certainly shall I never turn out great in any way.
Besides, this entrancement, this glorification produces such wakeful
moments in the soul, that one feels poor and stripped when they are
extinguished. Ah! I can very well comprehend how so many make use of
external excitement to recal or to prolong them, and that they endeavour
through the fire of wine to wake again the fire of the soul."

"Then," said Louise, "you comprehend something which is very bad and
irrational. They are precisely such excitements as these that we have to
thank for there being so many miserable men, and so many drunkards in
Sweden, that one can scarcely venture to go out in the streets for
them!"

"I do not defend it, dear Louise," said Henrik, gently smiling at the
zeal of his sister, "but I can understand it, and in certain cases I can
excuse it. Life is often felt to be so heavy, and the moments of
inspiration give a fulness to existence; they are like lightning flashes
out of the eternal life!"

"And so they certainly are," said Leonore, who had listened attentively
to her brother, and whose mild eyes had become moist by his words; "and
life will certainly," continued she, "feel thus clear, thus full, when
we shall have become ever entirely freed from the chrysalis; not from
the bonds of the body only, but of the soul also. Perhaps these moments
are given to us here on earth to allure us up to the Father's house, and
to let us feel its air."

"A beautiful thought, Leonore," said her brother. "Thus these gleams of
light are truly revelations of our inward, actual, here-yet-enslaved
life. Good God! how glorious that--But ah! the long, long moments of
darkness, what are they?"

"Trials of patience, times of preparation," replied Leonore, tenderly
smiling. "Besides, the bright moments come again and gladden us with
their light, and that so much the more frequently the further one
advances in perfection. But one must, at the same time, learn to have
patience with oneself, Henrik, and here, in this life, to wait for
oneself."

"You have spoken a true word, sister. I must kiss your hand for it,"
said Henrik. "Ah, yes, if----"

"Be now a little less sensible and æsthetic," exclaimed "our eldest,"
"and come here and drink a cup of tea! See here, Henrik, a cup of strong
warm tea, which will do your head good. But this evening and to-morrow
morning you must take a table-spoonful of my elixir!"

"From that defend us all, ye good--_Vi ringrazia carissima sorella!_"
said Henrik. "But--but charming Gabriele! a drop of port wine in the tea
would make it more powerful, without turning me into one of those
miserable beings of whom Louise is so afraid! Thanks, sister dear!
_Fermez les yeux_, O Mahomet!" and with an obeisance before Louise,
Henrik conveyed the cup to his lips.

Later in the evening Henrik stood in one of the library windows looking
out into the moonlight. Leonore went up to him and looked into his face
with that mild, humbly questioning glance to which the heart so
willingly opened itself, and which was peculiar to her.

"You are so pale, Henrik," said she, disquieted.

"It is extraordinary," said he, half laughing at himself; "do you see,
Leonore, how the tops of the fir-trees there in the churchyard bow
themselves in the wind and beckon? I cannot conceive why, but this
nodding and beckoning distresses me wonderfully; I feel it in my very
heart."

"That comes naturally enough, Henrik," returned she, "because you are
not well. Shall we not go out a little? It is such lovely moonshine! The
fresh air will perhaps do you good."

"Will you go with me, Leonore?" said he. "Yes, that is a good idea!"

Gabriele found it, however, rather poor, and called her brother and
sister Samoyedes, Laplanders, Esquimaux, and such like, who would go
wandering about in the middle of a winter's night. Nevertheless these
two went forth jestingly and merrily arm in arm.

"Is it not too windy for you?" asked Henrik, whilst he endeavoured
carefully to shield his sister from the wind.

"The wind is not cold," replied Leonore, "and it is particularly
charming to me to walk by your side while it roars around us, and while
the snow-flakes dance about in the moonshine like little elves."

"Nay, you feel then like me!" said Henrik; "with you, sisters, I am
ever calm and happy; but I don't know how it is, but now for some time
other people often plague and irritate me----"

"Ah, Henrik," remarked Leonore, "is not that someway your own fault?"

"Are you thinking of Stjernhök, Leonore?" asked he.

"Yes."

"So am I," continued he, "and perhaps you are right; yes, I will
willingly concede that I have often been unjust towards him, and
unreasonably violent, but he has excited me to it. Why has he made me so
often oppressively feel his superiority? so often taken away from me my
own joy in my own endeavours, and almost always treated me with coldness
and depreciation?"

Leonore made no answer, the moonlight lit a quiet tear in her eye, and
Henrik continued with increasing violence:

"I could have loved him so much! He had, through the originality of his
character, his strength, and his whole individuality, a great influence,
a great power over me; but he has misused it; he has treated me
severely, precisely in the instances in which I approached him nearest.
He has flung from him the devotion which I cherished for him. I will
tell you the whole truth, Leonore, and how this has happened between us.
You know that in the University, about three years ago, a sort of
literary society of young men gathered themselves about me. Perhaps they
esteemed my literary talents too highly, and might mislead me--I could
almost believe so myself, but I was the favourite of the day in the
circle in which my life moved; perhaps, on that account, I became
presumptuous; perhaps a tone of pretension betrayed itself in me, and a
false, one-sided direction was visible in the poems which I then
published: nevertheless, these poems made some little noise in the
world. Shortly, however, after their appearance a criticism on them came
out, which made a yet greater noise, on account of its power, its
severity, and also its satirical wit. Its acrimony spared neither my
work nor my character as a poet, and it produced almost universally a
re-action against me. It appeared to me severe and one-sided; and even
now, at this moment, it appears to me not otherwise, although I can now
see its justice much better than at the time.

"The anonymous author of the critique upon me was Stjernhök, and he did
not in the slightest deny it. He considered it as being much less
directed against me personally, than against the increasing influence of
the party of which I was a sort of chief. Even before this I had begun
to withdraw myself from his power, which I always felt to be oppressive;
and this new blow did not, by any means, tend to reunite us. His severe
criticism had made me observant of my faults; but yet I do not know
whether it would have produced any other effect than pain, had I not at
this time returned home to you; and at home, through the beneficial
influence of my own family, a new strength and a purer direction had
been aroused in me. That was the time in which my father, with
indescribable goodness, and in complot with you all, sold the half of
his library to furnish me with the means of foreign travel. Yes, you
have called forth a new being in me; and all my poems, and all my
writings, are now designed to prove to you that I am not unworthy of
you. Ah, yes! I love you warmly and deeply--but it is all over with
Stjernhök; the love which I cherished for him has changed itself into
bitterness."

"Ah, Henrik, Henrik, do not let it be so!" said Leonore. "Stjernhök is
indeed a noble, a good man, even if, at the same time, too severe. But
really he loves you as well as we, but you two will not understand one
another; and Henrik, the last time you were really unjust to him--you
seemed as if you could hardly bear him."

"I hardly can, Leonore," said he. "It is a feeling stronger than myself.
I don't know what evil spirit it is which now, for some time, has set
itself firmly in my heart; but there it is steadfastly rooted; and if I
am aware only of Stjernhök's presence, it is as if a sharp sword passed
through me; before him my heart contracts itself; and if he only touch
me, I feel as if burning lead went through my veins."

"Henrik! dearest Henrik!" exclaimed Leonore with pain, "it is really
terrible! Ah! make only the attempt with yourself; conquer your
feelings, and extend the hand of reconciliation to him."

"It is too late for that, Leonore," said Henrik. "Yes, if it were
necessary for him, it would be easy; but what does he trouble himself
about me? He never loved me, never esteemed either my efforts or my
ability. And perhaps it may be with some justice that he does not think
so very highly of my talents. What have I done? And sometimes it seems
to me, even in the future, that I never shall do any thing great; that
my powers are limited, and that my spring-time is past. Stjernhök's, on
the contrary, is yet to come; he belongs to that class which mounts
slowly, but on that account all the more steadily. I see now, much
better than I did formerly, how far he stands beyond me, and how much
higher he will rise--and his knowledge is martyrdom to me."

"But wherefore," pleaded Leonore, "these dark thoughts and feelings,
dear Henrik, when your future appears fuller of hope than ever before?
Your beautiful poetry; your prize essay, which is certain to bring you
honour; the prospect of an advantageous post, a sphere of action which
will be dear to you--all this, which in a few months will so animate
your heart--why has it at this time so lost its power over you?"

"I cannot tell," replied he; "but for some time now I have been, and am
much changed; I have no faith in my good fortune; it seems to me as if
all my beautiful hopes will vanish like a dream."

"And even if it were so," said Leonore questioningly, with humility and
tenderness, "could you not find happiness and peace at home; in the
occupation of your beloved studies; in the life with us, who love you
solely, and for your own sake?"

Henrik pressed his sister's arm to his side, but answered nothing; and a
violent passing gust of wind compelled him to stand still for a moment.

"Horrible weather!" said he, wrapping his cloak round his sister at the
same time.

"But this is your favourite weather," remarked she jestingly.

"_Was_, you should say," returned he; "now I do not like it, perhaps
because it produces a feeling in me which distresses me." With these
words he took his sister's hand and laid it on his heart. His heart beat
wildly and strongly; its beating was almost audible.

"Heavens!" exclaimed Leonore, alarmed, "Henrik, what is this?--is it
often thus?"

"Only occasionally;--I have had it now for some time," replied he; "but
don't be uneasy on this account; and, above all things, say nothing to
my mother or Gabriele about it. I have spoken with Munter on the
subject; he has prescribed for me, and does not think it of much
consequence. To-day I have had it without intermission, and perhaps I am
from that cause somewhat hypochondriacal. Forgive me, dear Leonore, that
I have teased you about it. I am much better and livelier now; this
little walk has done me good--if you only don't get cold, Leonore, or
you would certainly be punished, or at all events be threatened, with
Louise's elixir. But does there not drive a travelling carriage towards
our door, exactly as if it would stop there? Can it be Eva? The carriage
stops--it is certainly Eva!"

"Eva! Eva!" exclaimed Leonore, with cordial delight; and both brother
and sister ran so quickly to the gate that she was received into their
arms as she dismounted from the carriage.


CHAPTER IV.

EVA.


Among the agreeable circumstances which occur in a happy home may
certainly be reckoned the return to its bosom of one of its beloved
members. So returns the bee to the safe hive with her harvest of honey,
after her flight abroad over the meadows of the earth. How much is there
not mutually to relate, to hear, to see, and to enjoy! Every cloud in
the heaven of home vanishes then; all is sunshine and joy; and it must
be bad indeed if they do not find one another lovelier and improved, for
when everything goes on right here, every advancing footstep in life
must tend in a certain manner to improvement.

Bright, indeed, did Eva's return make the hours of sunshine in the Frank
family! The mutual love which demonstrated itself in embraces, smiles,
tears, laughter, sweet words of greeting, and a thousand tokens of joy
and tenderness, made the first hours vanish in a lively intoxication,
and then, when all had become quieter and they looked nearer about them,
all looks and thoughts gathered themselves still about Eva with rapture;
her beauty seemed now in its full bloom, and a captivating life seemed
to prevail in her looks, in her behaviour, in her every motion, which
hitherto had not been seen. Her dress of the most modern fashion, a
certain development and style about her, a bewitching case of manner,
all evinced the elegant circles of the capital, and exerted their magic
over her friends, and charmed them all, but especially Gabriele, who
followed her beautiful sister with beaming looks.

Bergström gave way to his feelings in the kitchen, and exclaimed,
"Mamselle Eva is quite divine!" Never had the blond Ulla so entirely
agreed with him before.

Leonore was the only one who regarded Eva with a tender yet at the same
time troubled eye. She saw a something worldly in Eva's exterior and
demeanour, which was a presage to her that a great and not happy change
had taken place in her beloved sister. Nor was it long before Leonore's
foreboding proved itself to be right. Eva had not been many hours in the
house before it was plainly visible that domestic affairs had but little
interest for her, and that parents and family and friends were not to
her all that they had been before.

Eva's soul was entirely occupied by one object, which laid claim to all
her thoughts and feelings, and this was Major R----. His handsome
person, his brilliant talents; his amiability, his love; the parties in
which she had met him, the balls in which she had danced with him; the
occasions on which they had played parts together--in short, all the
romantic unfoldings of their connexion, were the pictures which now
alone lived in her heart, and danced around her fancy, now heated by
worldly happiness.

The grave expression of her father's countenance, as he heard her first
mention the Major, prevented her during this first evening from
repeating his name.

But when afterwards she was alone with her sisters, when the sweet hour
of talk came, which between dear friends, on such occasions, generally
extends itself from night till morning, Eva gave free course to all with
which her soul was filled, and related to her sisters at large her
romance of the last year, in which several rival lovers figured, but of
which Major R---- was the hero. Nor was it without self-satisfaction
that Eva represented herself as the worshipped and conquering heroine
amid a crowd of rival ladies. Her soul was so occupied by all these
circumstances, her mind was so excited, that she did not observe the
embarrassment of her sisters during her relation; she saw neither their
disquiet, their constrained smiles, nor their occasionally depressed
looks.

Nor was it till when, with eyes beaming with joy, she confided to them
that Major R---- would soon come to the city, where he had relatives;
that he would spend the Christmas with them, and then ask her hand from
her parents, that the veil fell from her eyes. Louise expressed herself
strongly against Major R----, wondered at her sister, and lamented that
she could endure such a man; it was not, she said, what she had expected
from her. Eva, very much wounded, defended the Major with warmth, and
talked of intolerance and prejudice. In consequence of this, Louise's
indignation was increased; Gabriele began to weep, and Louise bore her
company; she seemed to look upon Eva as on one lost. Leonore was calmer;
she spoke not one word which could wound her sister, but sighed deeply,
and looked with quiet grief upon the beloved but misguided sister; and
then seeing what a tragical turn the conversation was taking, said, with
all that expression of calm sincerity so peculiarly her own:

"Do not let us this evening speak further on this subject; do not let us
disturb our joy. We have now Eva with us at home, and shall have time
enough to talk and to think--and then all will be cleared up. Is it not
quite for the best that we sleep on this affair? Eva must be weary after
her journey, and our 'blue-eyed one' must not weep on this first
evening."

Leonore's advice was taken, and with a mutual "forgive," Louise, Eva,
and Gabriele embraced and separated for the night. Leonore was happy to
be alone with Eva, and listened undisturbedly through the whole night to
her relations. The good Leonore!

Major Victor R. was universally known as one of those who make sport
with female hearts, and Judge Frank regarded sport of this kind with a
severity very uncommon among his sex, especially where, as was the case
in this instance, selfishness, and not thoughtlessness, led to it. The
Major, ten years before this time, had married a young and rich girl
connected with the Judge's family; and the only fault of the young wife,
then sixteen, had been that of loving her husband too tenderly--nay,
even in adoring one who repaid her love with relentless severity and
faithlessness, under which the poor Amelia drooped, and, in the second
year of her marriage, died; but not without having bequeathed to the
unworthy husband all the property over which she had any control.

These were the very means by which R. now was enabled to pursue his
brilliant and reckless career. He always made his court to one of the
beauties of the day. He had been several times betrothed, but had broken
off the affair again without the smallest regard to the reputation or to
the feelings of the girl, upon whom by this means he had cast a
stain--nay, indeed, he secretly regarded it as an honour to himself to
make such victims, and to cause hearts to bleed for him--that cooled the
burning thirst of his self-love.

The world did justice to his agreeable and splendid talents; but the
noble of his own sex, as well as of the other, esteemed him but very
lightly, inasmuch as they considered him a person without true worth.
The thoughts of a union between this man and his beloved daughter
occasioned a storm in the bosom of the Judge.

Such was the information regarding the man whom she loved that met Eva
on her return home. Everybody was unanimously against him. What Eva
spoke in his excuse produced no effect; what she said of his true and
deep devotion to her, evidently nobody credited; and over her own love,
which had made the world so beautiful, which had produced the most
delicious feelings in her breast, and had opened to her a heaven of
happiness, people mourned and wept, and regarded it as a misfortune,
nay, even as a degradation. Wounded to the inmost of her soul, Eva drew
herself back, as it were, from her own family, and accused them to
herself of selfishness and unreasonableness. Louise, perhaps, deserved
somewhat of this reproach; but Leonore was pure, pure as the angels of
heaven; still Leonore mourned over Eva's love, and on that account Eva
closed her heart against her also.

The variance, which in consequence of all this existed between Eva and
her family, became only yet greater when Major R. arrived, shortly after
her, at the city. He was a tall handsome man, of perhaps
five-and-thirty; of a haughty, but somewhat trifling exterior; his
countenance was gay and blooming, and his look clear and bold. Great
practice in the world, and an inimitable ease and confidence, gave to
his demeanour and conversation that irresistible power which these
qualities exercise so greatly in society.

On his visit to the Franks, the Judge and he exchanged some glances, in
which both read that neither could endure the other. The Major, however,
let nothing of all this be seen; was perfectly candid and gay; and while
he directed his conversation especially to Elise, spoke scarcely one
word to Eva, though he looked much at her. After the first stiff
salutation, the Judge went again into his study, for the very appearance
of this man was painful to him. Leonore was polite, nay, almost friendly
to him, for she would willingly have loved one whom Eva loved. Assessor
Munter was present during this visit; but when he had seen, for a few
minutes, the glances which the Major cast upon Eva, and their magic
influence over her, and had observed and had read her whole heart in a
timid glance which she raised to her beloved, he withdrew silently and
hastily.

The Major came but seldom to the house, for the eye of the Judge
appeared to have the power of keeping him at a distance; on the
contrary, he managed it so that he saw Eva almost daily out of the
house. He met her when she went out, and accompanied her home from
church. Invitations came; sledging-parties and balls were arranged; and
Eva, who formerly was so well pleased with home, who had often given up
the pleasures of the world for the domestic evening circle, Eva appeared
to find nothing now pleasing at home; appeared only to be able to live
in those circles and those pleasures in which Major R. shone, and where
she could see herself distinguished by him. Precisely, therefore, on
account of these rencontres of the two, the family went as little as
possible into society. Still, notwithstanding all this, Eva's wishes
upon the whole were favoured. Leonore accompanied her faithfully
wherever she wished. The Judge was gloomy and disturbed in temper; the
mother was mild and accommodating; and as to Eva, she was in a high
degree sensitive; whilst whatever concerned her love, or seemed to
oppose her wishes in the slightest degree, brought her to tears and
hysterical sobs, and her friends became ever more and more aware how
violent and exclusive her love was to Major R. The mere glimpse of him,
the sound of his steps, the tone of his voice, shook her whole frame.
All earlier affectionate relationships had lost their power over her
heart.

It not unfrequently happens that people, whether it arises from physical
or moral causes, become wonderfully unlike themselves. Irritability,
violence, indiscretion, and unkindness, suddenly reveal themselves in a
hitherto gentle and amiable character, and, as if by a magic stroke, a
beautiful form has been transformed into a witch. It requires a great
deal, under such circumstances, to keep friends warm and unchanged. A
great demand of goodness, a great demand of clearness of vision, is made
from any one when, under these circumstances, he is required to remain
true in the same love, to persevere in the same faith, to wait patiently
for the time when the magic shall lose its power, when the changed one
shall come back again; and yet he, all the time, be able only to present
himself by quiet prayers, mild looks, and affectionate care! Probably
otherwise he never might have come back again. I say _great purity of
vision_, because the true friend never loses sight of the heavenly image
of his friend; but sees it through every veil of casualty, even when it
is concealed from all, nay, even from the faulty one's self! He has
faith in it; he loves it; he lives for it, and says, "Wait! have
patience! it will go over, and then he (or she) comes back again!" And
whoever has such a friend, comes back indeed!

So stood the quiet, affectionate Leonore on the side of her altered
sister.

All this time Henrik was beneficial to his whole family, and appeared to
have regained all his former amiable animation, in order therewith to
eradicate every disturbing sensation from the bosom of home. He
accompanied his family, more than he had ever done before, into society,
and had always a watchful eye on his sister and the Major.

Before long the Major declared himself, and asked for Eva's hand. Her
parents had prepared themselves for this event, and had decided on their
line of conduct. They intended not to make their child unhappy by a
decided negative to the wishes of her heart; but they had determined to
demand a year of trial both from her and her lover, during which time
they should have no intercourse with each other, should exchange no
letters, and should consider themselves as free from every mutual
obligation; and that then again after this interval of time, if they
two, the Major and Eva, still wished it, the question of their union
might again he brought forward. This middle path had been proposed by
Elise, who, through a progressively inward, and more perfect fulfilment
of duties, had acquired an ever-increasing power over her husband, and
thus induced him to accede to it, at the same time that she endeavoured
to infuse into him the hope which she herself cherished, namely, either
that Eva, during the time of probation, would discover the unworthiness
of the Major, and won over by the wishes and the tenderness of her
family, would conquer her love, or, on the other hand, that the Major,
ennobled by love and constant to her, would become worthy of her. It was
one of the most favourite and cherished axioms of the Judge, that every
man had the power of improving himself, and he willingly conceded that
for this end there existed no more powerful means than a virtuous love.

The Judge now talked energetically yet tenderly with his daughter;
explained clearly to her the terms of this connexion, without concealing
from her how bitter to him had been, and still was, the thought of this
union, and appealed to her own sense and reason whether too much had
been required in this prescribed time of trial.

Eva shed many tears; but deeply affected by the goodness of her parents,
consented to their wishes, and promised, though not without pain, to
fulfil them. The Judge wrote to the Major, who had made his declaration
by letter, a candid and noble, but by no means sugared, answer; wherein
he required from him, as a man of honour, that he should by no means
whatever induce Eva to swerve from the promises which she had made to
her parents, and by this means disturb her hitherto so happy connexion
with her own family. This letter, which the father allowed his daughter
to read, and which occasioned her fresh tears, whilst she in vain
endeavoured to persuade him to remove expressions which she considered
too severe, but which he, on the contrary, considered too mild, was
despatched the same day, and all was again quieter.

Put the butter in a spider, when it bubbles add the apple cut in dice
and onion, fry brown, then stir in the curry powder, the chopped pepper
and tomato and nuts, let all simmer together for a few minutes, then add
the corn, and cook gently for twenty minutes. If it is too thick a little
water must be added. Serve in a shallow vegetable dish or on a platter.
Fresh corn may be used. Boil and then cut from the cob, cook the cobs
in the water the corn was boiled in long enough to extract all the
good from them, and use this broth for the curry.

CROQUETTES OF SALSIFY AND CELERIAC.

Two roots of salsify and one large celeriac. Wash and scrape them
well.

Cut in pieces and cover with vinegar and water and let them stand
one hour--this will prevent them from turning dark. Pour off the
vinegar and water and nearly cover them with boiling water, cook until
very tender, mash fine and smooth, season with pepper and salt, and
a few drops of onion juice, put in a saucepan over the fire, and add
a tablespoonful of butter, two tablespoonfuls of milk, and just before
removing from the fire add a tablespoonful of cream and one egg, stir
well, turn out into a bowl and set aside to cool.

When cold make into croquettes, dip in egg and cracker crumbs and fry
in a basket in boiling oil.

INDIAN CURRY OF VEGETABLES.

Equal quantities of cauliflower and potatoes, raw. The cauliflower cut
into flowerettes and the potatoes into dice.

Put them into a spider with a heaping tablespoonful of butter, a
rounded teaspoonful of curry powder, and let them simmer for a few
minutes without taking color.

Then add two tablespoonfuls of tomatoes, an even teaspoonful of
grated onion and one of chopped green pepper, fill up the spider
with boiling water, and set it back on the stove where it will stew
gently until the vegetables are tender and the water has been reduced
to one-third the quantity.

It should be as thick as ordinary gravy; if not, add a scant teaspoonful
of flour. Just before it is done stir in a heaping tablespoonful of
butter. Turn it into a shallow vegetable dish and serve very
hot.

The spider should be kept covered while the curry is cooking.

It is very good without the green pepper.

This may be warmed over, and is better the second day than the
first.

KOHLRABI.

Peel them, cut in slices and pour on just enough boiling water to
cook them.

Cook until tender. When nearly done add salt. Make a cream sauce, season
with white pepper, salt and a little grated nutmeg, if liked, toss
them in this sauce, let it boil up once and serve very hot.

MARROWFAT BEANS BAKED.

Pick over carefully and wash one quart of beans, soak in water over
night.

In the morning drain, add fresh cold water and bring to a boil, drain
again, and turn them into a four-quart stone jar, put in a generous cup
of butter, two large tablespoonfuls of Porto Rico molasses, two
tablespoonfuls of salt, less than a teaspoonful of pepper, and fill
the jar with boiling water.

Put in the oven, covering the jar with a tin cover. It must be cooked in
a slow oven eight or nine hours--the water ought to last until the beans
are perfectly cooked, and when done a good gravy left, about a
third of the depth of the beans in the jar.

Beans cooked in this way are very nutritious and easily digested. Keep
them covered for two or three hours while cooking. Serve with Chili
sauce.

BAYO OR MEXICAN BEANS.--No. 1.

Put one cup of Bayo or Mexican red beans to soak over night, in the
morning drain off the water and put them in a saucepan with plenty of
fresh water, let them cook for two hours, drain again, and add to them
three fresh tomatoes, skinned and cut small, or a cup of canned
tomatoes, and half an onion cut as small as the beans, then cover with
boiling water and cook for one hour.

Then stir in a very generous tablespoonful of butter, and salt and
pepper to taste.

MEXICAN BEANS.--No. 2.

Soak over night a pint of beans and boil as in recipe No. 1 until
soft.

Then melt a tablespoonful of butter in a spider; when it bubbles put
in a small onion chopped very fine, and fry a delicate brown. Drain the
beans and turn them into the spider, add a cup of boiling water and stir
until the water becomes thick like cream.

EMPARADAS (a Mexican Recipe).

Take some beans cooked as in Mexican Beans No. 1 and mash them to a paste.
Then roll out some puff paste very thin--about the sixth of an inch--cut
this into rounds with a large patty cutter, put a spoonful of the bean
purée on the half of each round, wet the edges of the pastry, cover,
press the edges together, making a half moon, brush them over with
beaten egg and bake in a hot oven, or they may be fried in boiling
oil or fat until a delicate brown.

FRIJOLES FRITOS.

A pint of beans cooked as in recipe for Bayo or Mexican Beans No. 1. Rub
them smooth in a mortar, put them into a spider with a quarter of a
cup of butter and fry for a few minutes, then add half a cup of
grated Parmesan cheese, mix thoroughly and serve hot.

BROILED MUSHROOMS.

Select large flap mushrooms for broiling. Wash, skin and stem them, lay
them on a dish, sprinkle with salt and pepper and pour a little olive
oil over each mushroom, let them stand one hour. Broil on a gridiron
over a nice clear fire. Place on a dish and serve with the following
sauce: Prepare the stock as before by boiling the stems and skins
in water and then straining.

Mince two or three mushrooms fine, add to the stock, with a teaspoonful
of minced parsley, a few drops of onion juice, a small lump of butter,
cook for fifteen minutes, then add a cupful of cream, an even teaspoonful
of flour wet with some of the cream and rubbed smooth. Let it all cook
together for three minutes, then add the beaten yolk of an egg, stir
well, remove from the fire at once and serve.

MUSHROOMS ON TOAST.

Half a pound of mushrooms, wash, stem and skin as before. Cut into dice,
put in a saucepan with the juice of half a lemon, a tablespoonful of
butter and a slice of onion, a sprig of parsley and one clove,
tied together in a thin muslin bag. Set the saucepan on the fire and
stew gently until nearly dry, then add water almost to cover them,
salt and pepper to taste, and let them cook fifteen minutes. Take out
the bag of onion, etc., and thicken with one egg yolk well beaten,
and a small cupful of cream.

Have some slices of toast on a platter, buttered and moistened with
a little hot milk, pour the mushrooms over them, garnish with parsley
and serve hot.

    MUSHROOMS STEWED IN A
      CREAM SAUCE.
    
      Make a pint of cream
    sauce, prepare half a
      pound of mushrooms as
    in the preceding recipe,
      cut into dice, and stew
    in the sauce until very
      tender. Have the toast
    prepared as above
      and pour the mushrooms over
    it.
      Garnish with parsley and
    serve at once. They may be
      served in pastry
    shells as an entrée, if
      preferred.
    
      
    TOMATOES STUFFED WITH
      MUSHROOMS.--No. 1.
    
      Wash, skin and stem
    half a pound of mushrooms,
      chop very fine, add two
    even teaspoonfuls of finely
      minced parsley, a few drops of lemon juice, the same of onion
juice, and salt and pepper to taste.

Melt two tablespoonfuls of butter in a saucepan and cook all
together in this until the mushrooms are tender, then add a cupful of
stale bread crumbs and one egg yolk, stir well and remove from the
fire. Have half a dozen perfectly ripe tomatoes, washed and wiped,
cut a slice from the top of each, take out the core and seeds, and
fill with the mushroom stuffing.

Bake in a moderate oven until done.

The skins should be removed in the usual way before stuffing.

TOMATOES STUFFED WITH MUSHROOMS.

--No. 2.

Wash and wipe the tomatoes, but do not remove the skins. Cut in half,
take out the core and a few of the seeds. Fill with the same forcemeat
as in the preceding recipe and cover the top with it, place in a
pan with a little water to keep from burning, bake in a moderate
oven until soft, remove carefully from the pan, place on a platter,
garnish with parsley and serve.

ESCALLOPED TOMATOES.

Strain from a quart can of tomatoes one cupful of water.

Put a layer of the tomatoes in a baking dish, season with salt, pepper
and a little sugar, cover with a layer of bread crumbs, dot freely
with bits of butter, then put another layer of tomatoes, and lastly a
layer of bread crumbs, with bits of butter, and sprinkle with a
dessertspoonful of sugar.

Bake forty-five minutes, and serve in the dish in which it is baked.

TOMATOES WITH EGG.

Drain the water from a can of tomatoes, press them through a colander,
put into a saucepan over the fire, season with salt and pepper, a
little sugar, if acid, and a few drops of onion juice.

Let them cook a little, and just before serving add the well-beaten
yolks of two eggs, stir well until it thickens, and remove immediately
from the fire or it will curdle.

FRENCH CARROTS IN BROWN SAUCE.

Select the smallest French carrots, wash and scrape them and boil until
tender in as little water as possible. When done drain from the water,
using it to make the sauce. Put a tablespoonful of butter into a
spider, when hot stir in a tablespoonful of flour, stir until
a dark brown, add gradually the water the carrots were boiled in,
season with salt and pepper, simmer until thick and smooth,
add the carrots, and when hot serve.

FRENCH CARROTS AND PEAS.

Take a pint of young peas and two bunches of French carrots, cut in
slices or fancy shapes (stars or clover leaves), cook each vegetable by
itself in as little water as will cook them. When they are
both tender put them together into a saucepan, add a heaping tablespoonful
of butter and half a tablespoonful of flour rubbed together, and if
there is not enough water left, add enough to make a gravy. Canned instead
of fresh peas may be used; drain the water from the peas and stew
the carrots in it, and follow the recipe as above.

SPINACH PUDDING.

Make a sauce of one ounce and a half of butter, one ounce of flour, a
scant half cup of rich milk, half a teaspoonful of sugar, a grating
of nutmeg, if liked, and salt and pepper to taste.

When this comes to a boil, add an even cupful of spinach that has been
cooked and finely chopped, and from which the water has been well
pressed out. Remove from the stove, and stir into it two beaten eggs.
Grease a mould, sprinkle it with dried and sifted bread crumbs, turn the
pudding into this, set the mould in a pan of hot water, put in the
oven, cover it to prevent browning and bake nearly three-quarters of an
hour. Turn out on a platter, have ready a cream sauce to pour around
the pudding, garnish with hard-boiled eggs, cut in quarters
lengthwise, and parsley.

If any is left over, cut in slices, and warm over in a cream sauce and
serve for luncheon. It will keep for days.

SPINACH BALLS.

Put a slightly heaping tablespoonful of butter, a tablespoonful of
cream, and half a teaspoonful of sugar into a saucepan on the
stove, mix well, and when it boils add a heaping tablespoonful of
flour--as much as will stay on the spoon--let it come to a boil, and
then add three-quarters of a cup of cooked and finely chopped spinach,
beat well and remove from the fire. When cold add two eggs, one at
a time, season with salt and pepper to taste and half a saltspoonful
of powdered mace.
Have a saucepan of boiling water, slightly salted, on the stove;
dip a tablespoon in cold water, and then take up enough of the
spinach mixture to make an oblong cake, in shape like an egg cut
in half lengthwise, then dip the spoon in the boiling water and let
the cake float off.

Use all the mixture in this way. The balls will cook in four or five
minutes, and they must not boil too fast or they will break. Let
them drain in a colander while making a cream sauce, and when the
sauce is made put the balls into it and let them come to a boil,
turn out on a platter and garnish with parsley.

TOMATOES AND MUSHROOMS.

Put on a pint of tomatoes in a saucepan and cook for fifteen or twenty
minutes until nearly all the water has evaporated, season with salt and
pepper, add a generous tablespoonful of butter, a tablespoonful
of bread crumbs and half a pint of fresh mushrooms chopped fine.

Cook until the mushrooms are tender. Have some bread cut in nice slices
toasted and slightly moistened with warm milk.

Pour the tomatoes and mushrooms over it and serve very hot.

TO BOIL RICE PLAIN.

Wash half a cupful of rice, drain from the water, have on the fire a very
large saucepan nearly full of salted boiling water. Turn the rice
into this and boil hard for twenty minutes, pour all into a colander,
drain well, and put the rice in a smaller saucepan on the back of the
stove, where it will be kept warm, without cooking, until all the moisture
has evaporated.

Then serve.

CAULIFLOWER WITH DRAWN BUTTER.

Select a nice white cauliflower, take off all the leaves, and cut enough
of the stem off to allow it to stand well in the dish it is to be
served in. Put it into a saucepan, cover with boiling water, and when it
is nearly done add salt, as cooking it long with salt turns it brown.
The usual time to cook a cauliflower is about twenty minutes. Try it
with a fork, and if it is tender remove carefully from the water,
let it drain in a colander while preparing a drawn butter.

Then put into a hot vegetable dish, pour the sauce over and serve.

FOR THE DRAWN BUTTER.--Melt a large heaping tablespoonful of butter,
and stir into it a heaping teaspoonful of flour, let them cook
together without browning and add by degrees a cup of hot milk.

ESCALLOPED CAULIFLOWER.

Cut a cauliflower into flowerettes, cover with boiling water into
a saucepan and cook until tender, let them drain in a colander while
the sauce is being prepared.

Make the usual cream sauce, enough to cover the cauliflower. When the
sauce is done add two heaping tablespoonfuls of American Edam or grated
Parmesan cheese, put the flowerettes into a baking dish, pour the
sauce over them, sprinkle the top with a little of the cheese, and
stand the dish in the oven for a few minutes to brown.

ESCALLOPED SPAGHETTINA.

Put a good half cupful of spaghettina, broken in bits, into a saucepan
of boiling water with an even tablespoonful of salt, boil
three-quarters of an hour, turn into a colander and let it drain
while the sauce is being made.

Prepare it exactly as for escalloped cauliflower and finish in the
same way.

CHESTNUT PURÉE.

Shell some large imported chestnuts and put over the fire in boiling
water, let them cook for a few minutes, rub the skins off, and cover
again with fresh boiling water, boil until tender.

Press through a sieve, and season with butter, pepper and salt.

PURÉE OF DRIED WHITE BEANS.

Pick over and wash a pint of beans and soak over night. In the morning
drain off the water, put the beans into a saucepan with cold water
to cover them, and cook until tender--a little more than an hour. Press
through a sieve, add a generous tablespoonful of butter, salt and
pepper to taste, put into a saucepan, make very hot and serve.

SQUASH PUDDING.

A large heaping cup of Hubbard squash, measured after it is baked
and mashed smooth, a generous heaping tablespoonful of butter,
melted and stirred into the squash, a heaping teaspoonful of flour
mixed with four tablespoonfuls of milk and one egg beaten light,
salt and pepper to taste.

Mix well and turn into a buttered pudding dish and bake about twenty
minutes. Serve in the dish in which it is baked. If any is left over,
make it up into little round cakes and brown in butter for
luncheon.

SQUASH FRITTERS.

A heaping cupful of Hubbard squash baked and mashed, stir into it
a heaping tablespoonful of butter, a heaping tablespoonful of flour,
a cup of milk, salt and pepper to taste, and one egg beaten light.

Mix well and bake or fry as griddle cakes.

SUMMER SQUASH.

Wash and peel two large summer squash, cut in small pieces and
remove the seeds, cover with boiling water and cook until tender.

Drain in a colander and press gently as much of the water out as possible
with a potato masher, then mash through the colander into a saucepan,
put it on the stove and let it cook until the squash is quite dry,
taking care that it does not burn. Then add four heaping tablespoonfuls
of butter, a teaspoonful of sugar, and salt and pepper to taste.

RICE CROQUETTES.

Put three-quarters of a cup of milk in a saucepan over the fire, with
a generous tablespoonful of butter, a heaping teaspoonful of
sugar, and when it comes to a boil add a cup and a half of boiled rice,
a saltspoonful of powdered cinnamon or nutmeg, if preferred, and salt
to taste.

Mix well, let it come to a boil and add a beaten egg, remove
from the fire, turn into a plate to get cold, form into cylinders
and cook in boiling fat.

FRICASSEE OF CELERIAC.

Wash and peel the celery roots, cut them into dice and cook until tender
in as little water as possible, and when nearly done add a little
salt.
Make a sauce of two tablespoonfuls of butter and one tablespoonful
of flour cooked together until smooth without browning.

Then add a cup of rich milk, and when this boils turn the celery dice with
the water in which they were boiled into the sauce, season to taste
with salt and pepper. When ready to serve beat one egg yolk with a
tablespoonful of cream and stir carefully into it, remove at once from
the fire, pour into a vegetable dish, sprinkle with a little parsley
minced fine, and serve.

YELLOW TURNIP RAGOUT.

Take one large yellow turnip, peel, wash and wipe dry, cut in
oblong pieces. Brown a good lump of butter in a spider, simmer the
turnip slices in this until nicely browned, taking care not to burn them.
Put all into a saucepan with only water enough to cook them tender,
cover tightly, when done, brown a little butter and flour together
to make the gravy the proper consistency, season with pepper and
salt and serve.

TOMATOES STUFFED WITH CHEESE.

Cut six tomatoes in half, scoop out part of the inside and put this
in a saucepan and cook until nearly all the water has been absorbed,
then add half a teaspoonful of sugar, one heaping tablespoonful of
butter, two heaping tablespoonfuls of grated cheese, two heaping
tablespoonfuls of dried bread crumbs, pepper and salt to taste, and
a few drops of onion juice.

Sprinkle the tomatoes with salt, pepper, a little sugar and grated
cheese, then fill them with the dressing, dot them with tiny bits
of butter and sift over them a few bread crumbs. Melt half a teaspoonful
of butter in a baking pan, put the tomatoes in and bake twenty or
twenty-five minutes. Take them out carefully when done, arrange
on a dish, make a little gravy in the pan in which they were baked by
adding a little more butter, half a cupful of milk, a heaping teaspoonful
of flour, and salt and pepper to taste. Serve in a sauceboat.

JERUSALEM ARTICHOKES.

Wash and peel a dozen artichokes, selecting them as nearly the same size
as possible. Cover with boiling water and cook until tender, drain at
once and pour over them a cream sauce, sprinkle a little finely chopped
parsley over them and serve.

ASPARAGUS.

Scrape and wash as much asparagus as is needed, cut the stalks the same
length, tie in bunches and put over the fire in boiling water, and
when nearly done add a little salt. Boil until perfectly tender, drain,
put in a dish, remove the strings and serve very hot with sauce Hollandaise
or a simple cream sauce.

POINTES D'ASPERGES.

Cut off the tender green tips of asparagus about an inch and a half long,
cover with boiling water and cook until tender. Add salt just before
they are done.

Drain and put the points into a saucepan with butter, salt and pepper and
a few spoonfuls of cream or Hollandaise sauce, mix well and do not let
it cook after the sauce is added. A little nutmeg may be used if liked.
Serve very hot.

PURPLE CABBAGE WITH CHESTNUTS.

Shred fine as for cold slaw half a purple cabbage, put half of this into
a saucepan, dot with a tablespoonful of butter, sprinkle over it a
heaping tablespoonful of sugar, a slightly heaping tablespoonful
of flour, a little salt and pepper, then the rest of the cabbage
with the same quantity of butter, sugar, etc., as before, and pour
over all a quarter of a cup of vinegar and a cupful of cold water.

Cover tightly, let it cook slowly until done, put it where it will
only simmer for two hours. If not sour enough add more vinegar. Be
careful that it does not burn. Serve in a vegetable dish and garnish
with large Italian chestnuts that have been boiled and blanched.
PARSNIP CROQUETTES WITH WALNUTS.
Take two good-sized parsnips, peel and cook them until tender in
as little water as possible. When done press the water carefully
from them and mash them smooth and fine through a colander, put
them back into the saucepan over the fire again, and add to them
two heaping tablespoonfuls of chopped walnut meats, a good heaping
tablespoonful of butter and a tablespoonful of rich cream, stir
well together and add at the last one egg well beaten. Remove from
the fire and turn out on a plate to cool, then form into cylinders,
dip in egg and bread crumbs and fry in boiling fat.
PARSNIPS FRIED.
Boil them until tender, cut them in slices lengthwise and fry brown
in a little butter.

PARSNIP FRITTERS.
Wash and scrape them and cut in slices, cover them with boiling
water, cook until tender, mash them through a colander, return them
to the fire, add to two large parsnips, a tablespoonful of butter,
salt and pepper to taste, and one egg beaten well. Mix thoroughly,
remove from the fire, and when cool make into small flat cakes and
fry in a little butter. Serve hot.

TO COOK STRING BEANS.
String thoroughly, cut in half, then in half lengthwise, throw into
boiling water and let them come to a boil. Remove from the fire,
drain, cover with cold water and let them stand in this until it
is time to cook them, then drain again, cover with boiling water
and cook for fifteen minutes, and when almost done add salt. When
tender, drain, add a lump of butter, and salt and pepper to
taste.

SPANISH ONIONS STUFFED.
Take two large Spanish onions, wash and skin and tie them to prevent
breaking. Put them into a saucepan over the fire, cover with boiling
water, cook until they can be pierced with a broom straw--from two
to three hours, according to size. When done, drain and carefully
take out the centers, leaving about a quarter of an inch for the
shell. Have ready a stuffing made from a quarter of a pound of
mushrooms prepared as before. Put these and the centers of the
onions into a chopping bowl and chop very fine. Cook them together
until the moisture from the onions has almost evaporated, then add
a generous heaping tablespoonful of butter, a tablespoonful of rich
cream, and three heaping tablespoonfuls of grated bread crumbs,
salt and pepper to taste. Fill the onion shells with this mixture,
smooth the tops nicely, sprinkle with bread crumbs, brush with egg
and a little butter. Put in the oven and brown about ten minutes,
and serve with the following sauce: Rub a generous heaping tablespoonful
of butter and a heaping tablespoonful of flour together.
Put a small teacup of milk into a saucepan on the fire, when hot
stir in the butter and flour and a quarter of a pound of mushrooms
prepared as before and chopped very fine, season with salt and
pepper to taste.
Place the onions on a platter and pour the sauce around them, garnish
with parsley and serve.

STUFFED CELERIAC WITH SPANISH SAUCE.
Put over the fire in a saucepan three-quarters of a cup of rich
milk and three ounces of butter, let them come to a boil, then add
three ounces of dried and sifted bread crumbs and an even tablespoonful
of flour. Let it cook, stirring all the time until it is a smooth
paste and detaches itself from the sides of the pan, remove from
the fire and set it aside to cool.The daughters of the house busied themselves earnestly with the
already-spoken-of plans for discovering a means of independent
subsistence for themselves, that they might lighten the anxieties of
their parents in their present adverse circumstances, and that without
being burdensome to anybody else. Eva wished at first to accept an
invitation to a country-seat in the neighbourhood, not far from that
where Major R. was at present. Axelholm opened itself, heart, arms,
main-building and wings, for the members of the Frank family. There were
wanting no opportunities for colonisation; but the Judge besought his
children so earnestly to decline all these, and for the present to
remain altogether.

"In a few months," said he, "perhaps in spring, you can do what you
like; but now--let us remain together. It is needful to me to have you
now all around me, in order to feel that I really possess you all. I
cannot bear the thoughts of losing any one of you at present."

The thought of parting appeared likewise soon to weigh heavily upon him.
Henrik, since the night of the conflagration, had scarcely had a moment
free from suffering; a violent, incessant beating of the heart had
remained since then, and the pain of this was accompanied by dangerous
attacks of spasms, which, notwithstanding all remedies, appeared rather
to increase than otherwise. This disturbed the Judge so much the more,
as now, more than ever, he loved and valued his son. Since the night of
the fire it might be said that, for the first time, affection was warm
between father and son.

The Mahomedan says beautifully, that when the angel of death approaches
man, the shadow of his wings falls upon him from a distance. From the
beginning of his illness Henrik's soul appeared to be darkened by
unfriendly shadows, and the first serious outbreak of disease revealed
itself in depression and gloom. Oh! it was not easy for the young man,
richly gifted as he was with whatever could beautify life on earth,
standing as he did at the commencement of a path where fresh laurels and
the roses of love beckoned to him, it was not easy to turn his glance
from a future like this, to listen to the words which night and day his
beating heart whispered to him--"Thou wilt descend to thy grave! nor
will I cease knocking till the door of the tomb opens to thee!"

But to a mind like Henrik's the step from darkness to light was not
wide. There was that something in his soul which enables man to say to
the Lord of life and death--

    The dreaded judgment-doom in thine own hand is writ,--
    We kiss it; bow our heads, and silently submit.

Henrik had one day a long conversation with his skilful and anxious
physician Munter, who when he left him had tears in his eyes; but over
Henrik's countenance, on the contrary, when he returned to his family,
although he was paler than usual, was a peculiarly mild and solemn
repose, which seemed to diffuse itself through his whole being. From
this moment his temper of mind was changed. He was now mild and calm,
yet at the same time more joyous and amiable than ever. His eyes had an
indescribable clearness and beauty; the shadow had passed away from his
soul altogether.

But deeper and deeper lay the shadow over one person, who from the
beginning of Henrik's illness was no longer like herself--and that was
Henrik's mother. It is true that she worked and spoke as formerly, but a
gnawing anguish lived in her; she appeared absent from the passing
business of life; and every occupation which had not reference, in some
way or other, to her son, was indifferent or painful to her. The
daughters kept carefully from her any thing which might be disturbing to
her. She devoted herself almost exclusively to her son; and many hours
full of rich enjoyment were spent by these two, who soon, perhaps--must
separate for so long!

Every strong mental excitement was interdicted to Henrik; his very
illness would not admit of it. He must renounce his beloved studies: but
his living spirit, which could not sleep, refreshed itself at the
youthful fountains of art. He occupied himself much with the works of a
poet who, during his short life, had suffered much and sung much also,
and from amid whose crown of thorns the loveliest "Lilies of Sharon" had
blossomed. The works of Stagnelius[18] were his favourite reading. He
himself composed many songs, and his mother sang them to him during the
long winter evenings. According to his opinion, his mother sang better
than his sisters; and he rejoiced himself in the pure strength which
triumphantly exalted him in this poet above the anguish and fever of
life.

It was observed that about this time he often turned the conversation,
in the presence of his mother, to the brighter side of death. It seemed
as if he wished to prepare her gradually for the possibly near
separation, and to deprive it beforehand of its bitterness. Elise had
formerly loved conversations of this kind; had loved whatever tended to
diffuse light over the darker scenes of life: but now she always grew
pale when the subject was introduced; uneasiness expressed itself in her
eyes, and she endeavoured, with a kind of terror, to put an end to it.

One evening as the family, together with the Assessor, were assembled in
the confidential hour of twilight, they began to speak about dreams, and
about the nature of sleep. Henrik mentioned the ancient comparison of
sleep and death, which he said he considered less striking as regarded
its unconsciousness than in its resemblance in the awaking.

"And in what do you especially consider this resemblance to consist?"
asked Leonore.

"In the perfect retention and re-animation of consciousness, of memory,
of the whole condition of the soul," replied he, "which is experienced
in the morning after the dark night."

"Good," said the Assessor, "and possible; but what can we _know_ about
it?"

"All that revelation has made known to us," replied Henrik, with an
animated look: "do we really need any stronger light on this subject
than that afforded us by one of our own race, who was dead, and yet rose
again from the grave, and who exhibited himself after his sleep in the
dark dwelling with precisely the same dispositions, the same
friendships, and with the most perfect remembrance of the least as well
as the greatest events of his earthly existence? What a clear, what a
friendly light has not this circumstance diffused around the dark gates
of the tomb! It has united the two worlds! it has thrown a bridge over
the gloomy deep; it enables the drooping wanderer to approach it without
horror; it enables him to say to his friends on the evening of life,
'Good night!' with the same calmness with which he can speak those words
to them on the evening of the day."

An arm was thrown convulsively round Henrik, and the voice of his mother
whispered, in a tone of despair, to him, "You must not leave us, Henrik!
you must not!" and with these words she sunk unconscious on his breast.

From this evening Henrik never again introduced in the presence of his
mother a subject which was so painful to her. He sought rather to calm
and cheer her, and his sisters helped him truly in the same work. They
now had less desire than ever to leave home and to mingle in society
generally; yet notwithstanding they did so occasionally, because their
brother wished it, and it enabled them to have something to tell at
home, which could entertain and enliven both him and his mother. These
reports were generally made in Henrik's room, and how heartily did they
not laugh there! Ah! in a cordially united family, care can hardly take
firm footing there: if it come in for one moment, in the very next it
will be chased away! Eva appeared during this time to forget her own
trouble, that she also might be a flower in the garland of comfort and
tenderness which was bound around the favourite of the family; the Judge
too, tore himself more frequently than hitherto from his occupations,
and united himself to the family circle.

A more attractive sick chamber than Henrik's can hardly be imagined.
That he himself felt. Enfeebled by the influence of disease, his
beautiful eyes often became filled with tears from slight causes, and he
would exclaim "I am happy--too happy! What a blessedness to be able to
live! That is happiness! that is the summer of the soul! Even now, amid
my sufferings, I feel myself made through you so rich, so happy!" and
then he would stretch forth his hand to those of his mother or his
sisters, and press them to his lips or his bosom.

An interval of amendment occurred in Henrik's illness, and he suffered
much less. A sentiment of joy diffused itself through the house, and
Henrik himself appeared at times to entertain hopes of life. He could
now go out again and inhale the fresh winter air--his favourite air. The
Judge often accompanied him; it was then beautiful to see the powerful
vigorous father supporting with his arm the pale but handsome son,
whenever his steps became weary; to see him curbing his own peculiarly
hasty movements, and conducting him slowly homewards; it was beautiful
to see the expression in the countenance of each.

People talk a great deal about the beauty of maternal love--paternal
love has perhaps something yet more beautiful and affecting in it; and
it is my opinion that he who has had the happiness of experiencing the
careful culture of a loving, yet at the same time upright father, can,
with fuller feeling and with more inward understanding than any other,
lift his heart to heaven in that universal prayer of the human race,
"Our Father which art in heaven!"

Several weeks passed on. A lady, an intimate friend of the family, was
about this time undertaking a journey with her daughter to the city
where Petrea was visiting, and desired greatly to take Gabriele with
her, who was the dearest friend of the young Amalie. Gabriele would very
gladly have embraced this opportunity of visiting her beloved sister,
and of seeing at the same time something of the world, but now when
Henrik was ill, she could not think of it; she was quite resolved not to
separate herself from him. But Henrik was zealously bent upon Gabriele
making this journey, which would be so extremely agreeable to her.

"Don't you see," said he, "that Gabriele sits here and makes herself
pale with looking at me? and that is so utterly unnecessary, especially
now I am so much better, and when I certainly in a little time shall be
quite well again. Journey, journey away, sweet Gabriele, I beseech you!
You shall cheer us in the mean time with your letters; and when at
Easter you return with Petrea, then--then you will no longer have an
ailing suffering brother; I will manage it so that I will be quite well
by that time!"

She was talked to also on other sides, especially by the young, lively
Amalie, and at length Gabriele permitted herself to be persuaded.
Convinced that for the present all danger for her brother was over, she
commenced the journey with a jest on her lips, but with tears in her
eyes.

It was the first flight of "our little lady" from home.

Not a word was heard from Major R.; and although Eva continued reserved
towards her own family, she appeared to be so much calmer than formerly
that they all began to be easy on her account. The Judge, who, in
consequence of her behaviour evinced towards her a grateful tenderness,
endeavoured to gratify her slightest wishes, and gave his consent that
in the early commencement of spring she should go to M----s. He hoped
that by that time the Major would be far removed from the country; but
it was not long before a painful discovery was made.

       *       *       *       *       *

On a dark evening at the beginning of March, two persons stood in deep
but low discourse under a tree in St. Mary's churchyard.

"How childish you are, Eva!" said the one, "with your fears and your
doubts! and how pusillanimous is your love. If you would learn, lovely
angel! how true love speaks, listen to me:--

    "Pourquoi fit on l'amour, si son pouvoir n'affronte,
    Et la vie et la mort, et la haine et la honte!
    Je ne demande, je ne veux pas savoir
    Si rien a de ton coeur terni le pur miroir:
    Je t'aime! tu le sais! Que l'importe tout le reste?"

"Oh Victor," answered the trembling voice of Eva, "my fault is not the
having too little love for you. Ah, I feel indeed, and I evince it by my
conduct, that my love to you is greater than my love for father and
mother and sisters, more than for all the world! And yet I know that it
is wrong! my heart raises itself against me--but I cannot resist your
power."

"On that account am I called Victor, my angel," said he; "heaven itself
has sanctioned my power. And _your_ Victor am I also, my sweet Eva; is
it not so?"

"Ah! only too much so," sighed Eva. "But now, Victor, spare my weakness;
do not desire to see me again till I go in spring in a month's time to
M----s. Do not demand----"

"Demand no such promises from Victor, Eva," said he; "he will not bind
himself so! but you--you must do what your Victor wills, else he cannot
believe that you love him. What--you will refuse to take a few steps in
order to gladden his eyes and his heart--in order to see and to hear
him--in truth you do not love him!"

"Ah, I love you, I adore you," returned Eva; "I could endure anything on
your account--even the pangs of my own conscience; but my parents, my
brother and sisters! ah, you know not what it costs me to deceive them!
they are so good, so excellent; and I! Yet sometimes the love which I
have for them contends with the love which I have for you. Do not string
the bow too tightly, Victor! And now--farewell, beloved, farewell! In a
month's time you will see me, your Eva, again, in M----s."

"Stop!" said he, "do you think you are to leave me in that way? Where is
my ring?"

"On my heart," returned she, "day and night it rests there--farewell!
ah, let me go!"

"Say once more that you love me above every thing in this world!" said
he, "that you belong only to me!"

"Only to you! farewell!" and with these words Eva tore herself away from
him, and hastened with flying feet, like one terrified, across the
churchyard. The Major followed her slowly. A dark form stepped at that
moment hastily forward, as if it had arisen from one of the graves, and
met the Major face to face. It seemed to him as if a cold wind passed
through his heart, for the form tall and silent, and at that dark hour,
and in the churchyard, had something in it ominous and spectre-like, and
as it had evidently advanced to him with design, he paused suddenly, and
asked, sharply, "Who are you?"

"Eva's father!" replied a suppressed but powerful voice, and by the
up-flaring light of a lamp which the wind drove towards them, the Major
saw the eyes of the Judge riveted upon him with a wrathful and
threatening expression. His heart sank for a moment; but in the next he
said, with all his accustomed haughty levity:

"Now there is no necessity for me to watch longer after her;" and so
saying he turned hastily aside, and vanished in the darkness.

The Judge followed his daughter without nearing her. When he came home,
such a deep and painful grief lay on his brow as had never been observed
there before.

For the first time in his life the powerful head of the Judge seemed
actually bowed.

       *       *       *       *       *

At this time Stjernhök came to the city quite unexpectedly. He had heard
of the misfortune which had befallen the Franks, as well as of the part
which Henrik acted on this occasion, and of the illness which was the
consequence of it, and he came now in order to see him before he
travelled abroad. This visit, which had occasioned Stjernhök to diverge
as much as sixty English miles out of his way, surprised and deeply
affected Henrik, who as he entered the room met him with the most candid
expression of cordial devotion. Stjernhök seized his outstretched hand,
and a sudden paleness overspread his manly countenance as he remarked
the change which a few weeks' illness had made in Henrik's appearance.

"It is very kind of you to come to me--my thanks for it, Stjernhök!"
said Henrik from his heart; "otherwise," continued he, "you would
probably have seen me no more in this world; and I have wished so much
to say one word to you before we separated thus."

Both were silent for some minutes.

"What would you say to me, Henrik?" at length asked Stjernhök, whilst an
extraordinary emotion was depicted in his countenance.

"I would thank you," returned Henrik, cordially, "thank you for your
severity towards me, and tell you how sincerely I now acknowledge it to
have been just, and wholesome for me also. I would thank you, because by
that means you have been a more real friend, and I am now perfectly
convinced how honestly and well you have acted towards me. This
impression, this remembrance of our acquaintance, is the only one which
I will take away with me when I leave this world. You have not been able
to love me, but that was my own fault. I have sorrowed over the
knowledge of that, but now I have submitted to it. In the mean time it
would be very pleasant to me to know that my faults--that my late
behaviour towards you, had not left behind it too repulsive an
impression; it would be very pleasant for me to believe that you were
able to think kindly of me when I am no more!"

A deep crimson flamed on Stjernhök's countenance, and his eyes glistened
as he replied, "Henrik, I feel more than ever in this moment that I have
not shown justice towards you. Several later circumstances have opened
my eyes, and now--Henrik, can you give me your friendship! mine you have
for ever!"

"Oh, this is a happy moment!" said Henrik, with increasing emotion;
"through my whole life I have longed for it, and now for the first time
it is given me--now when--but God be praised even for this!"

"But why," said Stjernhök, warmly, "why speak so positively about your
death? I will hope and believe that your condition is not so dangerous.
Let me consult a celebrated foreign physician on your case--or better
still, make the journey with me, and put yourself under the care of Dr.
K----. He is celebrated for his treatment of diseases of the heart; let
me conduct you to him; certainly you can and will recover!"

Henrik shook his head mournfully. "There lies his work," said he,
pointing to an open book in the window, "and from it I know all
concerning my own condition. Do you see, Nils Gabriel," continued he,
with a beautiful smile, as he placed his arm on the shoulder of his
friend, and pointed with his other towards heaven, gazing on him the
while with eyes which seemed larger than ever--for towards death the
eyes increase in size and brilliancy--"do you see," said he, "there
wanders your star. It ascends! for certain a bright path lies before
you; but when it beams upon your renown it will look down upon my grave!
I have no doubt whatever on this point. Some time ago this thought was
bitter to me; it is so now no more! When the knowledge depresses me that
I have accomplished so very little on earth, I will endeavour to console
myself with the conviction that you will be able to do so much more, and
that either in this world or the next I shall rejoice over your
usefulness and your happiness!"

Stjernhök answered not a word; large tears rolled down his cheeks, and
he pressed Henrik warmly to his breast.

On Henrik's account he endeavoured to give the conversation a calmer
turn, but the heart of his poor friend swelled high, and it was now too
full of life and feeling to find rest in anything but the communication
of these.

The connexion between the two young men seemed now different to what it
had ever been before. It was Henrik who now led the conversation, and
Stjernhök who followed him, and listened to him with attention and the
most unequivocal sympathy, whilst the young man gave such free scope to
his thoughts and presentiments as he had never ventured to do before in
the presence of the severe critic. But the truth is, there belongs to a
dweller on the borders of the kingdom of death a peculiar rank, a
peculiar dignity, and man believes that the whispering of spirits from
the mysterious land reaches the ear which bows itself to them; on this
account the wise and the strong of earth listen silently like disciples,
and piously like little children, to the precepts which are breathed
forth from dying lips.

The entrance of the Judge gave another turn to the conversation, which
Stjernhök soon led to Henrik's last works. He directed his discourse
principally to the Judge, and spoke of them with all the ability of a
real connoisseur, and with such entire and cordial praise as surprised
Henrik as much as it cheered him.

It is a very great pleasure to hear oneself praised, and well praised
too, by a person whom one highly esteems, and particularly when, at the
same time, this person is commonly niggardly of his praise. Henrik
experienced at that moment this feeling in its highest degree; and this
pleasure was accompanied by the yet greater pleasure of seeing himself
understood, and in such a manner by Stjernhök as made himself more clear
to himself. In this moment he seemed, now for the first time, to
comprehend in a perfectly intelligible manner his own talents, and what
he wished to do, and what he was able to do. The fountain of life
swelled forth strongly in his breast.

"You make me well again, Nils Gabriel!" exclaimed he; "you give me new
life. I will recover; recover in order again to live, in order to work
better and more confidently than I have hitherto done. As yet I have
done nothing; but now, now I could--I feel new life in me--I have never
yet felt myself so well as now! Certainly I shall now recover, or
indeed--is the best wine reserved for me till the last?"

The evening sped on agreeably, and with animation in the family circle.
The blessed angels of heaven were not more beautiful or more joyous than
Henrik. He joked with his mother and sisters, nay, even with Stjernhök,
in the gayest manner, and was one of the liveliest who partook of the
citron-soufflé which Louise served up for supper, and which she herself
had helped to prepare, and of which she was not a little proud. Yes,
indeed, she was almost ready to believe that it was this which had given
new life to Henrik, and the power of which she considered to be
wonderfully operative. But ah!----

At the very moment when Henrik jested with Louise on this very subject,
he was seized by the most violent suffering.

This suffering continued interruptedly for three days, and deprived the
sick young man of consciousness; whilst it seemed to be leading him
quickly to that bound which mercy has set to human sufferings. On the
second day after this paroxysm Henrik was seized with that desire for
change of resting-place which may be commonly regarded as the sign that
the soul is preparing for its great change of abode. The Judge himself
bore his son in his arms from room to room, and from bed to bed. No
sleep visited the eyes of his family during these terrible days; whilst
his mother, with eyes tearless and full of anguish riveted upon her son,
followed him from room to room, and from bed to bed; now hanging over
his pillow, now seated at the foot of his bed, and smiling tenderly upon
him when he appeared to know her, and articulating his name in a low and
almost inaudible voice.

On the evening of the third day the poor youth regained his
consciousness. He recognised his family again, and spoke kindly to them.
He saw that they were pale and weary, and besought them incessantly to
go to rest. The Assessor, who was present, united earnestly in this
request, and assured them that, according to all appearances, Henrik
would now enjoy an easy sleep, and that he himself would watch by him
through the night. The father and daughters retired to rest; but when
they endeavoured to persuade the mother, she only waved with her hand,
whilst a mournful smile seemed to say, "It is of no use whatever to talk
to me about it."

"I may remain with you, Henrik?" said she, beseechingly.

He smiled, took her hand, and laid it on his breast; and in the same
moment closing his eyes, a calm refreshing sleep stole over him. The
Assessor sate silently beside them, and observed them both: it was not
long, however, before he was obliged to leave them, being summoned
suddenly to some one who was dangerously ill. He left them with the
promise to return in the course of the night. Munter was called in the
city the night-physician, because there was no one like him who appeared
earnestly willing to give his help by night as by day.

The mother breathed deeply when she saw herself alone with her son. She
folded her hands, and raised her eyes to heaven with an expression which
through the whole of the foregoing days had been foreign to them. It was
no longer restless, almost murmuring anxiety; it was a mournful, yet at
the same time, deep, perfect, nay, almost loving resignation. She bent
over her son, and spoke in a low voice out of the depths of her
affectionate heart.

"Go, my sweet boy, go! I will no longer hold thee back, since it is
painful to thee! May the deliverer come! Thy mother will no longer
contend with him to retain thee! May he come as a friendly angel and
make an end of thy sufferings! I--will then be satisfied! Go then, my
first-born, my summer-child; go, and if there may never more come a
summer to the heart of thy mother--still go! that thou mayst have rest!
Did I make thy cradle sweet, my child! so would I not embitter by my
lamentations thy death-bed! Blessed be thou! Blessed be He also who gave
thee to me, and who now takes thee from me to a better home! Some time,
my son, I shall come home to thee; go thou beforehand, my child! Thou
art weary, so weary! Thy last wandering was heavy to thee; now thou wilt
rest. Come thou good deliverer, come thou beloved death, and give rest
to his heart; but easily, easily. Let him not suffer more--let him not
endure more. Never did he give care to his parents----"

At this moment Henrik opened his eyes, and fixed them calmly and full of
expression on his mother.

"Thank God!" said he, "I feel no more pain."

"Thanks and praise be given to God, my child!" said she.

Mother and son looked on each other with deep and cheerful love! they
understood each other perfectly.

"When I am no more," said he, with a faint and broken voice, "then--tell
it to Gabriele, prudently; she has such tender feelings--and she is not
strong. Do not tell it to her on a day--when it is cold and
dull--but--on a day--when the sun shines warm--when all things look
bright and kindly--then, then tell her--that I am gone away--and greet
her--and tell her from me--that it is not difficult--to die!--that there
is a sun on the other side----"

He ceased, but with a loving smile on his lips, and his eyes closed
their lids as if from very weariness.

Presently afterwards he spoke again, but in a very low voice. "Sing me
something, mother," said he, "I shall then sleep more calmly, 'They
knock! I come!'"

These words were the beginning of a song which Henrik had himself
written, and set to music some time before, during a night of suffering.

The genius of poetry seemed to have deserted him during the latter part
of his illness; this was painful to him; but his mind remained the same,
and the spirit of poetry lived still in the hymn which his mother now,
at his request, sang in a trembling voice:

    They knock! I come! yet ere on the way
    To the night of the grave I am pressing,
    Thou Angel of Death, give me yet one lay--
    One hymn of thanksgiving and blessing.

    Have thanks, O Father! in heaven high,
    For thy gift, all gifts exceeding;
    For life! and that grieved or glad I could fly
    To thee, nor find thee unheeding.

    Oh thanks for life, and thanks too for death,
    The bound of all trouble and sighing;
    How bitter! yet sweet 't is to yield our breath
    When thine is the heart of the dying!

    By our path of trial thou plantest still
    Thy lilies of consolation;
    But the loveliest of all--to do thy will--
    Be it done in resignation!

    Farewell, lovely earth, on whose bosom I lay;
    Farewell, all ye dear ones, mourning;
    Farewell, and forgive all the faults of my day:
    My heart now in death is burning!

"It is burning!" repeated Henrik in a voice of suffering. "It is
terrible! Mother! Mother!" said he, looking for her with a restless
glance.

"Your mother is here!" said she, bending over him.

"Ah! then all is right!" said he again, calmly. "Sing, my mother," added
he, again closing his eyes--"I am weary."

She sang--

    We part! but in parting our steps we bend
    Alone towards that glorious morrow,
    Where friend no more shall part from friend,
    Where none knoweth heart-ache or sorrow!

    Farewell! all is dark to my failing sight,
    Your loved forms from my faint gaze rending,
    'T is dark, but oh!--far beyond the night
    I see light o'er the darkness ascending!

"Oh! if you only knew how serene it is! It is divine!" said the dying
one, as he stretched forth his arms, and then dropped them again.

A change passed over the countenance of the young man; death had touched
his heart gently, and its pulsations ceased. At the same moment a
wonderful inspiration animated the mother; her eyes beamed brightly, and
never before had her voice had so beautiful, so clear a tone as whilst
she sang

    Thou callest, O Father! with glad accord
    I come!--Ye dear ones we sever!--
    Now the pang is past!--now behold I the Lord--
    Praise be thine, O Eternal, for ever!

Judge Frank was awoke out of his uneasy sleep by the song, whose tone
seemed to have a something supernatural in it. A few moments passed
before he could convince himself that the voice which he heard was
really that of his wife.

He hastened with indescribable anxiety to the sick room; Elise yet sang
the last verse as he entered, and casting his eyes on her countenance,
he exclaimed "My God!" and clasped his hands together.

The song ceased: a dreadful consciousness thrust itself like a sword
through the heart of the mother. She saw before her the corpse of her
son, and with a faint cry of horror she sank, as if lifeless, upon the
bed of death.

FOOTNOTES:

[18] Eric Stagnelius, who was born in 1793, and died in 1823, would have
been, it is probable, had a longer life been granted to him, one of the
most distinguished poets of the age. His poems, epic, dramatic, and
lyric, fill three volumes. "Liljor i Saron"--Lilies of Sharon, is the
general title of his lyrics.


CHAPTER VIII.

ELISE TO CECILIA.


    _Two months later._

"When I last wrote to you, my Cecilia, it was winter. Winter, severe icy
winter, had also gathered itself about my heart--my life's joy was
wrapped in his winding-sheet, and it seemed to me as if no more spring
could bloom, no more life could exist; and that I should never again
have the heart to write a cheerful or hopeful word. And now--now it is
spring! The lark sings again the ascension-song of the earth; the May
sun diffuses his warming beams through my chamber, and the grass becomes
already green upon the grave of my first-born, my favourite! And I----Oh
Lord! thou who smitest, thou also healest, and I will praise thee! for
every affliction which thou sendest becomes good if it be only received
with patience. And if thou concealest thyself for a season--as it
appears to our weak vision--thou revealest thyself yet soon again,
kinder and more glorious than before! For a little while and we see thee
not, and again for a little while and we see thee, and our hearts
rejoice and drink strength and enjoyment out of the cup which thou,
Almighty One! fillest eternally. Yes, every thing in life becomes good,
if that life be only spent in God!

"But in those dark wintry hours it was often gloomy and tumultuous
within me. Ah, Cecilia, I would not that he should die! He was my only
son, my first-born child. I suffered most at his birth; I sang most
beside his cradle; my heart leapt up first and highest with maternal joy
at his childish play. He was my summer child, born in the midsummer of
nature and of my life and my strength, and then--he was so full of life,
so beautiful and good! No, I would not that he should die, or that my
beautiful son should be laid in the black earth! And as the time drew
nearer and nearer, and I saw that it must be--then it was dark in me.
But the last night--Oh, it was a most wonderful night!--then it was
otherwise. Do you know, Cecilia, that I sung gaily, triumphantly, by the
death-bed of my first-born! Now I cannot comprehend it. But this
night--he had during the foregoing day suffered much, and his
sufferings had reconciled me to his death. They abated as death
approached, and he besought of me, as he had often done in the years of
his childhood, to sing him to sleep. I sang--I was able to sing. He
received pleasure from the song, which increased in power, and with a
heavenly smile, whilst heavenly pictures seemed to float before his
eyes, he said, 'Ah, it is divine!' and I sang better and ever clearer. I
saw his eyes change themselves, his breath become suspended, and I knew
that then was the moment of separation between soul and body--between me
and him! but I did not then feel it, and I sang on. It seemed to me as
if the song sustained the spirit and raised it to heaven. In that moment
I was happy; for even I, as well as he, was exalted above every earthly
pain.

"The exclamation of my name awoke me from my blessed dream, and I saw
the dead body of my son--after this I saw nothing more.

"There was a long, deep stupor. When I recovered consciousness, I felt a
heart beating against my temples. I raised my eyes and saw my husband;
my head was resting on his breast, and with the tenderest words he was
calling me back to life. My daughters stood around me weeping, and
kissing my hands and my clothes. I also wept, and then I felt better. It
was then morning, and the dawn came into my chamber. I threw my arms
around my husband's neck, and said, 'Ernst, love me! I will
endeavour----'

"I could say no more, but he understood me, thanked me warmly, and
pressed me close to his bosom.

"I did endeavour to be calm, and with God's help I succeeded. For
several hours of the day I lay still on my bed. Eva, whose voice is
remarkably sweet, read aloud to me. I arose for tea, and endeavoured to
be as usual; my husband and my daughters supported me, and all was peace
and love.

"But when the day was ended, and Ernst and I were alone in our chamber,
a fear of the night, of bed, and a sleepless pillow, seized hold of me;
I, therefore, seated myself on the sofa, and prayed Ernst to read to me,
for I longed for the consolations of the Gospel. He seated himself by me
and read; but the words, although spoken by his manly, firm voice,
passed at this time impressionless over my inward sense. I understood
nothing, and all within me was dark and vacant. All at once some one
knocked softly at the door, and Ernst, not a little astonished, said,
'Come in;' the door was opened, and Eva entered. She was very pale, and
appeared excited; but yet at the same time firm and determined. She
approached us softly, and sinking down on her knees between us, took our
hands between hers. I would have raised her, but Ernst held me back, and
said, mildly but gravely, 'Let her alone!'

"'My father, my mother!' said Eva, with tremulous voice, 'I have given
you uneasiness--pardon me! I have grieved you--I will not do it again.
Ah! I will not now lay a stone on your burden. See, how disobedient I
have been--this ring, and these letters, I have received against your
will and against my promises from Major R. I will now send them back.
See here! read what I have written to him. Our acquaintance is for ever
broken! Pardon me, that I have chosen these hours to busy you with my
affairs, but I feared my own weakness when the force of this hour shall
have passed. Oh, my parents! I feel, I know, that he is not worthy to be
your son! But I have been as it were bewitched--I have loved him beyond
measure;--ah, I love him still--nay, do not weep, mother! You shall
never again shed a tear of grief over me--you have wept already enough
on my account. Since Henrik's death every thing in me is changed. Fear
nothing more for me; I will conquer this, and will become your obedient,
your happy child. Only require not from me that I should give my hand to
another--never will I marry, never belong to another! But for you, my
parents, will I live; I will love you, and with you be happy! Here, my
father, take this, and send it back to him whom I will no more see!
And--Oh, love me! Love me!'

"Tears bedewed the face which she bowed down to her father's knee. Never
had she looked so lovely, so attractive! Ernst was greatly affected; he
laid his hand as if in blessing upon her head, which he raised, and
said:

"'When you were born, Eva, you lay long as if dead; in my arms you first
opened your eyes to the light, and I thanked God. But I thank him
manifold more for you in this moment, in which I see in you the joy and
blessing of our age--in which you have been able to combat with your own
heart, and to do that which is right! God bless you! God reward you!'

"He held her for a long time to his bosom, and his tears wetted her
forehead. I also clasped her in my arms, and let her feel my love and my
gratitude, and then, with a look which beamed through tears, she left
us.

"We called her 'our blessed child' at that time, for she had blessed us
with a great consolation. She had raised again our sunken hearts.

"Ernst went to the window and looked silently into the star-lighted
night; I followed him, and my glance accompanied his, which in this
moment was so beautiful and bright, and laying his arm around me he
spoke thus, as if to himself:

"'It is good! It is so intended--and that is the essential thing! He is
gone! What more? We must all go; all, sooner or later. He might not
perfect his work; but he stood ready, ready in will and ability when he
was called to the higher work-place! Lord and Master, thou hast taken
the disciple to thyself. Well for him that he was ready! That is the
most important for us all!'

"Ernst's words and state of mind produced great effect upon me. Peace
returned to my spirit. In the stillness of the night I did not sleep,
but I rested on his bosom. It was calm around me and in me. And in the
secret of my soul I wished that it might ever remain so, that no more
day might dawn upon me, and no more sun shine upon my weary, painful
eyes.

"How the days creep on! On occasions of great grief it always appears as
if time stood still. All things appear to stand still, or slowly and
painfully to roll on, in dark circles; but it is not so! Hours and days
go on in an interminable chain; they rise and sink like the waves of the
sea; and carry along with them the vessel of our life: carry it from the
islands of joy it is true, but carry it also away from the rocky shores
of grief. Hours came for me in which no consolation would appease my
heart, in which I in vain combated with myself, and said--'Now I will
read, and then pray, and then sleep!' But yet anguish would not leave
me, but followed me still, when I read; prevented me from prayer, and
chased away sleep; yes, many such hours have been, but they too are
gone; some such may perhaps come yet, but I know also that they too will
go. The tenderness of my husband and of my children--the peace of
home--the many pleasures within it--the relief of tears--the eternal
consolation of the Eternal Word--all these have refreshed and
strengthened my soul. It is now much, much better. And then--he died
pure and spotless, the youth with the clear glance and the warm heart!
He stood, as his father said, ready to go into the higher world. Oh!
more than ever have I acknowledged, in the midst of my deep pain, that
there is pain more bitter than this; for many a living son is a greater
grief to his mother than mine--the good one there, under the green
mound!

"We have planted fir-trees and poplars around the grave, and often will
it be decorated with fresh flowers. No dark grief abides by the grave of
the friendly youth.--Henrik's sisters mourn for him deep and
still--perhaps Gabriele mourns him most of all. One sees it not by day,
for she is generally gay as formerly; a little song, a gay jest, a
little adornment of the house, all goes on just as before to enliven the
spirits of her parents. But in the night, when all rest in their beds,
she is heard weeping, often so painfully--it is a dew of love on the
grave of her brother; but then every morning is the eye again bright and
smiling.

"On the first tidings of our loss Jacobi hastened to us. He took from
Ernst and me, in this time of heavy grief, all care upon himself, and
was to us as the tenderest of sons. Alas! he was obliged very soon to
leave us, but the occasion for this was the most joyful. He is about to
be nominated to the living of T----; and his promotion, which puts him
in the condition soon to marry, affords him also a respectable income,
and a sphere of action agreeable to his wishes and accordant with his
abilities, and altogether makes him unspeakably happy. Louise also looks
forward towards this union and establishment for life with quiet
satisfaction, and that, I believe, as much on account of her family as
for herself.

"The family affection appears, through the late misfortune, to have
received a new accession: my daughters are more amiable than ever in
their quiet care to sweeten the lives of their parents. Mrs. Gunilla has
been like a mother to me and mine during this time; and many dear
evidences of sympathy, from several of the best and noblest in Sweden,
have been given to Henrik's parents;--the young poet's pure glory has
brightened their house of mourning. 'It is beautiful to have died as he
has died,' says our good Assessor, who does not very readily find any
thing beautiful in this world.

"And I, Cecilia, should I shut my heart against so many occasions for
joy and gratitude, and sit with my sorrow in darkness? Oh no! I will
gladden the human circle in which I live; I will open my heart to the
gospel of life and of nature; I will seize hold on the moments, and the
good which they bring. No friendly glance, no spring-breeze, shall pass
over me unenjoyed or unacknowledged; out of every flower will I suck a
drop of honey, and out of every passing hour a drop of eternal life.

"And then--I know it truly--be my life's day longer or shorter, bear it
a joyful or a gloomy colour,

    The day will never endure so long
    But at length the evening cometh.

The evening in which I may go home--home to my son, my summer-child! And
then--Oh then shall I perhaps acknowledge the truth of that prophetic
word which has so often animated my soul: 'For behold I create new
heavens and a new earth; and the former shall not be remembered nor come
into mind. But be ye glad and rejoice for ever in that which I create.'

"I have wept much whilst I have written this, but my heart has peace. It
is now late. I will creep in to my Ernst, and I feel that I shall sleep
calmly by his side.

"Good-night, my Cecilia."


CHAPTER IX.

NEW ADVERSITIES.


It was afternoon. The sisters were busily quilting Louise's bridal
bed-cover; because at the end of May, as was determined in the family
council, that she was to be married. The coverlet was of green silk, and
a broad wreath of leafy oak branches formed its border. This pattern had
occasioned a great deal of care and deliberation; but now, also, what
joy did it not give rise to, and what ever-enduring admiration of the
tasteful, the distinguished, the indescribably good effect which it
produced, especially when seen from one side! Gabriele, to be sure,
would have made sundry little objections relative to the connexion of
the leaves, but Louise would not allow that there was any weight in
them: "The border," said she, "is altogether charming!"

Gabriele had placed a full-blown monthly rose in the light locks of the
bride, and had arranged with peculiar grace, around the plaited hair at
the back of her head, the green rose-leaves like a garland. The effect
was lovely, as at this time the sun-light fell upon her head, and her
countenance had more than ordinary charm; the cheeks a high colour; the
eyes a clearer blue, as they were often raised from the green
rose-wreath and directed towards the window. Jacobi, the new pastor, was
expected that evening.

Gabriele went up to her mother, and besought her to notice how well
Louise looked, and the rose, how becoming it was to her! The mother
kissed her, but forgot to notice Louise in looking at the lovely face of
"the little lady."

The industrious up-and-down picking of the needles accompanied the
joyful conversation of the sisters.

Now they talked about the management of the living; now about the
school; now about milk, and now about cheese. They settled about
household matters; about mealtimes; the arrangement of the table, and
such like. In many things Louise intended to follow the example of home;
in others, she should do differently. "People must advance with the
age." She intended that there should be great hospitality in the
parsonage-house--that was Jacobi's pleasure. Some one of her own family
she hoped to have always with her;--an especial wing should be built for
beloved guests. She would go every Sunday to church, to hear her husband
preach or sing the service. If the old wives came to the parsonage with
eggs, or other little presents, they should always be well entertained,
and encouraged to come again. All sick people should be regaled with
Louise's elixir, and all misdoers should be more or less reproved by
her. She would encourage all, to the very best of her power, to read, to
be industrious, to go to church, and to plant trees. Every Sunday
several worthy peasants should be invited with their wives to dine at
the parsonage. If the ladies of the Captain and the Steward came to
visit her, the coffee-pot should be immediately set on, and the
card-table prepared. Every young peasant girl should live in service a
whole year at the parsonage before she was married, in order to learn
how to work, and how to behave herself.--N. B. This would be wages
enough for her. At all marriages the Pastor and his wife would always be
present, the same at christenings; they would extend their hand in
sponsorship over the youth, that all might grow up in good-breeding and
the fear of God. At Midsummer and in harvest-time there should be a
dance, and great merry-making at the parsonage for the people--but
without brandy;--for the rest, nothing should be wanting:

    None she forgets, the mistress of the feast,
    The beer flows free, the bunch of keys it jingles,
    And, without pause, goes on the stormy dance!

Work should be found for all beggars at the parsonage, and then food;
for lazy vagabonds a passing lecture, and then--march! And thus, by
degrees, would preparation be made for the Golden Age.

Ah! Ruin to the golden plans and to the golden age which they planned!
Two letters which were delivered to Louise put a sudden end to them all!
One of the letters was from Jacobi, was very short, and said only that
the parsonage was quite gone from him; but that Louise would not blame
him on that account, as soon as she understood the whole affair.

      "I long for you inexpressibly," continued Jacobi, "but I must
      postpone my arrival in X. in order to pay my respects to his
      Excellency O----, who is detained in P. from an attack of gout,
      which seized him on his journey from Copenhagen to Stockholm. But
      by the 6th of May I hope certainly to be with you. I have new
      plans, and I long to lay down all my feelings and all my thoughts
      on your true breast. My Louise! I will no longer wait and seek.
      Since fortune perpetually runs out of my way, I will now take a
      leap and catch it, and in so doing trust in heaven, in you, and
      lastly also--in myself. But you must give me your hand. If you
      will do that, beloved, I shall soon be much happier than now, and
      eternally,

      "Your tenderly devoted,           "J. Jacobi."

The other letter was from an unknown hand--evidently a woman's hand, and
was as follows:

"Do not hate me, although I have stood in the way of your happiness. Do
not hate me--for I bless you and the noble man with whom you have united
your fate. He is my benefactor, and the benefactor of my husband and my
children. Oh, these children whose future he has made sure, they will
now call on heaven to give a double measure of happiness to him and you
for that which he has so nobly renounced. The object of my writing is to
obtain your forgiveness, and to pour forth the feelings of a grateful
heart to those who can best reward my benefactor. Will you be pleased on
this account to listen to the short, but uninteresting relation of a
condition, which, at the same time, is as common as it is mournful?

"Perhaps Mr. Jacobi may at some time or other have mentioned my husband
to you. He was for several years Jacobi's teacher, and each was much
attached to the other. My husband held the office of schoolmaster in W.,
with honour, for twenty years. His small income, misfortunes which befel
us, a quick succession of children, made our condition more oppressive
from year to year, and increased the debt which from the very time when
we settled down first we were obliged to incur. My husband sought after
a pastoral cure, but he could have recourse to none of those arts which
are now so almost universally helpful, and which often conduct the
hunter after fortune, and the mean-spirited, rather than the deserving,
to the gaol of their wishes; he was too simple for that, too modest, and
perhaps also too proud.

"During the long course of years he had seen his just hopes deceived,
and from year to year the condition of his family become more and more
melancholy. Sickness had diminished his ability to work, and the fear of
not being able to pay his debts gnawed into his health, which was not
strong, and the prospect--of his nine unprovided-for children! I know I
should deeply affect your heart, if I were to paint to you the picture
of this family contending with want; but my tears would blot my writing.
Jacobi can do it--he has seen it, he has understood it; for this picture
which I have so carefully concealed from every other eye--this pale,
family misery I revealed to him, for I was in despair!

"The name of my husband stood on the list of candidates for the living
of T----. He had three-fold the legally-demanded requisites of Jacobi,
and was, over and above, known and beloved by the parish; all the
peasants capable of voting, openly declared their intention of choosing
him. Two great landed proprietors, however, had the ultimate decision:
Count D., and Mr. B. the proprietor of the mines, could, if they two
were agreed, they two alone, elect the pastor. They also acknowledged
the esteem in which they held my husband, and declared themselves
willing to unite in the general choice.

"For the first time in many years did we venture to look up to a
brighter future. Presently, however, we learnt that a powerful patron of
Mr. Jacobi had turned the whole scale in his favour, and that it would
be soon decided; the two great proprietors had promised their votes to
him, and our condition was more hopeless than ever.

"The day of nomination approached. I did not venture to speak with my
strictly conscientious husband of the design which I cherished. I had
heard much said of Jacobi's excellent character; I was a distracted wife
and mother. I sought out Jacobi, and spoke to him out of the depths of
my heart, spoke to his sense of right--to his sense of honour; I showed
him how the affair stood for us before he disturbed it, by means which
could not be justly called honourable. I feared that my words were
bitter, but all the more angel-like was it in Jacobi to hear me with
calmness. I pictured to him our present condition; told him how he might
save us from misery, and besought him to do it.

"My prayer at first was almost wild, and in the beginning Jacobi seemed
almost to think it so, but he heard me out; he let me conduct him to the
house of his former teacher, saw the consuming anxiety depicted on his
pale emaciated countenance; saw that I had exaggerated nothing; he wept,
pressed my hand with a word of consolation, and went out hastily.

"The day of nomination came. Jacobi renounced all claims. My husband was
elected to the living in T----. Good God! how it sounded in our ears and
in our hearts! For a long time we could not believe it. After fifteen
years of deceived hopes we hardly dared to believe in such happiness. I
longed to embrace the knees of my benefactor, but he was already far
distant from us. A few friendly lines came from him, which reconciled my
husband to his happiness, and Jacobi's renunciation, and which made the
measure of his noble behaviour full. I have not yet been able to thank
him; but you, his amiable bride, say to him----"

We omit the outpourings which closed this letter; they proceeded from a
warm, noble heart, overflowing with happiness and gratitude.

The needles fell from the fingers of the sisters as the mother, at
Louise's request, read this letter aloud, and astonishment, sympathy,
and a kind of admiring pleasure might be read in their looks. They all
gazed one on the other with silent and tearful eyes.

Gabriele was the first who broke silence: "So, then, we shall keep our
Louise with us yet longer," said she gaily, while she embraced her; and
all united cordially in the idea.

"But," sighed Leonore, "it is rather a pity, on account of our wedding
and our parsonage; we had got all so beautifully arranged."

Louise shed a few quiet tears, but evidently not merely over the
disappointed expectation. Later in the evening the mother talked with
her, and endeavoured to discover what were her feelings under these
adverse circumstances.

Louise replied, with all her customary candour, that at first it had
fallen very heavily upon her. "I had now," continued she, "fixed my
thoughts so much on an early union with Jacobi; I saw so much in my new
condition which would be good and joyful for us all. But though this is
now--and perhaps for ever, at an end, yet I do not exactly know if I
wish it otherwise; Jacobi has behaved so right, so nobly right, I feel
that I now prize him higher, and love him more than ever!"

It was difficult to the Judge not to be more cheerful than common this
evening. He was inexpressibly affectionate towards his eldest daughter;
he was charmed with the way in which she bore her fate, and it seemed to
him as if she had grown considerably.

On the following day they quietly went on again with the quilting of the
bed-cover, whilst Gabriele read aloud; and thus "the childhood of Eric
Menved" diverted with its refreshing magic power all thoughts from the
parsonage and its lost paradise to the rich middle age of Denmark, and
to its young king Eric.


CHAPTER X.

NEW VIEWS AND NEW SCHEMES.


Jacobi was come: Gabriele complained jestingly to her mother, "that the
brother-in-law-elect had almost overturned her, the little
sister-in-law-elect, in order to fly to his Louise."

Louise received Jacobi with more than customary cordiality; so did the
whole family. That which Jacobi had lost in worldly wealth he seemed to
have won in the esteem and love of his friends; and it was the secret
desire of all to indemnify him, as it were, for the loss of the
parsonage. Jacobi on this subject had also his own peculiar views; and
after he had refreshed himself both with the earthly and the "angels'
food," which Louise served up to him in abundance, and after he had had
a conference of probably three hours' length with her, the result of the
same was laid before the parents, who looked on the new views thus
opened to them not without surprise and disquiet.

It was Jacobi's wish and intention now immediately to celebrate his
marriage with Louise, and afterwards to go to Stockholm, where he
thought of commencing a school for boys. To those who knew that all
Jacobi's savings amounted to a very inconsiderable capital; that his
yearly income was only fifty crowns; that he had displeased his only
influential patron; that his bride brought him no dowry; and thus, that
he had nothing on which to calculate excepting his own ability to
work--to all those then who knew thus much, this sudden establishment
had some resemblance to one of those romances with their "_diner de man
coeur, et souper de mon âme_," which is considered in our days to be
so infinitely insipid.

But Jacobi, who had already arranged and well considered his plans, laid
them with decision and candour before the parents, and besought their
consent that he might as soon as possible be able to call Louise his
wife. Elise gasped for breath; the Judge made sundry objections, but for
every one of these Jacobi had a reasonable and well-devised refutation.

"Are Jacobi's plans yours also, Louise?" asked the Judge, after a
momentary silence; "are you both agreed?"

Louise and Jacobi extended a hand to each other; looked on each other,
and then on the father, with tearful, yet with calm and assured eyes.

"You are no longer children," continued the father; "you know what you
are undertaking. But have you well considered?"

Both assented that they had. Already, before there had been any
expectation of the living, they had thought on this plan.

"It is a fatiguing life that you are stepping into," continued the
Judge, seriously, "and not the least so for you, Louise. The result of
your husband's undertaking will depend for the greatest part on you.
Will you joyfully, and without complaint, endure that which it will
bring with it; will you, from your heart, take part in his day's work?"

"Yes, that I will!" replied Louise, with entire and hearty confidence.

"And you, Jacobi," continued he, with unsteady voice, "will you be
father and mother and sisters to her? Will you promise me that she
neither now, nor in the future, so far as in you lies, shall miss the
paternal home?"

"God help me! so certainly as I will exert myself to effect it, she
shall not!" answered Jacobi with emotion, and gave his hand to the
Judge.

"Go then, children," exclaimed he, "and ask the blessing of your
mother--mine you shall have," and with tearful eyes he clasped them in
his arms.

Elise followed the example of her husband. She felt now that Louise and
Jacobi's firm devotion to each other; their willingness to work; and
their characters, so excellent, and beyond this, so well suited to each
other, were more secure pledges of happiness than the greatest worldly
treasure. With respect to the time of the marriage, however, she made
serious objections. All that the parents could give to their daughter
was a tolerably handsome outfit; and this could not, by any possibility,
be so speedily prepared. Louise took her mother's view of the question,
and Jacobi saw himself, although reluctantly, compelled to agree that it
should remain as at first arranged, namely, for the second day in
Whitsuntide, which, in this year, fell at the end of May.

After this the betrothed hastened to the sisters to communicate to them
the new views and schemes. There was many an "Oh!" and "Ah!" of
astonishment; many a cordial embrace; and then, of course, what industry
in the oak-leaf garland!

But as the mother at the usual time came in, she saw plainly that "the
little lady" was somewhat impatient towards the brother-in-law-elect,
and but little edified by his plans.

From that kind of sympathy which exists between minds, even when not a
single word is spoken, especially between persons who are dear to each
other, the dissatisfaction of Gabriele took possession also of the
mother, who began to discover that Jacobi's plans were more and more
idle and dangerous. Thus when Jacobi, not long afterwards, sought to
have a _tête-à-tête_ with her, in order to talk about his and Louise's
plans, she could not help saying that the more she thought about the
undertaking the more foolish did it appear to be.

To which Jacobi answered gaily, "Heaven is the guardian of all fools!"

Elise recollected at that moment how it had fared with a person with
whom she was acquainted, who hoped for this guardianship in an
undertaking that in most respects resembled Jacobi's, yet nothing had
prevented all his affairs from going wrong altogether, and at length
ending in bankruptcy and misery. Elise related this to Jacobi.

"Have you not read, mother," replied he, "a wise observation which
stands at the end of a certain medical work?"

"No," said she; "what observation is it?"

"That what cured the shoemaker killed the tailor," said Jacobi.

Elise could not help laughing, and called him a conceited shoemaker.
Jacobi laughed too, kissed Elise's hand, and then hastened to mingle in
the group of young people, who assembled themselves round the tea-table
to see and to pass judgment on an extraordinary kind of tea-bread
wherewith Louise would welcome her bridegroom, and which, according to
her opinion, besides the freshest freshness, was possessed of many
wonderful qualities.

Whilst at tea, the mother whispered slyly into Louise's ear as Jacobi
put sugar into his tea, "My dear child, there will be a deal of sugar
used in your house--your husband will not be frugal."

Louise whispered back again, "But he will not grumble because too much
sugar is used in the house. So let him take it then, let him take it!"

Both laughed.

Later in the evening, as the mother saw Jacobi dance the gallopade with
Louise and Gabriele, whilst he made all happy with his joy, and his eyes
beamed with life and goodness, she thought to herself--even virtue has
her carelessness; and she was well satisfied with his plans.

One day Jacobi related the particulars of his audience with his
Excellency O----, at P., to Louise and her mother; his relation was as
follows:

"When I came up into the saloon the Bishop N. was coming backwards, with
low bows, out of the chamber of his Excellency. Within, a powerful voice
was heard speaking polite and jocular words, and immediately afterwards
his Excellency himself, with his foot wrapped in a woollen sock,
accompanied the Bishop out. The lofty figure, clothed now in a
dark-green morning coat, seemed to me more imposing than ever. He swung
a stick in his hand, upon which a grey parrot was sitting, which, while
it strove to maintain its balance, screamed with all its might after the
Bishop, 'Adieu to thee! adieu to thee!'

"The sunshine which was diffused over the expressive countenance of his
Excellency as he came out of his room, vanished the moment he saw me (I
had already informed him by letter of the use I had made of his
goodness), and a severe repulsive glance was the only greeting which I
received. When the Bishop at length, accompanied by the parting
salutations of the parrot, had left, his Excellency motioned the
servants out, and riveted upon me his strong, bright, grey eyes, and
with an actually oppressive look inquired short and sharp, 'What want
you, Sir?'

"I had never seen him behave thus to me before, and whilst I endeavoured
to overcome a really choking sensation, I answered, 'I would thank your
Excellency for the goodness which--'

"'Which you have thrown away as if it were a very trifle,' interrupted
his Excellency. 'You must have a confounded many livings at command, I
think. You can, perhaps, throw such away on all sides.'

"He spoke these words in a hard, ironical tone. I conjured him to hear
me, and laid before him shortly, but with the utmost clearness, the
reasons which had compelled me to give up the good fortune which his
favour had procured for me. I concluded by saying, that the only
consolation which I had for my loss, and the danger of having displeased
my benefactor, was the feeling that I had done my duty, and acted
according to my conscience, and the persuasion that I had acted right.

"'You have acted like a fool!' interrupted his Excellency, with
violence, 'like a regular bedlamite have you behaved yourself! Things
like this, Sir, may do in novels, but in actual life they serve to no
other purpose than to make their actors and all that belong to them
beggars. But you have unpardonably compromised me! The thousand! you
should have thought over all these things and these feelings before you
had obtained my recommendation! Can I know of all supplicants with
poverty, merits, and nine children? On your account in this business I
have written letters, given dinners, made fine speeches, paid
compliments, in order to silence other claimants. I obtained for you
that living, one of the best in the whole bishoprick, and now you have
given it away as if it were a----It is really too bad! Don't come any
more to me, and don't mix me up again in your concerns, that I say to
you! I shall for the future meddle in nothing of the kind. Don't you ask
me ever again for anything!'

"I was wounded, but still more distressed than wounded, and said, 'The
only thing which I shall ask from you, and shall ask for till I obtain
it, is the forgiveness of your Excellency! My error in this affair was
great; but after I had seen it, there was nothing for me to do but to
retrieve it as well as lay in my power, and then to bear the
consequences, even though they be as bitter as I now find them. Never
again shall I make any claim to your goodness--you have already done
more than enough for me. My intention is now to try if I cannot maintain
myself by my own powers as teacher. I intend to establish a school for
boys in Stockholm, whither I shall travel as soon as----'

"'Attempt, and travel, and do whatever you like!' interrupted his
Excellency, 'I don't trouble myself about it. I have occupied myself in
your affairs for the last time! If I were to get for you ten livings,
you would give all away the next moment to the first, best poor devil
that prayed you for them, with his full complement of wife and ten
children!

"'Lundholm, wash me the glass! I never drink out of a glass from which a
Bishop has drunk!'

"His Excellency had already turned his back upon me, and went again into
his chamber cursing his gout, without the slightest parting word to me.
The parrot, however, on the contrary, turned itself about on the stick,
and cried out with all its might, 'Adieu to thee! adieu to thee!'

"With this greeting, perhaps the last in the house of his Excellency, I
retired; but not without, I must confess, stopping a few moments on the
steps, and wetting the stones with my tears. It was not the loss of a
powerful patron which gave me so much pain, but--I had so admired this
man, I had loved him with such an actual devotion; I looked up to him as
to one of the noblest and most distinguished of men. He also seemed
really to like me--at least I thought so; and now all at once he was so
changed, so stern towards me, and as it seemed to me so unreasonable. The
Russian Consul or his delegate proceeds to the hearing of the claimant
and the Russian witnesses in the court in session, and interrogates
the defendant and the Chinese witnesses through the medium of the
Chinese Dignitary at Urga or his delegates or of his assistants in the
other localities of autonomous Outer Mongolia; the Russian Consul or his
delegate examines the evidence presented, demands security for
"revindication" and has recourse to the opinion of experts, if he considers
such expert opinion necessary for the elucidation of the rights of
the parties, etc.; he takes part in deciding and in the drafting
of the judgment, which he signs with the Chinese Dignitary at Urga
or his delegates or his assistants in the other localities of
Autonomous Outer Mongolia.

The execution of the judgment constitutes a duty of the Chinese
authorities.

The Chinese Dignitary at Urga and his Assistants in the other
localities of autonomous Outer Mongolia may likewise personally or
through their delegates be present at the hearing of an action in
the Consulates of Russia wherein the defendant or the accused is a
Russian subject and the claimant or the complainant is a Chinese
subject.

The execution of the judgment constitutes a duty of the Russian
authorities.

Art. 17.

Since a section of the Kiachta-Urga-Kalgan telegraph line lies in
the territory of autonomous Outer Mongolia, it is agreed that the
said section of the said telegraph line constitutes the complete
property of the Autonomous Government of Outer Mongolia.

The details respecting the establishment on the borders of that
country and Inner Mongolia of a station to be administered by Chinese
and Mongolian employes for the transmission of telegrams, as well as the
questions of the tariff for telegrams transmitted and of the
apportionment of the receipts, etc., are to be examined and settled
by a special commission of technical delegates of China, Russia and
Autonomous Outer Mongolia.

Art. 18. The Chinese postal institutions at Urga and Mongolian
Kiachta remain in force on the old basis.

Art. 19. The Autonomous Government of Outer Mongolia will place at the
disposal of the Chinese Dignitary at Urga and of his assistants at
Ouliassoutai, Kobdo and Mongolian-Kiachta as well as of their staff, the
necessary houses, which are to constitute the complete property of the
Government of the Republic of China.
Similarly, necessary grounds in the vicinity of the residences of
the said staff are to be granted for their escorts.

Art. 20. The Chinese Dignitary at Urga and his assistants in the other
localities of autonomous Outer Mongolia and also their staff are to
enjoy the right to use the courier stations of the autonomous
Mongolian Government conformably to the stipulations of Article XI
of the Russo-Mongolian Protocol of 81st October, 1912.

Art. 21. The stipulations of the Sino-Russian declaration and the Notes
exchanged between China and Russia of the 5th day of the 11th month
of the 2nd year of the Republic of China, 23rd October, 1913, as well
as those of the Russo-Mongolian Commercial Protocol of the 2lst October,
1912, remain in full force.

Art. 22. The present Agreement, drawn up in triplicate in Chinese, Russian,
Mongolian and French languages, comes into force from the day of its
signature. Of the four texts which have been duly compared and
found to agree, the French text shall be authoritative in the
interpretation of the Present Agreement.

Done at Kiachta the 7th day of the Sixth Month of the Fourth year
of the Republic of China, corresponding to the Twenty-fifth of May,
Seventh of June, One Thousand Nine Hundred Fifteen.

CHINO-JAPANESE TREATIES AND ANNEXES
COMPLETE ENGLISH TEXT OF THE DOCUMENTS

The following is an authoritative translation of the two Treaties and
thirteen Notes exchanged between His Excellency the President of the
Republic of China and His Majesty the Emperor of Japan through their
respective plenipotentiaries:

TREATY RESPECTING THE PROVINCE OP SHANTUNG
His Excellency the President of the Republic of China and His Majesty
the Emperor of Japan, having resolved to conclude a Treaty with a view
to the maintenance of general peace in the Extreme East and the further
strengthening of the relations of friendship and good neighbourhood
now existing between the two nations, have for that purpose named as
their Plenipotentiaries, that is to say:

His Excellency the President of the Republic of China, Lou Tseng- tsiang,
Chung-ching, First Class Chia Ho Decoration, Minister of Foreign
Affairs.

And His Majesty the Emperor of Japan, Hioki Eki, Jushii, Second Class
of the Imperial Order of the Sacred Treasure, Minister Plenipotentiary,
and Envoy Extraordinary:
Who, after having communicated to each other their full powers and
found them to be in good and due form, have agreed upon and concluded
the following Articles:-- 
Article 1.

The Chinese Government agrees to give full assent to all matters
upon which the Japanese Government may hereafter agree with the
German Government relating to the disposition of all rights, interests
and concessions which Germany, by virtue of treaties or otherwise,
possesses in relation to the Province of Shantung.

Art. 2.

The Chinese Government agrees that as regards the railway to be built
by China herself from Chefoo or Lungkow to connect with the
Kiaochow-Tsinanfu railway, if Germany abandons the privilege of
financing the Chefoo-Weihsien line, China will approach Japanese
capitalists to negotiate for a loan.

Art. 3. The Chinese Government agrees in the interest of trade and for
the residence of foreigners, to open by China herself as soon as
possible certain suitable places in the Province of Shantung as
Commercial Ports.

Art. 4.

The present treaty shall come into force on the day of its signature.

The present treaty shall be ratified by His Excellency the President of
the Republic of China and His Majesty the Emperor of Japan, and the
ratification thereof shall be exchanged at Tokio as soon as possible.

In witness whereof the respective Plenipotentiaries of the High Contracting
Parties have signed and sealed the present Treaty, two copies in the
Chinese language and two in Japanese.

Done at Peking this twenty-fifth day of the fifth month of the fourth
year of the Republic of China, corresponding to the same day of the
same month of the fourth year of Taisho.

EXCHANGE OF NOTES RESPECTING SHANTUNG
--Note--
Peking, the 25th day of the 5th month of the 4th years of the
Republic of China.

Monsieur le Ministre.

In the name of the Chinese Government I have the honour to make the
following declaration to your Government:--"Within the Province of
Shantung or along its coast no territory or island will be leased
or ceded to any foreign Power under any pretext."

I avail, etc.,
(Signed) LOU TSENG-TSIANG.

His Excellency, Hioki Eki,
Japanese Minister.

--Reply--
Peking, the 25th day of the 5th month of the 4th year of Taisho.

Excellency,
I have the honour to acknowledge the receipt of Your Excellency's note
of this day's date in which you made the following declaration
in the name of the Chinese Government:--"Within the Province of
Shantung or along its coast no territory or island will be leased
or ceded to any foreign Power under any pretext."

In reply I beg to state that I have taken note of this declaration.

I avail, etc.,
(Signed) HIOKI EKI.

His Excellency, Lou Tseng-tsiang, Minister of Foreign Affairs.

EXCHANGE OF NOTES RESPECTING THE OPENING OF PORTS IN SHANTUNG
--Note--

Peking, the 25th day of the 5th month of the 4th year of the Republic of
China.

Monsieur le Ministre.

I have the honour to state that the places which ought to be opened
as Commercial Ports by China herself, as provided in Article 3 of
the Treaty respecting the Province of Shantung signed this day,
will be selected and the regulations therefor, will be drawn up,
by the Chinese Government itself, a decision concerning which will
be made after consulting the Minister of Japan.

I avail, etc.,
(Signed) LOU TSENG-TSIANG.

His Excellency, Hioki Eki, Japanese Minister.

--Reply--
Peking, the 25th day of the 5th month of the 4th year of Taisho.

Excellency,
I have the honour to acknowledge the receipt of Your Excellency's note
of this day's date in which you stated "that the places which ought to
be opened as Commercial Ports by China herself, as provided in Article 3
of the Treaty respecting the province of Shantung signed this day,
will be selected and the regulations therefor, will be drawn up by
the Chinese Government itself, a decision concerning which will be
made after consulting the Minister of Japan."

In reply, I beg to state that I have taken note of the same,
I avail, etc.,
(Signed) HIOKI KEI.

His Excellency, Lou Tseng-tsiang, Minister of Foreign Affairs.

EXCHANGE OF NOTES RESPECTING THE RESTORATION OF THE LEASED TERRITORY
OF KIAOCHOW BAY
--Note--Peking, the 25th day of the 5th month of the 4th year of
Taisho.

Excellency,

In the name of my Government I have the honour to make the following
declaration to the Chinese Government:--
When, after the termination of the present war, the leased territory of
Kiaochow Bay is completely left to the free disposal of Japan,
the Japanese Government will restore the said leased territory to China
under the following conditions:--
1. The whole of Kiaochow Bay to be opened as a Commercial Port.

2.

A concession under the exclusive jurisdiction of Japan to be established
at a place designated by the Japanese Government.

3. If the foreign Powers desire it, an international concession may be
established.

4. As regards the disposal to be made of the buildings and
properties of Germany and the conditions and procedure relating thereto,
the Japanese Government and the Chinese Government shall arrange the
matter by mutual agreement before the restoration.

I avail, etc.,
(Signed) HIOKI EKI.

His Excellency, Lou Tseng-tsiang,
Minister of Foreign Affairs.

--Reply--
Peking, the 25th day of the 5th month of the 4th year of the Republic
of China.

Monsieur le Ministre,
I have the honour to acknowledge the receipt of your Excellency's
note of this day's date in which you made the following declaration
in the name of your Government:--
"When, after the termination of the present war the leased territory
of Kiaochow Bay is completely left to the free disposal of Japan,
the Japanese Government will restore the said leased territory to
China under the following conditions:-- 
1.

The whole of Kiaochow Bay to be opened as a Commercial Port.

2. A concession under the exclusive jurisdiction of Japan to be established
at a place designated by the Japanese Government.

3. If the foreign Powers desire it, an international concession may be
established.

4. As regards the disposal to be made of the buildings and properties of
Germany and the conditions and procedure relating thereto, the Japanese
Government and the Chinese Government shall arrange the matter by mutual
agreement before the restoration."
In reply, I beg to state that I have taken note of this declaration.

I avail, etc.,
(Signed) Lou TSENG-TSIANG.

His Excellency, Hioki Eki, Japanese Minister.

TREATY RESPECTING SOUTH MANCHURIA AND EASTERN INNER MONGOLIA
His Excellency the President of the Republic of China and His
Majesty the Emperor of Japan, having resolved to conclude a Treaty
with a view to developing their economic relations in South Manchuria
and Eastern Inner Mongolia, have for that purpose named as their
Plenipotentiaries, that is to say;
His Excellency the President of the Republic of China, Lou Tseng-
tsiang, Chung-ching, First Class Chia-ho Decoration, and Minister
of Foreign Affairs; And His Majesty the Emperor of Japan, Hioki
Eki, Jushii, Second Class of the Imperial Order of the Sacred
Treasure, Minister Plenipotentiary and Envoy Extraordinary;
Who, after having communicated to each other their full powers, and
found them to be in good and due form, have agreed upon and concluded
the following Articles:-- 
Article 1.

The two High Contracting Parties agree that the term of lease of Port
Arthur and Dalny and the terms of the South Manchuria Railway and the
Antung-Mukden Railway, shall be extended to 99 years.

Art. 2. Japanese subjects in South Manchuria may, by negotiation, lease
land necessary for erecting suitable buildings for trade and manufacture
or for prosecuting agricultural enterprises.

Art. 3. Japanese subjects shall be free to reside and travel in South
Manchuria and to engage in business and manufacture of any
kind whatsoever.

Art. 4. In the event of Japanese and Chinese desiring jointly to undertake
agricultural enterprises and industries incidental thereto, the Chinese
Government may give its permission.

Art. 5. The Japanese subjects referred to in the preceding three articles,
besides being required to register with the local Authorities
passports which they must procure under the existing regulations,
shall also submit to the police laws and ordinances and taxation
of China.

Civil and criminal cases in which the defendants are Japanese shall be
tried and adjudicated by the Japanese Consul: those in which the
defendants are Chinese shall be tried and adjudicated by Chinese
Authorities. In either case an officer may be deputed to the court
to attend the proceedings. But mixed civil cases between Chinese and
Japanese relating to land shall be tried and adjudicated by delegates of
both nations conjointly in accordance with Chinese law and local
usage.

When, in future, the judicial system in the said region is completely
reformed, all civil and criminal cases concerning Japanese subjects shall
be tried and adjudicated entirely by Chinese law courts.

Art. 6.

The Chinese Government agrees, in the interest of trade and for the
residence of foreigners, to open by China herself, as soon as possible,
certain suitable places in Eastern Inner Mongolia as Commercial
Ports.

Art. 7.

The Chinese Government agrees speedily to make a fundamental revision
of the Kirin-Changchun Railway Loan Agreement, taking as a standard
the provisions in railway loan agreements made heretofore between
China and foreign financiers.

When in future, more advantageous terms than those in existing railway
loan agreements are granted to foreign financiers in connection
with railway loans, the above agreement shall again be revised in
accordance with Japan's wishes.

Art. 8. All existing treaties between China and Japan relating to Manchuria
shall, except where otherwise provided for by this Treaty, remain in
force.

Art. 9. The present Treaty shall come into force on the date of its
signature. The present Treaty shall be ratified by His Excellency
the President of the Republic of China and His Majesty the Emperor of
Japan, and the ratifications thereof shall be exchanged at Tokio as soon
as possible.

In witness whereof the respective Plenipotentiaries of the two High
Contracting Parties have signed and sealed the present Treaty, two
copies in the Chinese language and two in Japanese.

Done at Peking this twenty-fifth day of the fifth month of the fourth
year of the Republic of China, corresponding to the same day of the
same month of the fourth year of Taisho.

EXCHANGE OF NOTES
Respecting the Terms of Lease of Port Arthur and Dalny and the Terms of
South Manchurian and Antung-Mukden Railways.

Peking, the 25th day of the 5th month of the 4th year of the Republic
of China.

Monsieur le Ministre,
I have the honour to state that, respecting the provisions contained
in Article 1 of the Treaty relating to South Manchuria and Eastern
Inner Mongolia, signed this day, the term of lease of Port Arthur and
Dalny shall expire in the 86th year of the Republic or 1997.
The date for restoring the South Manchuria Railway to China shall fall
due in the 9lst year of the Republic or 2002. Article 12 in the original
South Manchurian Railway Agreement providing that it may be redeemed by
China after 36 years from the day on which the traffic is opened is
hereby cancelled. The term of the Antung-Mukden Railway shall expire
in the 96th year of the Republic or 2007.

I avail, etc.,
(Signed) Lou TSENG-TSIANG.

His Excellency, Hioki Eki,
Japanese Minister.

--Reply--Peking, the 25th day of the 5th month of the 4th year of
Taisho.

Excellency,
I have the honour to acknowledge the receipt of Your Excellency's note
of this day's date, in which you stated that respecting the provisions
contained in Article 1 of the Treaty relating to South Manchuria and
Eastern Inner Mongolia, signed this day, the term of lease of Port Arthur
and Dalny shall expire in the 86th year of the Republic or 1997.
The date for restoring the South Manchurian Railway to China shall
fall due in the 91st year of the Republic or 2002. Article 12 in
the original South Manchurian Railway Agreement providing that it
may be redeemed by China after 36 years from the day on which the
traffic is opened, is hereby cancelled. The term of the Antung-Mukden
Railway shall expire in the 96th year of the Republic or 2007.
In reply I beg to state that I have taken note of the same.
I avail, etc., 
(Signed) HIOKI EKI.
His Excellency, Lou Tseng-tsiang, Minister of Foreign Affairs.
EXCHANGE OF NOTES RESPECTING THE OPENING OF PORTS IN EASTERN INNER
MONGOLIA
--Note--Peking, the 25th day of the 5th month of the 4th year of
the Republic of China.

Monsieur le Ministre,
I have the honour to state that the places which ought to be opened
as Commercial Ports by China herself, as provided in Article 6 of
the Treaty respecting South Manchuria and Eastern Inner Mongolia
signed this day, will be selected, and the regulations therefor,
will be drawn up, by the Chinese Government itself, a decision
concerning which will be made after consulting the Minister of
Japan.

I avail, etc., 
(Signed) LOU TSENG-TSIANG.
His Excellency, Hioki Eki, Japanese Minister.
--Reply--Peking, the 25th day of the 5th month of the 4th year of
Taisho.

Excellency,
I have the honour to acknowledge the receipt of Your Excellency's
note of this day's date in which you stated "that the places which
ought to be opened as Commercial Ports by China herself, as provided
in Article 6 of the Treaty respecting South Manchuria and Eastern
Inner Mongolia signed this day, will be selected, and the regulations
therefor, will be drawn up, by the Chinese Government itself, a
decision concerning which will be made after consulting the Minister
of Japan."
In reply, I beg to state that I have taken note of the same.
I avail, etc., 
(Signed) HIOKI EKI.
His Excellency, Lou Tseng-tsiang, Minister of Foreign Affairs.
SOUTH MANCHURIA
--Note--Peking, the 25th day of the 5th month of the 4th year of
the Republic of China.

Monsieur le Ministre,
I have the honour to state that Japanese subjects shall, as soon
as possible, investigate and select mines in the mining areas in
South Manchuria specified hereinunder, except those being prospected
for or worked, and the Chinese Government will then permit them to
prospect or work the same; but before the Mining regulations are
definitely settled, the practice at present in force shall be
followed.Take it, my Ernst, and make yourself pleasure
with it, this summer; I pray you to do so, on account of our children.
Take Eva with you, and if possible Leonore also. Nothing would refresh
Eva's soul more than such a journey with you and Leonore in a
magnificent and beautiful country. The money can be obtained in a
month's time, and a few months' leave of absence cannot possibly be
denied to one who has spent more than thirty years in incessant service
for the state; and when Louise and her husband have left us, and spring
and nature are in their very loveliest, then you shall set out: you
shall be refreshed after so many years of painful labour, and the
wounded heart of our sick child shall be healed."


CHAPTER XII.

PLANS AND COUNTER PLANS.


Eva entered her father's study the next morning. He immediately left his
work, received her with the greatest tenderness, drew her to his side on
the sofa, and placing one arm round her waist, took her hand in his, and
inquired, with a searching glance, "Do you want anything from me, my
child? Can I do anything for you? Tell me!"

Encouraged by his kindness, Eva described the state of her mind to her
father, and explained how she wished to commence a more active life in
order to overcome her weakness, and to regain strength and quiet. The
situation of teacher in a girl's school in the city was vacant, and she
wished immediately to take it, but only for the summer, during which
time she and Leonore would prepare themselves to open a school in
autumn. It was a plan of which they had long thought, and which would
afford them a useful and independent life. Eva besought the acquiescence
of her father to this proposition.

"Leonore and I," continued she, "have this morning talked a deal on the
subject; we hope that with the counsel and countenance upon which we may
reckon, to be able to make it succeed. Ah, father! I am become quite
anxious about it on account of my own weakness. I must speedily resort
to external means, that I may overcome it. I will become active; I will
work; and whilst thus employed I shall forget the past and myself, and
only live for the happiness of those who love me, and to whom I have
caused so much trouble."

"My child! my dear child, you are right; you do rightly!" said the
father, deeply affected, and clasping his daughter in his arms; "your
wish shall be granted, and whatever is in my power will I do to forward
your plans. What a many institutions for education will there not
proceed from our house! But there is no harm at all in that--there are
no more useful institutions on the face of the earth! One reservation,
however, I must make from your and Leonore's determination. You may
dedicate the autumn and the winter to your school--but the summer you
must devote to your father!--and Madame B. may find a teacher where she
can, only not from my family--for I am not now in a condition to furnish
her one."

"Ah, father," said she, "every unemployed hour is a burden to me!"

"We will bear the burden together, my child! Leonore, I, and you, in our
wanderings towards the west. In a few weeks I am thinking of undertaking
a journey, after which I have longed for these many years; I will visit
the beautiful native land of my mother. Will you, Eva, breathe this
fresh mountain air with me? I should have very little pleasure in the
journey alone, but in company with you and Leonore it will make me young
again! Our heads are become bowed, my child, but in God's beautiful
nature we will lift them up again! You will go with me--is it not so?
Good! Come then with me to your mother, for it is she alone who has
managed this journey!"

With an arm round the waist of his daughter the Judge now went to his
wife; they found Leonore with her; nor was ever a quartet of Mozart's
more harmonious than that which was now performed among them.

Eva was uncommonly animated all day, but in the evening she was in a
burning fever. A feeling of anxiety went through the whole family; they
feared that a new grave was about to be opened, and disquiet was painted
on all countenances. Eva demanded, with a fervour which was not without
its feverish excitement, that the Assessor should be fetched. He came
immediately.

"Forgive me!" exclaimed Eva, extending her hand to him, "I have been so
ungrateful to you! But my heart was so disordered that it was quite
changed; but it will recover itself again. Leonore has given it health.
I am very ill now; my hands burn, my head aches! Give me my little
work-box--that I may hold it between my hands--that I may lean my head
upon it--else I shall be no better! You, my friend, will cure me that I
may again make my family happy!"

The Assessor dried his tears. As Eva leaned her head on the work-box,
she talked earnestly, but not quite coherently of the plans for the
future.

"Very good, very good," said the physician, interrupting her; "I too
will be of the establishment; I will give instruction in botany to the
whole swarm of girls, and between us we will drive them out into the
woods and into the fields, that we may see them learn all that is
beautiful in the world. But now, Eva, you must not talk any more--but
you must empty this glass."

Eva took the composing draught willingly, and was soon calmer. She was
the most obedient and amiable of patients, and showed a confidence in
her old friend which penetrated his heart. He would have sate night and
day by her bed.

Eva's sickness was a violent fever, which confined her to her bed for
nearly three weeks, and occasioned her family great uneasiness. This
sickness was, however, very beneficial for herself and for the health of
her mind; but still more beneficial was the infinite love with which she
saw herself encompassed on all sides.

One day in the beginning of her convalescence, as she sate up and saw
herself surrounded by all the comforts which love and home could gather
about a beloved sufferer, she said to Leonore as she leaned upon her,
"Ah, who would not be willing to live when they see themselves so
beloved!"

In the meantime Louise's wedding-day was approaching nearer.


CHAPTER XIII.

A SURPRISE.


Three days before the wedding a grand travelling-carriage drawn by four
horses rolled through the streets of the town of X----, and from the
prodigious clatter which it made drew all the inquisitive among the
inhabitants to their windows.

"Did you see, dear sister," cried the general shopkeeper Madame Suur to
Madame Bask, the wife of the postmaster, "the grand travelling-carriage
that has just gone by? Did you see the sweet youth that sate on the left
and looked so genteel, with his snow-white neck and open shirt-collar?
Lawk! how he looked at me--so sweet as he was! How like a real prince he
looked!"

"Dear sister!" answered the postmistress, "then you did not see the
gentleman who sate on the right? He was a grand gentleman, that I can
positively assert! He sate so stately leaning back in the carriage, and
so wrapped up in grand furs that one could not see the least bit of his
face. Positively he is a great somebody!"

"I got a shimmer of the youth," said the grey-brown handed and
complexioned Annette P----, as she glanced up from her coarse sewing,
with such a look as probably a captive casts who has glanced out of his
prison into a freer and more beautiful state of existence; "he looked so
calm, with large blue eyes, out of the plate-glass windows of the
carriage! as pure and grave he looked as one of God's angels!"

"Ay, we know to be sure how the angels look!" said the postmistress,
snubbingly, and with a severe glance at Annette; "but that's absolutely
all one! Yet I should like to know what grandees they are. I should not
be a bit surprised if it were his royal highness or gracious
crown-prince, who with his eldest son is travelling _incondito_ through
the country."

"Dear sister says what is true," returned Madame Suur. "Yes, it must be
so! for he looked like a regular prince, the sweet youth, as he sate
there and glanced at me through the window; really, he smiled at me!"

"Nay, my ladies, we've got some genteel strangers in the city!"
exclaimed Mr. Alderman Nyberg as he came into the room.

"Have they stopped here?" cried both ladies at once.

"My wife saw the carriage draw up and----"

"Nay, heaven defend us! Mr. Alderman what are you thinking about that
you don't make a stir in the city and send a deputation to wait upon
them? For goodness sake let the city-council come together!"

"How? What? Who?" asked the Alderman, opening wide his grey eyes like
some one just awoke out of sleep; "can it indeed----"

"Yes, very likely his royal highness himself in his own proper
person--possibly his majesty!"

"Gracious heavens!" said the Alderman, and looked as if the town-house
had fallen.

"But speed off in all the world's name, and run and look about you, and
don't stand here staring like a dead figure!" exclaimed the
postmistress, quite hoarse, while she shook up and down her great mass
of humanity on the creaking sofa. "Dear sister, cannot you also get on
your legs a little, and Annette too, instead of sitting there
hum-drumming with her sewing, out of which nothing comes. Annette run
quick, and see what it is all about--but come back in an instant-minute
and tell me, poor soul, whom our Lord has smitten with calamity and
sickness--nay, nay, march pancake!"

The Alderman ran; dear Sister Suur ran; Mamselle Annette ran; we ran
also, dear reader, in order to see a large-made gentleman somewhat in
years, and a youth of eleven, of slender figure and noble appearance,
dismount from the travelling carriage. It was his Excellency O---- and
his youngest son.

They alighted and went into the house of the Franks. His Excellency
entered the drawing-room without suffering himself to be announced, and
introduced himself to Elise, who though surprised by the visit of the
unexpected stranger, received him with all her accustomed graceful
self-possession; lamenting the absence of her husband, and thinking to
herself that Jacobi had not in the least exceeded the truth in his
description of the person of his Excellency.

His Excellency was now in the most brilliant of humours, and discovered,
as by sudden revelation, that he and Elise were related; called her "my
cousin" all the time, and said the handsomest things to her of her
family, of whom he had heard so much, but more especially of a certain
young man on whom he set the highest value. Further he said, that
however much he must rejoice in having made the personal acquaintance of
his cousin, still he must confess that his visit at this time had
particular reference to the young man of whom he had spoken; and with
this he inquired after Jacobi.

Jacobi was sent for, and came quickly, but not without evident emotion
in his countenance. His Excellency O----approached him, extended his
hand cheerfully, and said, "I rejoice to see you; my cursed gout has not
quite left me; but I could not pass so near the city without going a
little out of my way in order to wish you happiness on your approaching
marriage, and also to mention an affair--but you must introduce me to
your bride."

Jacobi did it with glowing eyes. His Excellency took Louise's hand, and
said, "I congratulate you on your happiness, on being about to have one
of the best and the most estimable of men for your husband!" And with
these words he riveted a friendly penetrating glance upon her, and then
kissed her hand. Louise blushed deeply, and looked happier than when she
agreed to her own proposition of not troubling herself about his
Excellency.

Upon the other daughters also who were present, his keen eyes were fixed
with a look which seemed rather to search into soul than body, and
rested with evident satisfaction on the beautifully blushing Gabriele.

"I also have had a daughter," said he, slowly, "an only one--but she was
taken from me!"

A melancholy feeling seemed to have gained possession of him, but he
shook it quickly from him, stood up, and went to Jacobi, to whom he
talked in a loud and friendly voice.

"My best Jacobi," said he, "you told me the last time we were together
that you thought of opening a school for boys in Stockholm. I am pleased
with it, for I have proved that your ability as teacher and guide of
youth is of no ordinary kind. I wish to introduce to you a pupil, my
little boy. You will confer upon me a real pleasure if you will be able
to receive him in two months, at which time I must undertake a journey
abroad, which perhaps may detain me long, and would wish to know that
during this my absence my son was in good hands. I wish that he should
remain under your care at least two or three years. You will easily feel
that I should not place in your hands him who is dearest to me in the
world, if I had not the most perfect confidence in you, and therefore I
give you no prescribed directions concerning him. And if prayers can
obtain motherly regard," continued he, turning to Louise, "I would
direct myself with them to you. Take good care of my boy--he has no
longer a mother!"

Louise drew the boy hastily to her, embraced him, and kissed him with
warmth. A smile as of sunshine diffused itself over the countenance of
the father, and certainly no words which Louise could have spoken would
have satisfied him more than this silent but intelligent answer of the
heart. Jacobi stood there with tears in his eyes; he could not bring
forth many words, but his Excellency understood him, and shook him
cordially by the hand.

"May we not have the horses taken out? Will not your Excellency have the
goodness to stay to dine with us?" were the beseeching questions which
were repeated around him.

But however willing his Excellency would have been to do it, it was
impossible. He had promised to dine at Strö with Count Y----, eighteen
miles distant from the town.

"But breakfast? a little breakfast at least? It should be served in a
moment. The young Count Axel would certainly be glad of a little
breakfast!" asserted Louise, with friendly confidence, who seemed
already to have taken under her protection the future pupil of her
husband.

The young Count Axel did not say no; and the father, whose behaviour
became every moment more cordial and gay, said that a little breakfast
in such company would eat excellently.

Bergström prepared with rapture and burning zeal the table for the lofty
guest, who in the mean time chatted with evident satisfaction with Elise
and Jacobi, directing often also his conversation to Louise as if
insensibly to test her; and from their inmost hearts did both mother and
bridegroom rejoice that with her calm understanding she could stand the
test so well.

Gabriele entertained the young Count Axel in one of the windows by
listening to the repeater of his new gold watch, which set the grave and
naturally silent boy at liberty to lead the entertainment in another
way; and Gabriele, who entered into all his ideas, wondered very much
over the wonderful properties of the watch; and let it repeat over and
over again, whilst her lovely and lively smiles and her merry words
called forth more and more the confidence of the young Axel.

Breakfast was ready; was brought in by the happy Bergström; was eaten
and praised by his Excellency, who was a connoisseur; a description of
the capitally preserved anchovies was particularly desired from Louise;
and then her health and that of her bridegroom was drunk in Madeira.

Towards the conclusion of the breakfast the Judge came home. The trait
of independence, bordering on pride, which sometimes revealed itself in
Judge Frank's demeanour, and which perhaps was visible at the very time
of his respectful but simple greeting of his Excellency, called forth in
him also a momentary appearance of height. But this pride soon vanished
from both sides. These two men knew and valued each other mutually; and
it was not long before they were so deeply engrossed by conversation,
that his Excellency forgot his journey, not for one only, but for two
hours.

"I lament over Strö and its dinner," said his Excellency, preparing to
take his departure; "how they must have waited there! But we could not
possibly help it."

After his Excellency had departed, he left behind him a bright
impression on all the family of Franks, not one of whom did not feel
animated in a beneficial manner by his behaviour and his words. Jacobi
in his joy made a high _entre-chat_, and embracing Louise, said, "Now,
Louise, what say you to the man? And we have got a pupil that will draw
at least twenty after him!"

Louise was perfectly reconciled to his Excellency.

From this day forth Bergström began a new era; whatever happened in the
family was either before or after the visit of his Excellency.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Ah, then, my goodness! that it should be Excellency O----!" said the
dear sister Bask to the dear sister Suur.

"Yes, just think! That he should come solely, and for no other purpose,
than to visit the Franks, and breakfast there, and stop several hours
there! He is a cousin, of the Judge's lady."

"Her cousin! Bah! no more her cousin than I am the king's cousin;
positively not!"

"Yes, yes! or why else should he have called her 'my gracious cousin?'
And one must confess that there is something refined and genteel about
her--and such hands as she has have I never seen!"

"Hum! There's no art in looking genteel and having beautiful hands, when
one goes about the house like a foolish thing, washing one's hands in
rose-water, and all the livelong day doing not one sensible act. That I
know well enough!"

"Yes, yes! they who will be of any use in their house cannot keep such
hands, and sit the whole day and read romances! I should like to know
how it would have gone with the blessed Suur's baking business--to which
at last he added the grocery--if I had been a genteel lady! Not at all,
because I should not have done it. Sweet sister, know that I once had my
whims--yes, and a turn for scribbling and writing. Yes, so help me
heaven! if it had not been for my little bit of sound sense, which
showed me my folly in time, I might have become a regular learned lady,
another--what do you call her?--Madame de Staël! But when I married the
late Suur I determined to give up all that foolishness, and do honour to
the baking; and now I have quite let my little talent slip away from me,
so that it is as good as buried. But on that account I am, to be sure,
no fitting company for the Franks--think only!--and shall be only less
and less so, if they are always climbing higher and higher."

"Let them climb as high as they will, I don't intend to make obeisances
before them, that I can promise them! that I absolutely will not! It
vexes me enough that Annette is so mad after them. Before one is aware
of it, they will be taking her away from me, skin and hair; and that's
my thanks for all I have lavished upon her! But I'll tell the gentry
that I'm positively determined to make no compliments to them or to
their Excellencies, and that one person is just as good as another!
Positively I'll tell them that!"


CHAPTER XIV.

THE EVENING BEFORE THE WEDDING.


"God bless the little ones! But when one considers how little of a
rarity children are in this world, one has only to open one's mouth to
say so, and people are all up in arms and make such a stir and such an
ado about their little ones! Heart's-dearest! People may call them
angels as much as ever they will, but I would willingly have my knees
free from them! But worst of all is it with the first child in a family!
Oh, it is a happiness and a miracle, and cannot be enough overloaded
with caresses and presents from father and mother, and aunts and
cousins, and all the world. Does it scream and roar--then it is a
budding genius; is it silent--then it is a philosopher in its cradle;
and scarcely is it eight days old but it understands Swedish and almost
German also! And--it bites, the sweet angel!--it has got a tooth! It
bites properly. Ah, it is divine! Then comes the second child:--it is by
far less wonderful already; its cry and its teeth are not half so
extraordinary. The third comes;--it is all over with miracles now! the
aunts begin to shake their heads, and say, 'no lack of heirs in the
house! Nay, nay, may there be only enough to feed them all.' After this
comes a fourth, and a fifth, and a sixth--yes, then people's wits are
set in full play! The parents resign themselves, but the friends defend
themselves! Heart's-dearest, what is to become of it? The house full of
children, there's soon a dozen of them! Poor Mrs. This and This--it
makes one quite weak both in body and mind only to think of it! Yes,
yes, my friends, people don't put these things down in romances, but it
goes on in this way in real life! Yes!"

It was the Chamberlain's lady who preached this little sermon, in the
zeal of her spirit, to the young couple who the next day were to be man
and wife. She ate on this evening Whitsuntide-porridge[19] with the
Franks, and all the while gave sundry lessons for the future. Jacobi
laughed heartily over the history of the children, and endeavoured to
catch Louise's eye; but this was fixed upon the Postillion, which she
was arranging with a very important and grave aspect. The Judge and
Elise looked smilingly on each other, and extended to each other their
hands.

The state of feeling in the family, for the rest of the evening, was
quite rose-coloured. Letters had been received from Petrea which gave
contentment to all her friends, and Eva sate in the family circle with
returning, although as yet pale roses on her cheeks. The Judge sate
between Eva and Leonore, laying out on the map the plan of the summer
tour. They would visit Thistedal, Ringerig, and Tellemark, and would go
through Trondhiem to Norland, where people go to salute the midnight
sun.

Gabriele looked after her flowers, and watered the myrtle tree from
which next morning she would break off sprays wherewith to weave a crown
and garland for Louise. Jacobi sate near the mother, and seemed to have
much to say to her; what it was, however, nobody heard, but he often
conveyed her hand to his lips, and seemed as if he were thanking her for
his life's happiness. He looked gentle and happy. Every thing was
prepared for the morrow, so that this evening would be spent in quiet.

According to Jacobi's wish the marriage was to take place in the church,
and after this they were all to dine _en famille_. In the evening,
however, a large company was to be assembled in the S. saloon, which
with its adjoining garden had been hired for the purpose. This was
according to the wish of the father, who desired that for the last time,
perhaps for many years, his daughter should collect around her all her
acquaintance and friends, and thus should show to them, at the same
time, welcome politeness. He himself, with the help of Jacobi and
Leonore, who was everybody's assistant, had taken upon himself the
arrangement of this evening's festival, that his wife might not be
fatigued and disturbed by it.

At supper the betrothed sat side by side, and Jacobi behaved sometimes
as if he would purposely seize upon his bride's plate as well as his
own, which gave rise to many dignified looks, to settings-to-rights
again, and a deal of merriment besides.

Later in the evening, when they all went to rest, Louise found her
toilet-table covered with presents from bridegroom, parents, sisters,
and friends. A great deal of work was from Petrea. These gifts awakened
in Louise mingled feelings of joy and pain, and as she hastened yet once
again to embrace the beloved ones from whom she was about so soon to
separate, many mutual tears were shed. But evening dew is prophetic of a
bright morrow--that was the case here.

FOOTNOTES:

[19] There is some new kind of porridge for almost every week in the
year in Sweden, with which the table is most religiously served.--M. H.


CHAPTER XV.

THE WEDDING-DAY.


The sun shone bright and warm on that morning of Whit-Monday. Flowers
and leaves glistened in the morning dew; the birds sang; the bells of
the city rang festively and gaily; the myrtle-crown was ready woven
early, and the mother and Leonore were present at the toilet of the
bride. They expected that Jacobi would make his appearance in the
highest state of elegance, and hoped that his appearance would not dim
that of the bride. Louise's sisters made her appearance on this occasion
of more importance than she herself did. Gabriele dressed her hair--she
possessed an actual talent for this art--half-blown rose-buds were
placed in the myrtle wreath; and what with one, and what with another
little innocent art of the toilet, a most happy effect was produced.
Louise looked particularly well in her simple, tasteful, bridal
dress--for the greatest part of the work of her own skilful hands--and
the content, and the beautiful repose which diffused itself over her
countenance, spread a glorification over all.

"You look so pale to-day in your white dress, my little Eva," said
Leonore, as she helped her to dress--"you must have something pink on
your neck to brighten you up, else our bride will be anxious when she
sees you."

"As you will, Leonore! I can put this handkerchief on, that it may give
a little reflected colour to my cheek. I will not distress any one."

       *       *       *       *       *

When the festally-arrayed family assembled for breakfast they presented
a beautiful appearance. The family-father, however, looked more gloomy
than gay; and as Jacobi entered they saw, with astonishment, that his
toilet was considerably negligent. He had been out; his hair was in
disorder, and he evidently was in an excited state of mind; but he was
handsome for all that. He kissed his bride tenderly on hand and lips,
and gave her a nosegay of beautiful wild-flowers, and several splendidly
bound books,--the sermons of Franzén and Wallin, which gift was very
valuable, and was received by "our sensible" and sermon-loving Louise
with the greatest pleasure.

After breakfast Jacobi hastened to arrange his toilet, and then they all
went to church. The weather was uncommonly beautiful, and crowds of
festally-dressed people thronged about, in part to hear the Provost, who
was to preach that day, but principally to see the bridal pair.

It was an agreeable surprise to the family when at the entrance of the
churchyard many young girls began to strew flowers before the bridal
couple the whole way to the church-door. The church also was decorated
with flowers and foliage.

When the Judge took the hand of his daughter in the church, she
perceived that his was cold, and that it trembled. She looked at him,
and read in his countenance the disquiet with which his soul laboured.

"My father," said she to him, "I feel so calm, so happy!"

"Then I am so too, my child," said he, pressing her hand; and after this
moment his demeanour was calm and decided as usual.

Jacobi, both before and after the ceremony, was excited in the highest
degree; he wept much. Louise, on the contrary, was externally quite
calm. She looked rather pale, but her eyes were bright and almost
joyous; an altogether unusual contrast in a bridal pair.

On their return from the church a little circumstance occurred which
gave pleasure to all, but more especially to the Judge. She met her
fate like a Christian, but still like a Queen.

Perhaps, had Marie Antoinette been uncontrolled in the exercise of
her judgment, she would have shown a spirit in emergency better adapted
to wrestle with the times than had been discovered by His Majesty.
Certain it is she was generally esteemed the most proper to be
consulted of the two. From the imperfect idea which many of the persons
in office entertained of the King's capacity, few of them ever made
any communication of importance but to the Queen.

Her Majesty never kept a single circumstance from her husband's knowledge,
and scarcely decided on the smallest trifle without his consent; but so
thorough was his confidence in the correctness of her judgment that
he seldom, if ever, opposed her decisions. The Princesse de Lamballe
used to say, "Though Marie Antoinette is not a woman of great or uncommon
talents, yet her long practical knowledge gave her an insight into matters
of moment which she turned to advantage with so much coolness and address
amid difficulties, that I am convinced she only wanted free scope to have
shone in the history of Princes as a great Queen.

Her natural tendencies were perfectly domestic. Had she been kept in
countenance by the manners of the times, or favoured earlier by
circumstances, she would have sought her only pleasures in the family
circle, and, far from Court intrigue, have become the model of her sex
and age."
It is by no means to be wondered at that, in her peculiar situation,
surrounded by a thoughtless and dissipated Court, long denied the
natural ties so necessary to such a heart, in the heyday of youth and
beauty, and possessing an animated and lively spirit, she
should have given way in the earlier part of her career to gaiety,
and been pleased with a round of amusement. The sincere friendship which
she afterwards formed for the Duchesse de Polignac encouraged this
predilection. The plot to destroy her had already been formed, and
her enemies were too sharp-sighted and adroit not to profit and take
advantage of the opportunities afforded by this weakness. The miscreant
had murdered her character long, long before they assailed her
person.

The charge against her of extravagance has been already refuted. Her
private palace was furnished from the State lumber rooms, and what was
purchased, paid for out of her savings. As for her favourites, she never
had but two, and these were no supernumerary expense or encumbrance
to the State.

       Perhaps it would have been better had she been more thoroughly
directed by the Princesse de Lamballe.

She was perfectly conscious of her good qualities, but De Polignac
dazzled and humoured her love of amusement and display of splendour.
Though this favourite was the image of her royal mistress in her amiable
characteristics, the resemblance unfortunately extended to her
weaknesses. This was not the case with the Princesse de Lamballe;
she possessed steadiness, and was governed by the cool foresight of her
father-in-law, the Duc de Penthievre, which both the other friends
wanted.

The unshaken attachment of the Princesse de Lamballe to the Queen,
notwithstanding the slight at which she at one time had reason to
feel piqued, is one of the strongest evidences against the slanderers
of Her Majesty.

The moral conduct of the Princess has never been called in question.
Amid the millions of infamous falsehoods invented to vilify and degrade
every other individual connected with the Court, no imputation, from
the moment of her arrival in France, up to the fatal one of her massacre,
ever tarnished her character. To her opinion, then, the most prejudiced
might look with confidence. Certainly no one had a greater opportunity
of knowing the real character of Marie Antoinette.
She was an eye-witness to her conduct during the most brilliant and
luxurious portion of her reign; she saw her from the meridian of her
magnificence down to her dejection to the depths of unparalleled
misery.

       If the unfortunate Queen had ever been guilty of the slightest of
those glaring vices of which she was so generally accused, the
Princess must have been aware of them; and it was not in her nature
to have remained the friend and advocate, even unto death, of one
capable of depravity.

Yet not a breath of discord ever arose between them on that score.
Virtue and vice can never harmonize; and even had policy kept Her Highness
from avowing a change of sentiments, it never could have continued her
enthusiasm, which was augmented, and not diminished, by the fall
of her royal friend. An attachment which holds through every vicissitude
must be deeply rooted from conviction of the integrity of its
object.

The friendship that subsisted between this illustrious pair is an everlasting
monument that honours their sex. The Queen used to say of her,
that she was the only woman she had ever known without gall.

"Like the blessed land of Ireland," observed Her Majesty, "exempt
from the reptiles elsewhere so dangerous to mankind, so was she
freed by Providence from the venom by which the finest form in
others is empoisoned.

No envy, no ambition, no desire, but to contribute to the welfare
and happiness of her fellow creatures--and yet, with all these
estimable virtues, these angelic qualities, she is doomed, from her
virtuous attachment to our persons, to sink under the weight of
that affliction, which, sooner or later, must bury us all in one
common ruin--a ruin which is threatening hourly."

These presentiments of the awful result of impending storms were
mutual.
From frequent conversations with the Princesse de Lamballe, from the
evidence of her letters and her private papers, and from many remarks
which have been repeated to me personally by Her Highness, and from
persons in her confidence, there is abundant evidence of the forebodings
she constantly had of her own and the Queen's untimely end.

[A very remarkable circumstance was related to me when I was at
Vienna, after this horrid murder.

The Princess of Lobkowitz, sister to the Princesse de Lamballe, received
a box, with an anonymous letter, telling her to conceal the box carefully
till further notice. After the riots had subsided a little in France,
she was apprised that the box contained all, or the greater part, of the
jewels belonging to the Princess, and had been taken from the Tuileries
on the 10th of August.

It is supposed that the jewels had been packed by the Princess in anticipation
of her doom, and forwarded to her sister through her agency or desire.]

There was no friend of the Queen to whom the King showed any
deference, or rather anything like the deference he paid to the
Princesse de Lamballe.

When the Duchesse de Polignac, the Comtesse Diane de Polignac, the Comte
d'Artois, the Duchesse de Guiche, her husband, the present Duc de
Grammont, the Prince of Hesse-Darmstadt, etc., fled from Paris,
he and the Queen, as if they had foreseen the awful catastrophe
which was to destroy her so horribly, entreated her to leave the
Court, and take refuge in Italy.

       So also did her father-in-law, the Duc de Penthievre; but all in
vain.

She saw her friend deprived of De Polignac, and all those near
and dear to her heart, and became deaf to every solicitation.
Could such constancy, which looked death in its worst form in the face
unshrinking, have existed without great and estimable qualities in its
possessor?

The brother-in-law of the Princesse de Lamballe, the Duc d'Orleans, was
her declared enemy merely from her attachment to the Queen. These three
great victims have been persecuted to the tomb, which had no sooner
closed over the last than the hand of Heaven fell upon their
destroyer.

That Louis XVI. was not the friend of this member of his family can
excite no surprise, but must rather challenge admiration. He had been
seduced by his artful and designing regicide companions to expend
millions to undermine the throne, and shake it to pieces under the
feet of his relative, his Sovereign, the friend of his earliest
youth, who was aware of the treason, and who held the thunderbolt,
but would not crush him.

    But they have been foiled in their
    hope of building a throne for him upon the ruin they had made, and
placed an age where they flattered him he would find a diadem.

The Prince de Conti told me at Barcelona that the Duchesse d'Orleans had
assured him that, even had the Duc d'Orleans survived, he never
could have attained, his object.

The immense sums he had lavished upon the horde of his revolutionary
satellites had, previous to his death, thrown him into embarrassment.
The avarice of his party increased as his resources diminished. The
evil, as evil generally does, would have wrought its own punishment in
either way. He must have lived suspected and miserable, had he not died.
But his reckless character did not desert him at the scaffold. It is
said that before he arrived at the Place de Greve he ate a very
rich ragout, and drank a bottle of champagne, and left the world
as he had gone through it.

The supernumerary, the uncalled-for martyr, the last of the four devoted
royal sufferers, was beheaded the following spring. For this murder there
could not have been the shadow of a pretext. The virtues of this victim
were sufficient to redeem the name of Elizabeth
[The eighteen years' imprisonment and final murder of Mary, Queen of
Scots, by Elizabeth of England, is enough to stigmatize her forever,
independently of the many other acts of tyranny which stain her
memory.

       The dethronement by Elizabeth of Russia of the innocent Prince Ivan,
her near relation, while yet in the cradle, gives the Northern
Empress a claim to a similar character to the British Queen.]

from the stain with which the two of England and Russia, who had
already borne it, had clouded its immortality.

She had never, in any way, interfered in political events. Malice itself
had never whispered a circumstance to her dispraise.

       After this wanton assassination, it is scarcely to be expected that
the innocent and candid looks and streaming azure eyes of that
angelic infant, the Dauphin, though raised in humble supplication
to his brutal assassins, with an eloquence which would have disarmed
the savage tiger, could have won wretches so much more pitiless
than the most ferocious beasts of the wilderness, or saved him from
their slow but sure poison, whose breath was worse than the upas
tree to all who came within its influence.

The Duchesse d'Angouleme, the only survivor of these wretched captives,
is a living proof of the baleful influence of that contaminated prison,
the infectious tomb of the royal martyrs. That once lovely countenance,
which, with the goodness and amiableness of her royal father, whose
mildness hung on her lips like the milk and honey of human kindness,
blended the dignity, grace, elegance, and innocent vivacity, which were
the acknowledged characteristics of her beautiful mother, lost for
some time all traces of its original attractions.

The lines of deep-seated sorrow are not easily obliterated. If the
sanguinary republic had not wished to obtain by exchange the Generals
La Fayette, Bournonville, Lameth, etc., whom Dumourier had treacherously
consigned into the hands of Austria, there is little: doubt but
that, from the prison in which she was so long doomed to vegetate
only to make life a burthen, she would have been sent to share the
fate of her murdered family.

       How can the Parisians complain that they found her Royal Highness,
on her return to France, by no means what they required in a Princess?

Can it be wondered at that her marked grief should be visible when amidst
the murderers of her family?

It should rather be a wonder that she can at all bear the scenes in
which she moves, and not abhor the very name of Paris, when every
step must remind her of some out rage to herself, or those most
dear to her, or of some beloved relative or friend destroyed!

       Her return can only be accounted for by the spell of that all-powerful
'amor patriae', which sometimes prevails over every other influence.

Before I dismiss this subject, it may not be uninteresting to my readers
to receive some desultory anecdotes that I have heard concerning one
or two of the leading monsters, by whom the horrors upon which I have
expatiated were occasioned.

       David, the famous painter, was a member of the sanguinary tribunal
which condemned the King.

On this account he has been banished from France since the restoration.

If any one deserved this severity, it was David.

It was at the expense of the Court of Louis XVI. that this ungrateful
being was sent to Rome, to perfect himself in his sublime art. His
studies finished, he was pensioned from the same patrons, and upheld as
an artist by the special protection of every member of the Royal
Family.

And yet this man, if he may be dignified by the name, had the baseness to
say in the hearing of the unfortunate Louis XVI., when on trial,
"Well!

when are we to have his head dressed, a la guillotine."
At another time, being deputed to visit the Temple, as one of the
committee of public safety, as he held out his snuff-box before the
Princesse Elizabeth, she, conceiving he meant to offer it, took a
pinch.

       The monster, observing what she had done, darting a look of contempt
at her, instantly threw away the snuff, and dashed the box to pieces
on the floor.

Robespierre had a confidential physician, who attended him almost to the
period when he ascended the scaffold, and who was very often
obliged, 'malgre-lui', to dine tete-a-tete with this monopolizer
of human flesh and blood.

One day he happened to be with him, after a very extraordinary
number had been executed, and amongst the rest, some of the physician's
most intimate acquaintances.

The unwilling guest was naturally very downcast, and ill at ease,
and could not dissemble his anguish.

He tried to stammer out excuses and get away from the
table.

Robespierre, perceiving his distress, interrogated him as to the cause.

The physician, putting his hand to his head, discovered his reluctance
to explain.

Robespierre took him by the hand, assured him he had nothing to fear, and
added, "Come, doctor, you, as a professional man, must be well informed
as to the sentiments of the major part of the Parisians respecting me.
I entreat you, my dear friend, frankly to avow their opinion. It may
perhaps serve me for the future, as a guide for governing them."

The physician answered, "I can no longer resist the impulse of nature. I
know I shall thereby oppose myself to your power, but I must tell
you, you are generally abhorred,--considered the Attila, the Sylla,
of the age,--the two-footed plague, that, walks about to fill
peaceful abodes with miseries and family mournings.

The myriads you are daily sending to the slaughter at the Place de Greve,
who have, committed no crime, the carts of a certain description, you
have ordered daily to bear a stated number to be sacrificed, directing
they should be taken from the prisons, and, if enough are not in the
prisons, seized, indiscriminately in the streets, that no place in the
deadly vehicle may be left unoccupied, and all this without a trial,
without even an accusation, and without any sanction but your own
mandate--these things call the public curse upon you, which is not the
less bitter for not being audible."
"Ah!" said Robespierre, laughing. "This puts me in mind of a story
told of the cruelty and tyranny, of Pope Sixtus the Fifth, who, having
one night, after he had enjoyed himself at a Bacchanalian supper, when
heated with wine, by way of a 'bonne bouche', ordered the first man
that should come through the gate of the 'Strada del popolo' at
Rome to be immediately hanged.

Every person at this drunken conclave--nay, all Rome--considered the
Pope a tyrant, the most cruel of tyrants, till it was made known and
proved, after his death, that the wretch so executed had murdered
his father and mother ten years previously.

I know whom I send to the Place de Greve.

All who go there are guilty, though they may not seem so. Go on, what
else have you heard?"
"Why, that you have so terrified all descriptions of persons, that they
fear even your very breath, and look upon you as worse than the
plague; and I should not be surprised, if you persist in this course of
conduct, if something serious to yourself should be the consequence,
and that ere long."

Not the least extraordinary part of the story is that this dialogue
between the devil and the doctor took place but a very, few hours
previous to Robespierre's being denounced by Tallien and Carriere
to the national convention, as a conspirator against the republican
cause.

In defending himself from being arrested by the guard, he attempted
to shoot himself, but the ball missed, broke the monster's jaw-bone
only, and nearly impeded his speaking.

Singularly enough, it was this physician who was sent for to assist and
dress his wounds. Robespierre replied to the doctor's observations,
laughing, and in the following language:

"Oh, poor devils!

they do not know their own interest. But my plan of exterminating the evil
will soon teach them. This is the only thing for the good of the nation;
for, before you can reform a thousand Frenchmen, you must first lop
off half a million of these vagabonds, and, if God spare my life, in a
few months there will be so many the less to breed internal commotions,
and disturb the general peace of Europe.

[When Bonaparte was contriving the Consulship for life, and, in the Irish
way, forced the Italian Republic to volunteer an offer of the Consulship
of Italy, by a deputation to him at Paris, I happened to be there.

Many Italians, besides the deputies, went on the occasion, and,
among them, we had the good fortune to meet the Abbe Fortis, the
celebrated naturalist, a gentleman of first-rate abilities, who had
travelled three-fourths of the globe in mineralogical research.

The Abbe chanced one day to be in company with my husband, who was an old
acquaintance of his, where many of the chopfallen deputies, like
themselves, true lovers of their country, could not help declaring
their indignation at its degraded state, and reprobating Bonaparte
for rendering it so ridiculous in the face of Europe and the world.

The Abbe Fords, with the voice of a Stentor, and spreading his
gigantic form, which exceeded six feet in height, exclaimed: "This would
not have been the case had that just and wise man Robespierre lived
but a little longer."

Every one present was struck with horror at the observation. Noticing
the effect of his words, the Abbe resumed:

"I knew well I should frighten you in showing any partiality for that
bloody monopoliser of human heads.
"Ah!" replied Petrea, blushing, and not without embarrassment, "there
are probably two causes for that, and it was partly his fault and partly
mine. In the country, where I met him, he was quite left to himself;
nobody troubled themselves about him; he had _ennui_, and for that
reason I began to find pleasure for him."

"Very noble," said Gabriele, smiling.

"Not quite so much so as you think," replied Petrea, again blushing,
"because--at first I wished really to find pleasure for _him_, and then
also a little for myself. Yes, the truth is this--that--I--had nothing
to do, and while I busied myself about Mr. M., I did not think it so
very much amiss to busy him a little about me; and for this reason I
entered into his amusements, which turned upon all sorts of petty
social tittle-tattle; for this reason I preserved apricots for him, I
told stories to him, and sang to him in an evening in the
twilight--'Welcome, O Moon!' and let him think if he would, that he was
the moon. Mother, Gabriele, forgive me, I know how little edification
there is in all this, it is quite too----but you cannot believe how
dangerous it is to be idle, when one has an active spirit within one,
and an object before one that----You laugh! God bless you for it! the
affair is not worth anything more, for it is anything but tragic--yet it
might become so, if on account of my sins I were to punish myself by
marrying Mr. M. I should be of no worth to him, excepting as housekeeper
and plaything, and this would not succeed in the long run; for the rest
he does not love me, cannot love me seriously, and would certainly
easily console himself for my refusal."

"Then let him console himself, and do not think any further on the
affair," cried Gabriele, with animation.

"I am of Gabriele's opinion," said the mother; "for to marry merely to
be married; merely to obtain a settlement, an establishment, and all
that, is wrong; and, moreover, with your family relationships, the most
unnecessary thing in the world. You know, my dear child, that we have
enough for ourselves and for you, and a sphere of action suitable for
you will present itself in time. Your father will soon return home, and
then we can talk with him on the subject. He will assist us directly in
the best way."

"I had, indeed, presentiments," said Petrea, with a sigh, "and hopes,
and dreams, perhaps--of a way, of an activity, which would have made me
useful and happy according to my own abilities. I make now much humbler
demands on life than formerly; I have a much less opinion of myself than
I had--but, oh! if I might only ally myself, as the least atom of light,
to the beams which penetrate humanity at the same time that they animate
the soul of man, I would thank God and esteem myself happy! I have made
an attempt--you know, mother, and Gabriele--to express in a book
somewhat of that which has lived in me and which still lives; you know
that I have sent the manuscript to an enlightened printer for his
judgment, and also--if his judgment be favourable--that he should
publish it. If this should succeed, if a sphere of action should open
itself to me in this way, oh! then some time or other I might become a
more useful and happy being; should give pleasure to my connexions,
and----"

Petrea was here interrupted by the arrival of a large packet directed to
herself. A shuddering apprehension went through her; her heart beat
violently as she broke the seal, and--recognised her own manuscripts.
The enlightened, intelligent printer sent them back to her, accompanied
by a little note, containing the pleasant tidings that he would not
offer the merest trifle for the book, neither could he undertake the
printing of it at his own cost.

"Then this path is also closed against me!" said Petrea, bowing her head
to her hand that nobody might see how deeply she felt this. Thus then
she had deceived herself regarding her talents and her ability. But now
that this way also was closed against her--what should she undertake?
Marriage with Mr. M. began again to haunt her brain. She stumbled about
in the dark.

Gabriele would not allow, however, that the path of literature was
closed against her; she was extremely excited against the printer. "He
was certainly," she said, "a man without any taste."

"Ah!" said Petrea, readily smiling, "I also will gladly flatter myself
with that belief, and that if the book could only be printed, then we
soon--but that is not to be thought of!"

Gabriele thought it was quite worth while to think about it, and did not
doubt but that means might be found, some time or other, to make the
gentleman printer make a long face about it.

The mother agreed; spoke of the return of her husband, who, she said,
would set all right. "Keep only quietly with us, Petrea, calmly, and
don't be uneasy about the means for bringing out your book; they will be
found without difficulty, if we only give ourselves time."

"And here," added Gabriele, "you shall have as much quiet as you desire.
If you would like to spend the whole day in reading and writing, I will
take care that nobody disturbs you. I will attend to all your friends
and acquaintance, if it be needful, to insure your quiet. I will only
come in to you to tell you when breakfast is ready and when dinner; and
on the post-day, I'll only come at the post-hour and knock at your
door, and take your letters and send them off. And in the evening,
then--then we may see you amongst us--you cannot believe how welcome you
will be! Ah! certainly you will feel yourself happy among those who love
you so much! And your book! we will send it out into the world, and it
too shall succeed one of these days!"

Loving voices! domestic voices in happy families, what adversity, what
suffering is there which cannot be comforted by you!

Petrea felt their healing balsam. She wept tears of love and gratitude.
An hour afterwards, much calmer in mind, she stood at the window, and
noticed the scene without. Christmas was at hand, and every thing was in
lively motion, in order to celebrate the beautiful festival joyously.
The shops were ornamented, and people made purchases. A little bird came
and sate on the window, looked up to Petrea, twittered joyfully, and
flew away. A lively sentiment passed through Petrea's heart.

"Thou art happy, little bird," thought she; "so many beings are happy.
My mishap grieves no one, hurts no one. Wherefore, then, should it
depress me? The world is large, and its Creator rich and good. If this
path will not succeed for me, what then? I will find out another."

In the evening she was cheerful with her family. But when night came,
and she was alone; when the external world presented no longer its
changing pictures; when loving, sweet voices no more allured her out of
herself,--then anguish and disquiet returned to her breast. In no
condition to sleep, and urged by irresistible curiosity, she sate
herself down sighingly to go through her unlucky manuscripts. She found
many pencil-marks, notes of interrogation, and traces of the thumb on
the margin, which plainly proved that the reader had gone through the
manuscript with a censorious hand, and had had satisfaction in passing
his judgment of "good for nothing!"

Ah! Petrea had built so many plans for herself and her family upon this,
which was now good for nothing; had founded upon it so many hopes for
her ascent upwards. Was nothing now to come out of them all?

Petrea read; she acknowledged the justice of many marginal remarks, but
she found, more and more, that the greater part of them had reference
to single expressions, and other trifles. Petrea read and read, and was
involuntarily captivated by that which she read. Her heart swelled, her
eyes glowed, and suddenly animated by that feeling which (we say it
_sans comparaison_) gave courage to Correggio, and which comforted
Galileo, she raised herself, and struck her hand upon the manuscript
with the exclamation, "It is good for something after all!"

Animated to the depths of her heart, she ran to Gabriele, and laughing,
embraced her with the words, "You shall see that some fine day I'll
ascend upwards yet."


PART IV.

CHAPTER I.

PETREA TO IDA.


From my Hermitage in the Garret.

"'Illusions! Illusions!' you cry over all joys, all faith, all love in
life. I shout back with all my might over your own words, 'Illusions!
Illusions!' All depends upon what we fix our faith and our affections.
Must the beauty of love and worth of life be at an end to woman when her
first spring, her bloom of love, her moments of romance are past? No, do
not believe that, Ida. Nothing in this world is such an illusion as this
belief. Life is rich; its tree blossoms eternally, because it is
nourished by immortal fountains. It bears dissimilar fruits, varies in
colour and glory, but all beautiful; let us undervalue none of them, for
all of them are capable of producing plants of eternal life.

"Youthful love--the beaming passion-flower of earth! Who will belie its
captivating beauty, who will not thank the Creator that he gave it to
the children of earth? But ah! I will exclaim to all those who drink of
its nectar, and to those who must do without it--'There are flowers
which are as noble as this, and which are less in danger than it of
being paled by the frosts of the earth--flowers from whose chalices
also you may suck life from the life of the Eternal!'

"Ah! if we only understood how near to us Providence has placed the
fountains of our happiness--if we had only understood this from the days
of our childhood upwards, acted upon it, and profited by it, our lives
would then seldom lead through dry wildernesses! Happy are those
children whose eyes are early opened by parents and home to the rich
activity of life. They will then experience what sweetness and joy and
peace can flow out of family relationships, out of the heartfelt union
between brothers and sisters, between parents and children: and they
will experience how these relations, carefully cherished in youth, will
become blessings for our maturer years.

"You pray me to speak of my home and my family. But when I begin with
this subject, who can say, Ida, whether I shall know how to leave off!
This subject is so rich to me, so dear--and yet how weak will not my
description be, how lifeless in comparison with the reality!

"The dwelling-house--which may be said to have the same relation to home
as the body has to the soul--arisen, now out of its ashes, stands on the
same place on which, twelve years ago, it was burnt down. I wish you had
been with me yesterday in the library at breakfast. It was Leonore's
birthday, and the family had occasioned her a surprise by a little gift
which was exactly according to her taste--ornament combined with
convenience. It was an insignificant gift--wherefore then did it give us
all so much pleasure? wherefore were there sweet tears in her pious
eyes, and in ours also? We were all so still, and yet we felt that we
were very happy--happy because we mutually loved one another, and
mutually pleased one another so much. The sun shone at that time into
the room--and see, Ida! this sunbeam which shines day by day into the
house is the best image of its state; it is that which chases hence all
darkness, and turns all shadows into the glorification of its light!

"I will now, lively Ida, talk to you some little about the daughters of
the house, and in order that you may not find my picture too
sentimental, I will introduce first to you--'Honour to whom honour is
due!'--

    'OUR ELDEST,'

well known for industry, morality, moral lecturing, cathedral airs, and
many good properties. She married eleven years ago upon a much smaller
than common capital of worldly wealth; but both she and her husband knew
how to turn their pound to account, and so, by degrees, their house,
under her careful hands, came to be what people call a well-to-do house.

"Eight wild Jacobis during this time sprung up in the house without
bringing about any revolution in it, so good were the morals which they
drew in with the mother's milk. I call them the 'Berserkers,' because
when I last saw them they were perfect little monsters of strength and
swiftness, and because we shall rely upon their prowess to overturn
certain planks--of which more anon; on which account I will inspire them
and their mother beforehand with a certain old-gothic ambition.

"So now! After the married couple had kept school eleven years--he
instructing the boys in history, Latin, and such like; and she washing,
combing, and moralising the same, and in fact, becoming a mother to many
a motherless boy, it pleased the mercy of the Almighty to call them--not
directly to heaven, but through his angel the Consistorium to the
pastoral care of the rural parish adjoining this town--the highest goal
of their wishes ever since they began to have wishes one with another.
Their approaching journey here has given rise to great pleasure--it is
hard to say in which of the two families the greatest. Thus, then,
Louise will become a pastor's wife--perhaps soon also an archdeacon's,
and then she arrives at the desired situation in which she can impart
moral lectures with power--of which sister Petrea might have the benefit
of a good part, and pay it back with interest.

"But the moral lectures of our eldest have a much milder spirit than
formerly, which is owing to the influence of Jacobi; for it has occurred
in their case, as in the case of many another happily-married couple,
they have ennobled one another; and it is a common saying in our family,
that she without him would not have become what she now is, neither
would he have been without her what he now is.

"The Rose of the Family, the daughter Eva, had once in her life a great
sorrow--a bitter conflict; but she came forth victorious. True it is
that an angel stood by her side and assisted her. Since then she has
lived for the joy of her family and her friends, beautiful, and amiable,
and happy, and has from time to time rejected lovers; but she may soon
be put out of the position to continue this course. I said that an angel
stood beside her in the bitter conflict. There was a time when this
angel was an ugly, uncomfortable girl, a trouble to herself, and
properly beloved by none. But there is no one in the family now who is
more beloved or more in favour than she is. Never, through the power of
God, did there take place a greater change than in her. Now it gives one
pleasure to look at her and to be near her. Her features, it is true,
have not improved themselves, nor has her complexion become particularly
red-and-white; but she has become lovely, lovely from the heartfelt
expression of affection and intelligence; beautiful from the quiet,
unpretending grace of her whole being. Her only pretension is that she
will serve all and help all; and thus has she attached every one, by
degrees, to her, and she is become the heart, the peace of the house;
and, for herself, she has struck deep root down into the family, and is
become happy through all these charms. She has attached herself, in the
closest manner, to her sister Eva, and these two could not live
separated from each other.

"You know the undertaking which these two sisters, while yet young,
commenced together. You know also how well it succeeded; how it obtained
confidence and stability, and how it won universal respect for its
conductors, and how also, after a course of ten years--independent of
this institution--they had realised a moderate income; so that they can,
if they are so disposed, retire from it, and it will still continue to
prosper under the direction of Annette P., who was taken as assistant
from the beginning, and who in respect of character and ability has
proved herself a person of rare worth. The name of the sisters Frank
stood estimably at the head of this useful establishment; but it is a
question whether it would have prospered to such an extent, whether it
would have developed itself so beautifully and well without the
assistance of a person who, however, has carefully concealed his
activity from the eye of the public, and whose name, for that reason,
was never praised. Without Assessor Munter's unwearied care and
assistance--so say the sisters--the undertaking could never have gone
forward. What a wonderful affectionate constancy lies in the soul of
this man! He has been, and is still, the benefactor of our family; but
if you would see and hear him exasperated, tell him so, and see how he
quarrels with all thanks to himself. The whole city is now deploring
that it is about to lose him. He is going to reside on his estate in the
country, for it is impossible that he could sustain much longer the way
in which he is at present overworked both night and day. His health has
for some time evidently declined, and we rejoice that he can now take
some rest, by which he may regain new strength. We all love him from our
hearts; but one of us has set on foot a plot to oblige another of us
to--ally herself with him, and therefore our good Assessor is now
exposed to a secret proceeding, which--but I forget that I was to write
about the daughters of the family.

"There is a peculiar little world in the house--a world into which
nothing bad can enter--where live flowers, birds, music, and Gabriele.
The morning would lose its sweetest charms, if during the same
Gabriele's birds and flowers did not play a part, and the evening
twilight would be duskier if it were not enlivened by Gabriele's guitar
and songs. Her flower-stand has extended itself by degrees into an
orangery--not large to be sure, but yet large enough to shelter a
beautiful vine, which is now covered with grapes, and many beautiful and
rare plants also, so as to present to the family a little Italy, where
they may enjoy all the charms of the south, in the midst of a northern
winter. A covered way leads from the dwelling-house down into the
orangery, and it is generally there that in winter they take their
afternoon coffee. The aviary is removed thither; and there upon a table
covered with a green cloth, lie works on botany, together with the
writings of the Swedish gardening society, which often contain such
interesting articles. There stand two comfortable armed chairs, on which
the most magnificent birds and flowers are worked, you can easily
imagine for whom. There my mother sits gladly, and reads or looks at her
'little lady' (she never grows out of this appellation) as she tends her
flowers in the sun, or plays with her tame birds. One may say, in fact,
that Gabriele strews the evening of her mother's days with flowers.

"A man dear to the Swedish heart has said, 'that the grand natural
feature of northern life is a conquered winter,' and this applies
equally to life individually, to family life, and to that of human
nature. It so readily freezes and grows stiff, snow so readily falls
upon the heart; and winter makes his power felt as much within as
without the house. In order to keep it warm within, in order that life
may flourish and bloom, it is needful to preserve the holy fire
everburning. Love must not turn to ashes and die out; if it do, then all
is labour and heaviness, and one may as well do nothing but--sleep. But
if fire be borrowed from heaven, this will not happen; then will house
and heart be warm, and life bloom incessantly, and a thousand causes
will become rich sources of joy to all. If it be so within the
house--then may it snow without--then winter thou mayst do thy worst!

"But I return to Gabriele, whose lively wit and joyous temper, united to
her affectionate and innocent heart, make her deservedly the favourite
of her parents, and the joy of every one. She asserts continually her
own good-for-nothingness, her uselessness, and incorrigible love to a
sweet '_far niente_;' but nobody is of her opinion in this respect, for
nobody can do without her, and one sees that when it is necessary, she
can be as decided and as able as any one need be. It is now some time
since Gabriele made any charades. I almost fancy that the cause of this
is a certain Baron L., who was suspected for a long time of having set
fire to a house, and who now is suspected of a design of setting fire to
a heart, and who, with certain words and glances, has put all sorts of
whims into her head--I will not say heart.

"And so then we have nothing bad to say of 'this Petrea,' as one of the
friends of the house still calls her, but no longer in anger. This
Petrea has had all kind of botherations in the world: in the first place
with her own nose, with which she could not get into conceit, and then
with various other things, as well within her as without her, and for a
long time it seemed as if her own world would never come forth out of
chaos.

"It has however. With eyes full of grateful tears I will dare to say
this, and some time I may perhaps more fully explain how this has been
done. And blessed be the home which has turned back her wandering steps,
has healed the wounds of her heart, and has offered her a peaceful
haven, an affectionate defence, where she has time to rest after the
storms, and to collect and to know herself. Without this home, without
this influence, Petrea certainly might have become a witch, and not, as
now, a tolerably reasonable person.

"You know my present activity, which, whilst it conducts me deeper into
life, discovers to me more beauty, more poetry, than I had ever
conceived of it in the dreams of my youth. Not merely from this cause,
although greatly owing to it, a spring has began to blossom for me on
the other side of my thirty years, which, were it ever to wither, would
be from my own fault. And if even still a painful tear may be shed over
past errors or present faults; if the longing after what is yet
unattainably better, purer, and brighter, may occasion many a pang--what
matters it? What matter if the eye-water burn, so that the eye only
become clear; if heaven humiliate, so that it only draw us upwards?

"One of Petrea's means of happiness is, to require very few of the
temporal things of earth. She regards such things as nearly related to
the family of illusions, and will, on that account, have as little as
possible to do with them. And thus has she also the means of obtaining
for herself many a hearty and enduring pleasure. I will not, however, be
answerable for her not very soon being taken by a frenzy of giving a
feast up in her garret, and thereby producing all kinds of illusions;
such, for example, as the eating little cakes, the favourite illusion of
my mother, and citron-soufflé, the almost perfect earthly felicity of
'our eldest,' in which a reconciliation skål with the frenzy-feast might
be proposed to her beloved 'eldest.'

"Would you now make a _summa summarum_ of Petrea's state, it stands
thus: that which was a fountain of disquiet in her is now become a
fountain of quiet. She believes in the actuality of life, and in her own
part therein. She does not allow her peace to be disturbed by accidental
troubles, be they from within or from without; she calls them
mist-clouds, passing storms, after which the sun will come forth again.
And should her little garret tumble to pieces one of these days, she
would regard even that as a passing misfortune, and hold herself ready,
in all humility--to mount up yet a little higher.

"But enough of Petrea and her future ascension.

"Yet one daughter dwelt in the family, and her lovely image lives still
in the remembrance of all, but a mourning veil hangs over it; for she
left home, but not in peace. She was not happy, and for many years her
life is wrapped in darkness. People think that she is dead; her friends
have long believed so, and mourned her as such; but one among them
believes it not. _I_ do not believe that she is dead. I have a strong
presentiment that she will return; and it would gladden me to show her
how dear she is to me. I have built plans for her future with us, and I
expect her continually, or else a token where I may be able to find her;
and be it in Greenland or in Arabia Deserta whence her voice calls me, I
will find out a way to her.

"I would that I could now describe to you the aged pair, to whom all in
the house look up with love and reverence, who soon will have been a
wedded couple forty years, and who appear no longer able to live the one
without the other--but my pen is too weak for that. I will only venture
upon a slight outline sketch. My father is nearly seventy years old--but
do you think he indulges himself with rest? He would be extremely
displeased if he were to sleep longer in a morning than usual: he rises
every morning at six, it being deeply impressed upon him to lose as
little of life as possible. It is unpleasant to him that his declining
sight compels him now to less activity. He likes that we should read
aloud to him in an evening, and that--romances. My mother smilingly
takes credit to herself for having seduced him to that kind of reading;
and he confesses, with smiles, that it is really useful for old people,
because it contributes to preserve the heart young. For the rest, he is
in all respects equally, perhaps more, good, more noble-hearted than
ever; and from that cause he is to us equally respect-inspiring and
dear. Oh, Ida, it is a happy feeling to be able intrinsically to honour
and love those who have given us life!

"And now must I, with a bleeding heart, throw a mournful shadow over
the bright picture of the house, and that shadow comes at the same time
from a beautiful image--from my mother! I fear, I fear, that she is on
the way to leave us! Her strength has been declining for two years. She
has no decided malady, but she becomes visibly weaker and feebler, and
no remedy, as yet, has shown itself availing for her. They talk now of
the air of next spring--of Selzer-water, and a summer journey;--my
father would travel to the world's end with her--they hope with
certainty that she will recover; she hopes so herself, and says
smilingly yes, to the Selzer-water, and the journey, and all that we
propose; says she would gladly live with us, that she is happy with
us,--yet nevertheless there is a something about her, and even in her
smiles, that tells me that she herself does not cherish full faith in
the hope which she expresses. Ah! when I see daily her still paler
countenance; the unearthly expression in her gentle features--when I
perceive her ever slower gait, as she moves about, still arranging the
house and preparing little gratifications for her family; then comes the
thought to me that she perhaps will soon leave us, and it sometimes is
difficult to repress my tears.

"But why should I thus despair? Why not hope like all the rest? Ah, I
will hope, and particularly for the sake of him who, without her, could
no more be joyful on earth. For the present she is stronger and livelier
than she has been for a long time. The arrival of Louise and her family
have contributed to this, as also another day of joy which is
approaching, and which has properly reference to my father. She goes
about now with such joy of heart, with the almanack in her hand, and
prepares everything, and thinks of everything for the joyful festival.
My father has long wished to possess a particular piece of building land
which adjoins our little garden, in order to lay it out for a great and
general advantage; but he has sacrificed so much for his children, that
he has nothing remaining wherewith to carry out his favourite plan. His
children in the mean time have, during the last twelve years, laid by a
sum together, and now have latterly borrowed together what was wanting
for the purchase of the land. On the father's seventieth birthday
therefore, with the joint help of the 'Berserkers,' will the wooden
fence be pulled down, and the genius of the new place, represented by
the graceful figure of Gabriele, will deliver over to him the
purchase-deed, which is made out in his name. How happy he will be! Oh,
it makes us all happy to think of it! How he will clear away, and dig,
and plant! and how it will gladden and refresh his old age. May he live
so long that the trees which he plants may shake their leafy branches
over his head, and may their rustling foretel to him the blessing, which
his posterity to the third and fourth generation will pronounce upon his
beneficent activity.

"I would speak of the circle of friends which has ever enclosed our home
most cordially, of the new Governor Stejernhök and his wife, whom we
like so much, and whose removal here was particularly welcome to my
father, who almost sees a son in him. I would speak also of the servants
of the house, who are yet more friends than servants--but I fear
extending my letter to too great a length.

"Perhaps you blame me secretly for painting my picture in colours too
uniformly bright, perhaps you will ask, 'Come there then not into this
house those little knocks, disturbances, rubs, overhastinesses,
stupidities, procrastinations, losses, and whatever those spiritual
mosquitoes may be called, which occasion by their stings irritation,
unquiet, and vexation, and whose visits the very happiest families
cannot avoid?'

"Yes, certainly. They come, but they vanish as quickly as they come, and
never leave a poisonous sting behind, because a universal remedy is
employed against them, which is called 'Forgive, forget, amend!' and
which the earlier applied the better, and which makes also the visits of
these ugly fiends of rarer occurrence; they come, indeed, in pure and
mild atmospheres never properly forth.

"Would you, dearest Ida, be convinced of the truth of the picture, come
here and see for yourself. We should all like it so much. Come, and let
our house provide for you the divertisement, perhaps also the rest which
is so needful to your heart. Come, and believe me, Ida, that when one
observes the world from somewhat of an elevation--as for instance, a
garret--one sees illusions like mist, passing over the earth, but above
it heaven vaulting itself in eternal brightness."


CHAPTER II.

A MORNING HOUR


"Good morning!" said Jeremias Munter, as with his pockets full of books
he entered Petrea's garret, which was distinguished from all other rooms
merely by its perfect simplicity and its lack of all ornament. A glass
containing beautiful fresh flowers was its only luxury.

"Oh, so heartily welcome!" exclaimed Petrea as she looked with beaming
eyes on her visitor and on his valuable appendages.

"Yes, to-day," said he, "I am of opinion that I am welcome! Here's a
treat for Miss Petrea. See here, and see here!"

So saying, the Assessor laid one book after another upon the table,
naming at the same time their contents. They belonged to that class of
books which open new worlds to the eye of reflecting minds. Petrea took
them up with a delight which can only be understood by such as have
sought and thirsted after the same fountains of joy, and who have found
them. The Assessor rejoiced quietly in her delight, as she looked
through the books and talked about them.

"How good, how cordially good of you," said Petrea, "to think about me.
But you must see that I also have expected you to-day;" and with eyes
that beamed with the most heartfelt satisfaction she took out of a
cupboard two fine china-plates, on one of which lay cakes of light
wheaten bread, and on the other, piled up, the most magnificent grapes
reposing amid a garland of their own leaves, which were tastefully
arranged in various shades against the golden border of the plate. These
Petrea placed upon a little table in the window, so that the sun shone
upon them.

The Assessor regarded them with the eye of a Dutch fruit painter, and
appeared to rejoice himself over a beautiful picture after his own
manner.

"You must not only look at your breakfast, but you must eat it," said
the lively Petrea; "the bread is home-baked, and--Eva has arranged the
grapes on the plate and brought them up here."

"Eva!" said he, "now, she could not know that I was coming here to-day?"

"And precisely because she thought so as well as I, would she provide
your breakfast." With these words Petrea looked archly at the Assessor,
who did not conceal a pleasurable sensation--broke off a little grape,
seated himself, and--said nothing.

Petrea turned herself to her books: "Oh," said she, "why is life so
short, when there is such an infinite deal to learn? Yet this is not
right, and it evidences ignorance to imagine the time of learning
limited; besides, this remark about the shortness of time and the length
of art proceeds from the heathen writer Hippocrates. But let us praise
God for the hope, for the certainty, that we may be scholars to all
eternity. Ah, Uncle Munter, I rejoice myself heartily over the
industrial spirit of our age! It will make it easy for the masses to
clothe and feed themselves, and then will they begin also to live for
mind. For true is that sentiment, which is about two thousand years old,
'When common needs are satisfied, man turns himself to that which is
more universal and exalted.' Thus when the great week of the world is
past, the Sabbath will commence, in which a people of quiet worshippers
will spread themselves over the earth, no more striving after decaying
treasures, but seeking after those which are eternal; a people whose
life will be to observe, to comprehend, and to adore, revering their
Creator in spirit and in truth. Then comes the day of which the angels
sung 'Peace on earth!'"

"Peace on earth!" repeated Jeremias in a slow and melancholy voice,
"when comes it? It must first enter into the human heart; and there,
there live so many demons, so much disquiet and painful longing--but
what--what is amiss now?"

"Ah, my God!" exclaimed Petrea wildly, "she lives! she lives!"

"What her? who lives? No, really Petrea all is not right with you," said
the Assessor, rising.

"See! see!" cried Petrea, trembling with emotion, and showing to the
Assessor a torn piece of paper, "see, this lay in the book!"

"Well, what then? It is indeed torn from a sepia picture--a hand
strewing roses on a grave, I believe. Have I not seen this somewhere
already?"

"Yes, certainly; yes, certainly! It is the girl by the rose-bush which
I, as a child, gave to Sara! Sara lives! see, here has she written!"

The back of the picture seemed to have been scrawled over by a child's
hand; but in one vacant spot stood these words, in Sara's own remarkably
beautiful handwriting:

    No rose on Sara's grave!
    Oh Petrea! if thou knew'st----

The sentence was unfinished, whilst several drops seemed to prove that
it had been closed by tears.

"Extraordinary!" said the Assessor: "these books which I purchased
yesterday were bought in U. Could she be there? But----"

"Certainly! certainly she is there," exclaimed Petrea, "look at the book
in which the picture lay--see, on the first page is the name, Sara
Schwartz--although it has been erased. Oh! certainly she is in U., or
there we can obtain intelligence of her! Oh, Sara, my poor Sara! She
lives, but perhaps in want, in sorrow! I will be with her to-day if she
be in U.!"

"That Miss Petrea will hardly manage," said the Assessor, "unless she
can fly. It is one hundred and two (English) miles from here to U."

"Alas, that my father should at this time be absent, should have the
carriage with him; otherwise he would have gone with me! But he has an
old chaise, I will take it----"

"Very pretty, indeed," returned he, "for a lady to be travelling alone
in an old chaise, especially when the roads are spoiled with rain;--and
see what masses of clouds are coming up with the south wind--you'll have
soaking rain the whole day through in the chaise."

"And if it rain pokers," interrupted Petrea, warmly, "I must go. Oh,
heavens! she was indeed my sister, she is so yet, and she shall not call
on me in vain! I will run down to my mother in this moment and----"
Petrea took her bonnet and cloak in her hand.

"Calm yourself a little, Miss Petrea," he said; "I tell you, you could
not travel in this way. The chaise would not hold together. Alas, I have
tried it myself--you could not go in it!"

"Now then," exclaimed Petrea determinately, "I will go; and if I cannot
go I'll creep--but go I will!"

"Is that then your firm determination?"

"My firm and my last."

"Well, then, I must creep with you!" said the Assessor, smiling, "if it
be only to see how it goes with you. I'll go home now, but will be back
in an hour's time. Promise me only to have patience for so long, and not
without me to set off--creep off, I should say!"

The Assessor vanished, and Petrea hastened down to her mother and
sisters.

But before her communications and consultations were at an end, a light
travelling carriage drew up at the door. The Assessor alighted from it,
came in, and offered Petrea his arm. Soon again was he seated in the
carriage, Petrea by his side, and was protesting vehemently against the
bag of provisions, and the bottle of wine, which Leonore thrust in,
spite of his protestations, and so away they went.


CHAPTER III.

ADVENTURES.


It was now the second time in their life that the Assessor and Petrea
were out together in such a manner, and now as before it seemed as if no
favourable star would light their journey, for scarcely had they set out
when it began to rain, and clouds as heavy and dark as lead gathered
together above their heads. It is rather depressing when in answer to
the inquiring glances which one casts upwards at the commencement of an
important journey, to be met by a heaven like this. Other omens also
little less fortunate added themselves; the horses pranced about as if
they were unwilling to go farther, and an owl took upon itself to attend
the carriage, set itself on the tree-branches and points of the palings
by the wayside, and then on the coming up of the carriage flew a little
farther, there to await its coming up at a little distance.

As the travellers entered a wood, where on account of the deep road they
were compelled to travel slowly, they saw on the right hand a little
black-grey old woman step forth, as ugly, witch, and Kobold like in
appearance as an old woman ever can be. She stared at the travellers for
a moment, and then vanished among the trunks of the trees.

The Assessor shuddered involuntarily at the sight of her, and remarked,
"What a difference is there between woman and woman--the loveliest upon
earth and the most horrible is yet--woman!"

After he had seen the old witch he became almost gloomy. In the meantime
the owl vanished with her; perhaps, because "birds of a feather flock
together."

Yet it may be that I am calumniating all this time the little old mother
in the most sinful manner; she may be the most good-tempered woman in
the world. It is well that our Lord understands us better than we do
ourselves.

All this time Petrea sate silent, for however enlightened and
unprejudiced people may be, they never can perfectly free themselves
from the impression of certain circumstances, such as presentiments,
omens, apparitions, and forebodings, which, like owls on noiseless
wings, have flown through the world ever since the time of Adam, when
they first shouted their ominous "Too-who! too-whit!" People know that
Hobbes, who denied the resurrection in the warmest manner, never could
sleep in the neighbourhood of a room in which there had been a corpse.
Petrea, who had not the least resemblance in the world to Hobbes, was
not inclined to gainsay anything within the range of probability. Her
temperament naturally inclined her to superstition; and like most people
who sit still a great deal, she felt always at the commencement of a
journey a degree of disquiet as to how it would go on. But on this day,
under the leaden heaven, and the influence of discomforting forebodings,
this unquiet amounted to actual presentiment of evil; whether this had
reference to Sara or to herself she knew not; but she was disposed to
imagine the latter, and asked herself, as she often had done, whether
she were prepared for any occasion which might separate her for ever
from all those whom she loved on earth. It is the proud prerogative
of this city that, without any mandate from the Constitution, without
any legal sanction it yet has the privilege of sealing by its
approval the reputation and renown of the great men whom this country
produces; and the honors which it confers are as much valued and
as much desired as any which are given in this country.

[Cheers.] It has won that position not because it has been given
to it, but because it has shown discrimination and earnestness and
because it has united the suffrage of the people in the approval of the
course that it has taken and of the honors it has bestowed. [Cheers.]
My Lord Mayor, it is in reference to that function which you have
performed to-day and the most brilliant reception which has been
accorded to the Sirdar that I now do your bidding and propose his
health. [Cheers.] But if the task would be in any circumstances arduous
and alarming, it is much more so because all that can be said in his
behalf has already been said by more eloquent tongues than mine.
I have little hope that I can add anything to the picture that has been
already drawn [allusion to previous speeches made by the Earl of
Cambridge, Lord Lansdowne, and Lord Rosebery], but no one can
wonder at the vast enthusiasm by which the career of this great soldier
has been received in this city. It is not merely his own personal
qualities that have achieved it. It is also the strange dramatic
interest of the circumstances, and the conditions under which his laurels
have been won. [Cheers.]

It has been a long campaign, the first part of which we do not look back
to with so much pleasure because we had undertaken a fearful task without
a full knowledge of the conditions we had to satisfy or the real character
of the foes to whom we were opposed. ["Hear! Hear!"] The remembrance
of that heroic figure whose virtues and whose death are impressed
so deeply upon the memory of the whole of the present generation of
Englishmen, the vicissitudes of those anxious campaigns in which the
most splendid deeds of gallantry were achieved are yet fresh in the minds
of the English people and Lord Rosebery has not exaggerated when he
has said that the debt was felt deeply in the mind of every
Englishman, however little they might talk of it at the time and
when the opportunity arrived with what eagerness, in spite of any
possible discouragement--with what eagerness the opportunity was
seized.

[Cheers.] It was a campaign--the campaign which your gallant guest has
won--it was a campaign marked by circumstances which have seldom marked
a campaign in the history of the world. [Cheers.] I suppose that
wonderful combination of all achievements and discoveries of modern
science, in support of the gallantry and well-tried strategy of a
British leader--I suppose these things have not been seen in our
history before.

[Cheers.] But the note of this campaign was that the Sirdar not only won
the battles which he was set to fight, but he furnished himself the
instruments by which they were won, or rather, I should say, he
was the last and perhaps by the nature of the circumstances the most
efficient of a list of distinguished men whose task it has been to rescue
the Egyptian army from inefficiency and contempt in order to put it on
the pinnacle of glory it occupies now. [Cheers.]
I remember in our debates during that terrible campaign of 1884-85 a
distinguished member of the Government of that day observing with
respect to Egyptian troops that they were splendid soldiers if only they
would not run away. [Laughter.]
It was a quaint way of putting it, but it was very accurate. They
had splendid physique; they had great fidelity and loyalty to their
chiefs; they had many of the qualities of the soldier, but like men
who had been recruited under the slave whip, and who had been
accustomed to the methods of despotism, they had not that courage
which can only be obtained by freedom and by united military training.

[Cheers.] What they lacked has been supplied to them, and the Egyptian
army, as it has issued from the hands of Sir Evelyn Wood, Sir Francis
Grenfell, and the Sirdar, is a magnificent specimen of the motive power
of the English leader. [Cheers.] We do not reflect on it, yet if we
have any interest in the administrative processes that go on in various
parts of the Empire we cannot help being impressed by the fact
that numbers on numbers of educated young men, who at home, in this
country, would show no very conspicuous qualities except those we
are accustomed to look for in an English gentleman, yet, if thrown
on their own resources, and bidden to govern and control and guide
large bodies of men of another race, they never or hardly ever fall
short of the task which has been given to them; but they will make
of that body of promising material splendid regiments by which the
Empire of England is extended and sustained.

[Cheers.]
It is one of the great qualities of the Sirdar that he has been able to
direct the races that are under him, to make them effective and loyal
soldiers, to attach them to himself, and insure their good conduct
in the field of battle. [Cheers.] He has many other qualities
upon which I might dilate if time permitted. Lord Cromer, who I
am glad to see Lord Rosebery noted as one who ought to have his
full share in any honors you confer on those who have built up
Egyptian prosperity, who is one of the finest administrators the
British race has ever produced--Lord Cromer is in the habit of
saying that the Sirdar has almost missed his vocation, and that if
he was not one of the first generals in the world, he would be one
of the first Chancellors of the Exchequer.

[Laughter and cheers.] I daresay many people think it a small thing that
a soldier should be able to save money [laughter], but it is not so if
you will only conceive for yourselves the agony of mind with which
in former times the Chancellors of the Exchequer or financial members
of the Council have received from time to time accounts of brilliant
victories, knowing all the time what a terrible effect upon the
ultimate balance of the budget those victories will entail.

[Laughter.] It is a hazardous thing to say, but I am almost inclined to
believe that the Sirdar is the only general that has fought a campaign
for £300,000 less than he originally promised to do it. [Laughter.] It
is a very great quality, and if it existed more generally, I
think that terror which financiers entertain of soldiers, and
that contempt which soldiers entertain for financiers would not
be so frequently felt.

["Hear! Hear!" and laughter.]
Well, then, the Sirdar has another great quality: he is a splendid
diplomatist. It would require talents of no small acuteness and
development to enable him to carry to so successful a result as he
did that exceedingly delicate mission up the Nile which conducted him
into the presence of Major Marchand. The intercourse of that time has
ended apparently in the deepest affection on both sides
[laughter]--certainly in the most unrestricted and unstinted
compliments and expressions of admiration and approval.

I think these things show very much for the diplomatic talents of the
Sirdar. He recently expressed his hope that the differences which
might have arisen from the presence of Major Marchand would not transcend
the powers of diplomacy to adjust. I am glad to say that up to a certain
point he has proved a true prophet.
[Cheers.] I received from the French Ambassador this afternoon
the information that the French Government had come to the conclusion
that the occupation of Fashoda was of no sort of value to the French
Republic.

[Loud cheers and some laughter.] And they thought that in the circumstances
to persist in an occupation which only cost them money and did
them harm merely because some bad advisers thought it might be
disagreeable to an unwelcome neighbor, would not show the wisdom by
which I think the French Republic has been uniformly guided, and
they have done what I believe the government of any other country
would have done, in the same position--they have resolved that that
occupation must cease.

[Cheers.] A formal intimation of that fact was made to me this afternoon
and it has been conveyed to the French authorities at Cairo. I believe
that the fact of that extremely difficult juxtaposition between the
Sirdar and Major Marchand has led to a result which is certainly gratifying
and, to some extent, unexpected; and that it is largely due to the
chivalrous character and diplomatic talents which the Sirdar displayed
on that occasion.

[Cheers.] I do not wish to be understood as saying that all causes of
controversy are removed by this between the French Government and
ourselves. It is probably not so, and I daresay we shall have many
discussions in the future; but a cause of controversy of a somewhat
acute and dangerous character has been removed and we cannot but
congratulate ourselves upon that.

[Cheers.]
I will only say that alike in his patient and quiet forethought, lasting
over three years, in his brilliant strategy on the field of battle,
in his fearless undertaking of responsibility and his contempt of danger,
and last but not least in the kindness and consideration which he displayed
for men who were for a moment in a position of antagonism to himself--in
these things he has shown a combination of the noblest qualities which
distinguish the race to which he belongs and by the exercise of
which the high position of England in this generation in the world
and in her great Empire has been won.

[Loud cheers.]

WILLIAM THOMAS SAMPSON

VICTORY IN SUPERIOR NUMBERS
[Speech of Rear-Admiral William T. Sampson at a banquet given in his honor
by citizens of Boston, Mass., February 6, 1899. Hon.
Richard Olney presided on the occasion.]

MR. PRESIDENT AND GENTLEMEN:--I rise to thank you for your most generous
greeting for myself, for my friends, and for all of the Navy that you
have included in the various remarks which have been made. I
want you to understand that I do not take it all to myself, but that
this is divided with all the men; and while with great hesitation I attempt
to make a speech at all, I feel that this is an opportunity which should
not be thrown away. I do not propose to say anything, as you might
expect, about the battle of Santiago, but I would like to say a few words
about the lessons which we have learned, or should learn, from that
battle.

First, I would say that neither that battle nor any other that I know
of, was won by chance. It requires an adequate means to accomplish
such a result. That battles are not won by chance, you have only to
consider for a moment a few--one or two--of the principal battles of
the world.
Not that I mean to class the battle of Santiago as one of the great battles
of the world--but just as an illustration. You will see the result
of adequate means in the case of the battle of Waterloo, for
instance.

When we remember that Wellington fought that battle with 130,000 men
opposed to Napoleon's 80,000, we are not surprised that it was Wellington's
battle. Take another decisive battle--Sedan. When the Germans
had 125,000 men opposed to 84,000, it does not seem possible that the
result could have been anything else.

So we might go over a long list. The sea fights furnish many instances
where it was found that the most powerful fleet was the one that was
successful. Nelson was always in favor of overwhelming fleets, though
he did not have them always at his command. Our own war of 1812
furnishes numerous instances where our victories depended upon the
superior force.

It seems unnecessary that such self-evident truths should be stated before
this assemblage of intelligent gentlemen, but we are apt to forget that
a superior force is necessary to win a victory. As I said before,
victory is not due to chance. Had superior force not been our own case
at the battle of Santiago, had it been the reverse, or had it been
materially modified, what turned out to be a victory might have been a
disaster; and that we must not forget.

The second lesson, if we may call it so, is closely allied, perhaps, to
the first. Shall we learn the lesson which is taught us in this recent
war? Shall we rest on the laurels which we may have won, or shall
we prepare for the future? Shall we not imagine our foe in the future,
as might well be the case, to be superior to the one over which
we have been victorious? It is a question that comes home to us
directly. On July 3d, when Cervera was returned, on board the "Iowa,"
to the mouth of the harbor at Santiago, he requested permission to send
a telegram reporting the state of the case to Captain-General Blanco.
Of course, no objection was raised to this, and Cervera wrote out a
telegram and sent it on board the flagship to be scrutinized and
forwarded to Blanco. He stated in this telegram that he obeyed his (General
Blanco's) orders and left the harbor of Santiago at 9.30 Sunday morning,
and "now," he said, "it is with the most profound regret that I have
to report that my fleet has been completely destroyed. We went out to
meet the forces of the enemy, which outnumbered us three to one."

I had so much sympathy with old Admiral Cervera that I did not have it
in my heart to modify or change in any respect the report which he
proposed to make to Captain-General Blanco. I felt that the truth would
be understood in the course of time, and that while I would not
now, or then, under any circumstances, admit that he was outnumbered
in the proportion of three to one, I still felt that he should be
at liberty to defend himself in that manner.

The fleets that were opposed to each other on that Sunday morning were,
as regards the number of the ships, about six to seven. Leaving
out the torpedo-destroyers and the "Gloucester," which may be said
not to have been fighting ships, the proportion was six to four.

The fleet of the Spaniards consisted of four beautiful ships. I think I
am stating the case within bounds when I say that they were--barring
their condition at that time, which, of course, we did not all know, in
many respects--that they were all our imaginations had led us to suppose.
We outnumbered them, but this is only another illustration of the
fact which I wish to bring before you, that it is necessary to have
a superior force to make sure of victory in any case.

It seems to me that you, gentlemen, who are so influential in determining
and deciding what the Navy of the United States should be, should
bear this emphatically in mind--that we must have more ships, more
guns, and all that goes to constitute an efficient navy. I am not
advocating a large navy. I do not believe that we should support a large
navy, but that it should be much larger than it is at present I think
you will all concede. The increased territory which we have added to our
country will probably produce an increase in our chances for war by at
least one hundred per cent.--not that we need increase the Navy to that
extent--but probably will.

NOAH HUNT SCHENCK

TRUTH AND TRADE
[Speech of Rev. Dr. Noah Hunt Schenck at the 110th annual banquet of
the Chamber of Commerce of the State of New York, New York City, May 14,
1878. In introducing Dr. Schenck, the President, Samuel D.
Babcock, said: "The loose manner in which the Dinner Committee have
conducted their business is now becoming evident.

The chairman has got considerably mixed on the toasts. You may
recollect that the toast to which Dr. Chapin responded referred
to twins [Rev. Dr.
Edwin H.

Chapin had spoken to the toast 'Commerce and Capital, twin forerunners
of civilization and philanthropy'], and here is one that refers to
matrimony, and it is very evident that this one ought to have preceded
the other.
Beyond this, she was now no longer in those years
when one stands in life on a flying foot, careless and presumptuous:
she had planted herself firmly in life; had her own quiet room; her
peaceful sphere of activity, which she now loved more than the most
brilliant adventures in the world! It was not therefore to be wondered
at, that she recoiled tremblingly from the unlovely and hateful which is
at home by the road sides.

Petrea listened with a strongly beating heart; the rustling came nearer
and nearer; for one moment she thought of concealing herself on the
opposite side of the way, but in the next she boldly demanded "Who is
there?"

All was still. Petrea strained her eyes to discover some one in the
direction of the sound, but in vain: the wood was thick, and it had
become quite dark. Once again, exclaimed Petrea, "If any one be there
let him come to the help of unfortunate travellers!"

Even the heart of robbers, thought she, would be mollified by
confidence; and prayers for help might remove thoughts of murder. The
rustling in the wood began afresh, and now were heard the voices
of--children. An indescribable sensation of joy went through Petrea's
heart. A whole army, with Napoleon at their head, could not at this
moment have given that feeling of security and protection which came
from those children's voices; and soon came issuing from the wood two
little barefooted human creatures, a boy and a girl, who stared on
Petrea with astonishment. She quickly made herself acquainted with them,
and they promised to conduct her to the cottage, which lay at a little
distance. On their way they gave Petrea bilberries out of their full
birch-wood measure, and related to her that the reason of their being
out so late was, that they had been looking for the cow which was lost
in the wood; that they should have driven her home, but had not been
able to find her; which greatly troubled the little ten-years-old girl,
because, she said, the sick lady could not have any milk that evening.

Whilst Petrea, led by her little guardian-angels, wandered through the
wood, we will make a little flight, and relate what had occurred there a
few days before.

A few days before, a travelling-car drove along this road, in which sate
a lady and a little girl. As they came within sight of a small cottage,
which with its blossoming potato-field looked friendly in the wood, the
lady said to the peasant boy who drove, "I cannot go farther! Stop! I
must rest!" She dismounted, and crawled with his help to the cottage,
and besought the old woman, whom she found there, for a glass of water,
and permission to rest upon the bed for a moment. The voice which prayed
for this was almost inaudible, and the countenance deathly pale. The
little girl sobbed and cried bitterly. Scarcely had the poor invalid
laid herself upon the humble and hardly clean bed, when she fell into a
deep stupor, from which she did not revive for three hours.

On her return to consciousness she found that the peasant had taken her
things into the cottage; taken his horse out of the car, and left her.
The invalid made several ineffectual attempts during three days to leave
the bed, but scarcely had she taken a few steps when she sunk back upon
it; her lips trembled, and bitter tears flowed over her pale cheeks. The
fourth day she lay quite still; but in the afternoon besought the old
woman to procure her an honest and safe person, who, for a suitable sum,
would conduct the little girl to a place which would be made known to
him by a letter that would be given with her. The old woman proposed her
brother's son as a good man, and one to be relied on for this purpose,
and promised in compliance with the prayer of the sick woman to seek him
out that same day and speak with him; but as he lived at a considerable
distance she feared that she should only be able to return late in the
evening. After she was gone, the invalid took paper and a lead pencil,
and with a weak and trembling hand wrote as follows:

      "I cannot arrive--I feel it! I sink before I reach the haven. Oh,
      foster-parents, good sisters, have mercy on my little one, my
      child, who knocks at your door, and will deliver to you my humble,
      my last prayer! Give to her a warm home, when I am resting in my
      cold one! See, how good she looks! Look at her young countenance,
      and see that she is acquainted with want--she is not like her
      mother! I fancy her mild features resemble hers whose name she
      bears, and whose angelic image never has left my soul.

      "Foster-mother, foster-father! good sisters! I had much to say,
      but can say only a little! Forgive me! Forgive me the grief which
      I have occasioned you! Greatly have I erred, but greatly also have
      I suffered. A wanderer have I been on the earth, and have had
      nowhere a home since I left your blessed roof! My way has been
      through the desert; a burning simoom has scorched, has consumed my
      cheek----

      "About to leave the world in which I have erred so greatly and
      suffered so much, I call now for your blessing. Oh, let me tell
      you that that Sara, which you once called daughter and sister, is
      yet not wholly unworthy! She is sunk deep, but she has endeavoured
      to raise herself; and your forms, like good angels, have floated
      around the path of her improvement.

      "It will do your noble hearts good to know that she dies now
      repentant, but hopeful--she has fixed her humble hope upon the
      Father of Mercy.

      "The hand of mercy cherished on earth the days of my
      childhood--later, it has lifted my dying head, and has poured into
      my heart a new and a better life; it has conducted me to hope in
      the mercy of heaven. Foster-father, thou who wast His image to me
      on earth, thou whom I loved much--gentle foster-mother, whose
      voice perhaps could yet call forth life in this cold breast--have
      mercy on my child--call it your child! and thanks and blessings be
      upon you!

      "It never was my intention to come, as a burden, into your house.
      No; I wished only to conduct my child to your door--to see it open
      to her, and then to go forth--go forth quietly and die. But I
      shall not reach so far! God guide the fatherless and the
      motherless to you!

      "And now farewell! I can write no more--it becomes dark before my
      eyes. I write these last words upon my knees. Parents, sisters,
      take my child to you! May it make you some time forget the errors
      of its mother! Pardon all my faults! I complain of no one.

      "God reward you, and be merciful to me!

                              "Sara."

Sara folded her letter hastily, sealed it and directed it, and then,
enfeebled by the exertion, sank down beside her sleeping child, kissed
her softly, and whispered, "for the last time!" Her feet and hands were
like ice; she felt this icy coldness run through all her veins, and
diffuse itself over her whole body; her limbs stiffened; and it seemed
to her as if a cold wind blew into her face.

"It is death!" thought Sara; "my death-bed is lonesome and miserable;
yet--I have deserved no better." Her consciousness became ever darker;
but in the depths of her soul combated still the last, perhaps the
noblest powers of life--suffering and prayer. At length they too also
became benumbed, but not for long, for new impressions waked suddenly
the slumbering life.

It appeared to Sara as if angel voices had spoken and repeated her name,
tender hands had rubbed her stiffened limbs with electrical fire; her
feet were pressed to a bosom that beat strongly; hot drops fell upon
them, and thawed the icy coldness. She felt a heart throbbing against
hers, and the wind of death upon her face vanished before warm summer
breath, kisses, tears. Oh! was it a dream? But the dream became ever
more living and clear. Life, loving, affectionate, warm life, contended
with death, and was the victor! "Sara, Sara!" cried a voice full of love
and anxiety, and Sara opened her eyes, and said, "Oh! Petrea, is it
you?"

Yes, indeed, it was our poor Petrea, whose distress at Sara's condition,
and whose joy over her now returning life, can neither of them be
described. Sara took Petrea's hand, and conveyed it to her lips, and the
humility of this action, so unlike the former Sara, penetrated Petrea's
heart.

"Give me something to drink," prayed Sara, with a feeble voice. Petrea
looked around for some refreshing liquid, but there was nothing to be
found in the cottage excepting a jug containing a little muddy water;
not a drop of milk, and the cow was lost in the wood! Petrea would have
given her heart's blood for a few drops of wine, for she saw that Sara
was ready to die from feebleness. And now, with feelings which are not
to be told, must she give Sara to drink from the muddy water, in which,
however, to make it more refreshing, she bruised some bilberries. Sara
thanked her for it as if it had been nectar.

"Is there anywhere in this neighbourhood a place where one can meet with
people, and obtain the means of life?" asked Petrea from her little
guide.

The little guide knew of none excepting in the village, and in the
public-house there they could obtain everything, "whatever they wished,"
said the child; to be sure it was a good way there, but she knew a
footpath through the wood by which they might soon reach it.

Petrea did not stop thinking for a moment; and after she had encouraged
Sara to courage and hope, she set out most speedily with the little
nimble maiden on the way to the village.

The girl went first: her white head-kerchief guided Petrea through the
duskiness of the wood. But the footway which the girl trod so lightly
and securely, was an actual way of trial for Petrea. Now and then
fragments of her clothes were left hanging on the thick bushes; now a
branch which shot outwards seized her bonnet and struck it flat; now she
went stumbling over tree-roots and stones, which, on account of the
darkness and the speed of her flight, she could not avoid; and now bats
flew into her face. In vain did the wood now elevate itself more
majestically than ever around her; in vain, did the stars kindle their
lights, and send their beams into the deep gullies of the wood; in vain
sang the waterfalls in the quiet evening as they fell from the rocks.
Petrea had now no thought for the beauty of nature; and the lights which
sparkled from the village were to her a more welcome sight than all the
suns and stars in the firmament.

More lights than common streamed in pale beams through the misty windows
of the public-house as Petrea came up to it. All was fermentation within
it as in a bee-hive; violins were playing; the _polska_ was being
danced; women's gowns swung round, sweeping the walls; iron-heeled shoes
beat upon the floor; and the dust flew up to the ceiling. After Petrea
had sought in vain for somebody outside the dancing-room, she was
compelled to go in, and then she saw instantly that there was a wedding.
The gilded crown on the head of the bride wavered and trembled amid the
attacks and the defence of the contending parties, for it was precisely
the hot moment of the Swedish peasant wedding, in which, as it is said,
the crown is danced off the head of the bride. The married women were
endeavouring to vanquish and take captive the bride, whilst the girls
were, on their part, doing their utmost to defend and hold her back. In
the other half of the great room, however, all went on more noisily and
more violently still, for there the married men strove to dance the
bridegroom from the unmarried ones, and they pulled and tore and pushed
unmercifully, amid shouts and laughter, whilst the _polska_ went on its
whirling measure.

It would be almost at the peril of her life that a delicate lady should
enter into such a tumult; but Petrea feared in this moment no other
danger than that of not being able to make herself heard in this wild
uproar. She called and demanded to speak with the host; but her voice
was perfectly swallowed up in the universal din. She then quickly turned
herself, amid the contending and round-about-swinging groups to the two
musicians, who were scraping upon their fiddles with a sort of frenzy,
and beating time with their feet. Petrea caught hold of one of them by
the arm, and prayed him in God's name to leave off for a moment, for
that her business was of life and death. But they paid not the slightest
attention to her; they heard not what she said; they played, and the
others danced with fury.

"That is very mad!" thought Petrea, "but I will be madder still!" and so
thinking, she threw down, upon the musicians, a table which stood near
them covered with bottles and glasses. With this crash the music was
suddenly still. The pause in the music astonished the dancers; they
looked around them. Petrea took advantage of this moment, went into the
crowd and called for the host. The host, who was celebrating his
daughter's wedding, came forward; he was a fat, somewhat pursy man, who
evidently had taken a glass too much.

Petrea related summarily that which had happened; prayed for people to
assist at the carriage, and for some wine and fine bread for an invalid.
She spoke with warmth and determination; but nevertheless the host
demurred, and the crowd, half intoxicated with drink and dancing,
regarded her with a distrustful look, and Petrea heard it whispered
around her--"The mad lady!" "It is the mad lady!" "No, no, it is not
she!" "Yes, it is she!"

And we must confess that Petrea's excited appearance, and the condition
of her toilet after the fatigues of her wandering, gave some occasion
for her being taken for a little crazy; this, and the circumstance of
her being mistaken for another person, may explain the disinclination to
afford her assistance, which otherwise does not belong to the character
of the Swedish peasantry.

Again Petrea exhorted host and peasant to contribute their help, and
promised befitting reward.

The host set himself now in a commanding attitude, cleared his throat,
and spoke with a self-satisfied air.

"Yes, yes," said he, "that's all right-good and handsome, but I should
like to see something of this befitting reward before I put myself out
of the way about overturned carriages. In the end, maybe, one shall find
neither one nor the other. One cannot believe everything that people
say!"

Petrea recollected with uneasiness that she had no money with her; she,
however, let nothing of that be seen, but replied calmly and
collectedly, "You shall receive money when you come to the carriage. But
for heaven's sake, follow me immediately; every moment's delay may cost
a life!"

The men looked undecidedly one on another; but no one stirred from the
place; a dull murmur ran through the crowd. Almost in despair, Petrea
clasped her hands together and exclaimed, whilst tears streamed from her
eyes, "Are you Christians, and yet can hear that fellow-creatures are in
danger without hastening to help them."

She mentioned the name and office of her father, and then went from
prayers to threats.

Whilst all this was going on in the house, something was going on at the
door, of which, in all speed, we will give a glimpse.

There drew up at the inn-door a travelling-calash, accompanied by a
small Holstein carriage in which sate four boys, the eldest of whom,
probably ten years of age, and who, evidently greatly to his
satisfaction, had managed with his own hands a pair of thin travelling
horses. From the coach-box of the calash sprang nimbly a somewhat stout,
jovial-looking gentleman, and out of the carriage came, one after
another, other four little boys, with so many packets and bundles as was
perfectly wonderful; among all these moved a rather thin lady of a good
and gay appearance, who took with her own hands all the things out of
the carriage, and gave them into the care of a maid and the eldest of
the eight boys; the youngest sate in the arms of his father.

"Can you yet hold something, Jacob?" asked the lady from one of the
boys, who stood there loaded up to the very chin. "Yes, with my nose,"
replied he, merrily; "nay, nay, mamma dear, not the whole
provision-basket--that's quite impossible!"

The mother laughed, and instead of the provision-basket, two or three
books were put under the protection of the little nose.

"Take care of the bottles, young ones!" exhorted the mother, "and count
them exactly; there should be ten of them. Adam, don't stand there with
your mouth open, but hold fast, and think about what you have in your
hand, and what you are doing! Take good care of the bottle of mamma's
elixir. What a noise is there within! Does nobody come out? Come here my
young ones! Adam, look after David! Jonathan, stand here! Jacob,
Solomon, where are you? Shem and Seth, keep quiet!"

This was the moment when, by the opening of the door of the
dancing-room, they became aware of the arrival of the travellers, and
when the host hastened out to receive them. Many followed him, and among
the rest Petrea, who quickly interrupted her address to the peasants, in
order, through the interposition of the travellers, as she hoped, to
obtain speedier help.

"Good gentlefolks," cried she, in a voice which showed her agitation of
mind; "I know not, it is true, who you are" (and the darkness prevented
her from seeing it), "but I hope you are Christians, and I beseech of
you, for heaven's sake----"

"Whose voice is that?" interrupted a cheerful, well-toned, manly voice.

"Who speaks?" exclaimed Petrea in astonishment.

A few words were exchanged, and suddenly the names "Petrea! Jacobi!
Louise!" flew exultantly from the lips of the three, and they locked one
another in a heartfelt and affectionate embrace.

"Aunt Petrea! Aunt Petrea!" cried the eight boys in jubilation, and
hopped around her.

Petrea wept for joy that she had not alone met with good Christians, but
had hit upon her most Christian brother-in-law and court-preacher, and
upon "our eldest," who, with her hopeful offspring, "the Berserkers,"
were upon their journey to the paternal house and the new parsonage.

A few minutes afterwards the carriage, containing Petrea, Louise, and
Jacobi, accompanied by peasants on horseback, drove away at full gallop
into the wood, into whose gullies, as well as into Petrea's imploring
eyes, the half-moon, which now ascended, poured its comfortable light.

We leave Petrea now with her relatives, who, on their homeward journey,
fell in with her at the right moment to save her from a situation in the
highest degree painful. We are perfectly sure that the Assessor received
speedy assistance; that Sara was regaled with wine as well as with
Louise's elixir; that Petrea's heart was comforted, and her toilet
brought into order; and in confirmation of this our assurance we will
quote the following lines from a letter of Louise, which on the next day
was sent off home.

"I am quite convinced that Sara, with careful attention, befitting diet,
and above all, by being surrounded with kindness, may be called back to
life and health. But for the present she is so weak that it is
impossible to think of her travelling under several days. And in any
case, I doubt if she will come with us, unless my father come to fetch
her. She says that she will not be a burden to our family. Ah! now it is
a pleasure to open house and heart to her. She is so changed! And her
child is--a little angel! For the Assessor it might be necessary, on
account of his leg, that he go to the city; but he will not leave Sara,
who requires his help so greatly (his servant is out of all danger).
Petrea, spite of all fatigues and adventures, is quite superb. She and
Jacobi enliven us all. As things now stand we cannot fix decidedly the
day of our arrival; but if Sara continue to improve, as appearances
promise, Jacobi sets out to-morrow with the children to you. It is so
dear with them all here in the public-house. God grant that we may all
soon meet again in our beloved home!"

An hour after the receipt of this letter the Judge set off with such
haste as if his life were concerned. He journeyed from home to the
forest-village; we, on the contrary, reverse the journey, and betake
ourselves from the public-house to----

FOOTNOTES:

[21] A Day-book (Dagbok) is kept at every inn in Sweden. The name of
every traveller who takes thence horses, and the name of the next town
to which he proceeds, are entered in it; and thus when once on the
trace, nothing could be easier than to discover such a traveller. The
day-book is renewed each month.--M. H.


CHAPTER IV.

THE HOME.


Lilies were blossoming in the house on the beautiful morning of the
twentieth of September. They seemed to shoot up of themselves under
Gabriele's feet. The mother, white herself as a lily, went about softly
in her fine morning-dress, with a cloth in her hand, wiping away from
mirror or table the smallest particle of dust. A higher expression of
joy than common animated her countenance; a fine crimson tinged her
otherwise pale cheeks, and the lips moved themselves involuntarily as if
they would speak loving and joyful words.

Bergström adorned ante-room and steps with foliage and splendid flowers,
so that they represented a continuation of garlands along the white
walls; and not a little delighted was he with his own taste, which
Gabriele did not at all omit to praise. But although an unusually great
deal of occupation pervaded the house this morning, still it was
nevertheless unusually quiet; people only spoke in low voices, and when
the least noise was made, the mother said, "Hush! hush!"

The cause of this was, that the lost but again-found child slept in the
house of her parents.

Sara had arrived there the evening before, and we have passed over this
scene, for the great change in her, and her shaken condition, had made
it sorrowful; yet we wish indeed that the feeling reader had seen the
manly tears which flowed down the cheeks of the Judge, as he laid the
found-again daughter on the bosom of her mother. We should like to have
shown him the unfortunate one, as she rested with her hands crossed over
her breast on the snow-white couch, over which the mother herself had
laid the fine coverlet; have shown him how she looked upon the child,
whose bed stood near her own; upon the beloved ones, who full of
affection surrounded her--and then up to heaven, without being able to
utter one word! And how glad should we have been could he have seen the
Jacobian pair this evening in the paternal home, and how there sate
eating around them, Adam and Jacob, the twin brothers Jonathan and
David, ditto Shem and Seth, together with Solomon and little Alfred.
They were well-trained children, and looked particularly well, all
dressed alike in a blouse of dark stuff, over which fell back the white
shirt collar, leaving free the throat with its lively tint of health,
whilst the slender waist was girded with a narrow belt of white leather.
Such was the light troop of "the Berserkers."

But we return to our bright morning hour. Eva and Leonore were in the
garden, and gathered with their own hands some select Astracan apples
and pears, which were to ornament the dinner table. They were still
glittering with dew, and for the last time the sun bathed them with
purple by the song of the bulfinch. The sisters had spoken of Sara; of
the little Elise, whom they would educate; of Jacobi--and their
conversation was cheerful; then they went to other subjects.

"And to-day," said Leonore, "your last answer goes to Colonel R----,
your last, no! And you feel quite satisfied that it should be so?"

"Yes, quite!" returned Eva; "how the heart changes! I cannot now
conceive how I once loved him!"

"It is extraordinary how he should still solicit your hand, and this
after so long a separation. He must have loved you much more than any of
the others to whom he made court."

"I do not think so, but--ah, Leonore! do you see the beautiful apple
there? It is quite bright. Can you reach it? No? Yes, if you climb on
this bough."

"Must I give myself so much trouble?" asked Leonore; "that is indeed
shocking! Well, but I must try, only catch me if I should fall!"

The sisters were here interrupted by Petrea, whose appearance showed
that she had something interesting to communicate.

"See, Eva," said she, giving to her a written piece of paper, "here you
have something for morning-reading. Now you must convince yourself of
something of which till now you would not believe. And I shall call you
a stock, a stone, an automaton without heart and soul, if you do
not--yes, smile! You will not laugh when you have read it. Leonore!
come, dear Leonore, you must read it also, you will give me credit for
being right. Read, sisters, read!"

The sisters read the following remarks, in the handwriting of the
Assessor.

"'Happy is the lonely and the lowly! He may ripen and refresh himself in
peace!' Beautiful words, and what is better, true.

"The foundling has proved their truth. He was sick in mind, heart, and
sick of the world and of himself, but he belonged to the lowly and to
the unnoticed, and so he could be alone; alone, in the fresh, quiet
wood, alone with the Great Physician, who only can heal the deep wounds
of the heart--and it is become better with him.

"Now I begin to understand the Great Physician, and the regimen which he
has prescribed for me. I feared the gangrene selfishness, and would
drink myself free therefrom by the nectar of love; but he said,
'Jeremias, drink not this draught, but that of self-denial--it is more
purifying.'

"I have drunk it. I have loved her for twenty years without pretension
and without hope.

"To-day I have passed my three-and-sixtieth year; the increasing pain in
my side commands me to leave the steps of the patients, and tells me
that I have not many more paces to count till I reach my grave. May it
be permitted to me to live the remainder of my days more exclusively for
her!

"At the 'Old Man's Rose' will I live for her--for it stands in my will
that it belongs to her, it belongs to Eva Frank.

"I will beautify it for her. I will cultivate there beautiful trees and
flowers for her; vines and roses will I bring there. Old age will some
time seize on her, wither her, and consume her. But then 'the rose of
age' will bloom for her, and the odour of my love bless her, when the
ugly old man wanders on the earth no more. She will take her dear
sisters to her there; there hear the songs of the birds, and see the
glory of the sun upon the lovely objects of nature.

"I will repose on these thoughts during the solitary months or years
that I must pass there. Truly, many a day will be heavy to me; and the
long solitary evenings; truly, it were good to have there a beloved and
gentle companion, to whom one might say each day, 'Good morning, the sun
is beautiful;' or in whose eyes--if it were not so--one could see a
better sun;--a companion with whom one could enjoy books, nature--all
that God has given us of good; whose hand, in the last heavy hour one
could press, and to whom one could say, 'Good night! we meet
again--to-morrow--with love itself--with God!'

"But--but--the foundling shall find no home upon earth!

"Now he will soon find another home, and will say to the master there,
'Father, have mercy on my rose!' and to the habitation of men will he
say, 'Wearisome wast thou to me, O world! but yet receive my thanks for
the good which thou hast given me!'"

       *       *       *       *       *

When the sisters had ceased to read, several bright tears lay upon the
paper, and shone in the light of the sun. Leonore dried her tears, and
turning herself to Petrea, inquired, "But, Petrea, how came this paper
into your hands?"

"Did I not think that would come?" said Petrea. "You should not ask such
difficult questions, Leonore. Nay, now Eva's eyes are inquiring too--and
so grave. Do you think that the Assessor has put it into my hands? Nay,
he must be freed from that suspicion even at my expense. You want to
know how I came by this paper? Well then--I stole it, sisters--stole it
on our journey--on the very morning after it was written."

"But, Petrea!"

"But, Petrea! yes, you good ones! it is too late now to cry, 'but,
Petrea!' now you know the Assessor's secret; you now may do what your
consciences command, mine is hardened--you may start before my act, and
be horrified; I don't ask about it. The whole world may excommunicate
me--I don't trouble myself!--Eva! Leonore! Sisters!"

Petrea laid an arm round the neck of each sister, kissed them, smiling
with a tear in her eye, and vanished.

       *       *       *       *       *

Somewhat later in the morning we find Eva and Gabriele on a visit at the
beautiful parsonage-house immediately in the vicinity of the town, where
Mrs. Louise is in full commotion with all her goods and chattels, whilst
the little Jacobis riot with father and grandfather over fields and
meadows. The little four-years-old Alfred, an uncommonly lively and
amiable child, is alone with the mother at home; he pays especial court
to Gabriele, and believing that he must entertain her, he brings out his
Noah's Ark to introduce to her, in his low, clear, young voice, Ham and
Hamina, Shem and Shemina, Japhet and Japhetina.

After all how-do-ye-do's between the sisters had been answered, Gabriele
loosened the paper from a basket which Ulla had brought in, and asked
Louise to be pleased to accept some roast veal and patties. "We
thought," said she, "that you would need something fresh after the
journey, before you get your store-room in order. Just taste a patty!
they are filled with mince-meat, and I assure you are baked since the
Flood."

"Really!" replied Louise, laughing, "they are delicate too! See, there's
one for you, my little manikin; but another time don't come and set
yourself forward and look so hungry! Thanks! thanks, dear sister! Ah,
how charming that we are come again into your neighbourhood! How fresh
and happy you all look! And Petrea! how advantageously she has altered;
she is come to have something quiet and sensible about her; she has
outgrown her nose, and dresses herself neatly; she is just like other
people now. And see--here I have a warm, wadded morning-dress for her,
that will keep her warm up in her garret; is it not superb? And it cost
only ten thalers courant."

"Oh, extraordinary!--out of the common way!--quite unheard of!" said
they, "is it not so?--why it is a piece of clothing for a whole life!"

"What a beautiful collar Eva has on! I really believe she is grown
handsomer," said Louise. "You were and are still the rose of the family,
Eva; you look quite young, and are grown stout. I, for my part, cannot
boast of that; but how can anybody grow stout when they have eight
children to work for! Do you know sisters, that in the last week before
I left Stockholm, I cut out a hundred and six shirts! I hope I can meet
with a good sempstress here; at home; look at my finger, it is quite
hard and horny with sewing. God bless the children! one has one's
trouble with them. But tell me, how is it with our mother? They have
always been writing to me that she was better--and yet I find her
terribly gone off; it really grieves me to see her. What does the
Assessor say?"

"Oh," replied Gabriele warmly, "he says that she will recover. There is
really no danger; she improves every day."

Eva did not look so hopeful as Gabriele, and her eyes were filled with
tears as she said, "When autumn and winter are only over, I hope that
the spring----"

"And do you know," interrupted Louise, with animation, "what I have been
thinking of? In the spring she shall come to us and try the milk cure:
she shall occupy this room, with the view towards the beautiful birch
grove, and shall enjoy the country air, and all the good things which
the country affords and which I can obtain for her--certainly this will
do her good. Don't you think that then she will recover? Don't you think
that it is a bright idea of mine?"

The sisters thought that really it was bright, and Louise continued:

"Now I must show you what I have brought for her. Do you see these two
damask breakfast cloths, and these six breakfast napkins?--all spun in
the house. I have had merely to pay for the weaving. Now, how do they
please you?"

"Oh, excellently! excellently!" said one sister.

"How very handsome! How welcome they will be!" said the other.

"And you must see what I have bought for my father--ah! Jacobi has it in
his carpet-bag--one thing lies here and another there--but you will see
it, you will see it."

"What an inundation of things!" said Gabriele, laughing. "One can see,
however, that there is no shortness of money."

"Thank God!" said Louise, "all is comfortable in that respect, though
you may very well believe that it was difficult at first; but we began
by regulating the mouths according to the dishes. Ever since I married I
have had the management of the money. I am my husband's treasurer; he
gives over to me whatever comes in, and he receives from me what he
wants, and in this way all has gone right. The ruffians answered, "The
nation, always magnanimous, only seeks to punish the guilty. You may
be assured your family will be respected." Events have proved how well
they kept their word.

It was to fulfil the intention of recommending his family to the people
with his dying breath that he commenced his address upon the scaffold,
when Santerre ordered the drums to drown his last accents, and the axe
to fall!

The Princesse Elizabeth, and perhaps others of the royal prisoners,
hoped he would have been reprieved, till Herbert, that real 'Pere
du chene', with a smile upon his countenance, came triumphantly to
announce to the disconsolate family that Louis was no more!

Perhaps there never was a King more misrepresented and less understood,
especially by the immediate age in which he lived, than Louis XVI. He
was the victim of natural timidity, increased by the horror of bloodshed,
which the exigencies of the times rendered indispensable to his safety.

He appeared weak in intellect, when he was only so from circumstances.
An overwrought anxiety to be just made him hesitate about the mode
of overcoming the abuses, until its procrastination had destroyed
the object of his wishes.

He had courage sufficient, as well as decision, where others were not
menaced and the danger was confined to himself; but, where his family
or his people were involved, he was utterly unfit to give direction.

The want of self-sufficiency in his own faculties have been his, and
his throne's, ruin.

He consulted those who caused him to swerve from the path his own better
reason had dictated, and, in seeking the best course, he often
chose the worst.

The same fatal timidity which pervaded his character extended to his
manners. From being merely awkward, he at last became uncouth; but from
the natural goodness of his heart, the nearest to him soon lost
sight of his ungentleness from the rectitude of his intentions, and, to
parody the poet, saw his deportment in his feelings.

Previous to the Revolution, Louis XVI. was generally considered gentle
and affable, though never polished. But the numberless outrages
suffered by his Queen, his family, his friends, and himself,
especially towards the close of his career, soured him to an air
of rudeness, utterly foreign to his nature and to his intention.

It must not be forgotten that he lived in a time of unprecedented
difficulty.

He was a lamb governing tigers.
"We shall all meet for a
great coffee-drinking in the garden, and during this we shall lead the
conversation in a natural sort of way to the piece of ground on the
other side the fence, and then peep through the cracks in it, and then
express that usual wish that this fence might come down. And then, at
this signal, your eight boys, Louise, are to fall on the fence and----"

"How can you think," said Louise--"to be sure my boys are nimble and
strong, but it would require the power of Berserkers to----"

"Don't be alarmed," answered the sisters, laughing, "the fence is sawn
underneath, and stands only so firm that a few pushes will produce the
effect--the thing is not difficult. Besides, we'll all run to the
attack, if it be needful."

"Oh, heaven help us! if it be only so, my young ones will soon manage
the business--and _à propos_! I have a few bottles of select white
sugar-beer with me, which would certainly please my father, and which
will be exactly the right thing if we, as is customary on such
occasions, have to drink healths."

During this conversation little Alfred had gone round ineffectually
offering two kisses, and was just on the point of growing angry because
his wares found no demand, when all at once, summoning resolution, he
threw his arms round Gabriele's neck, and exclaimed, "Now I see really
and thoroughly, that Aunt Gabriele has need of a kiss!" And it was not
Aunt Gabriele's fault if the dear child was not convinced how wholly
indispensable his gift was.

But Louise still turned over her things. "Here," said she, "I have a
waistcoat-piece for Bergström, and here a neck-kerchief for Ulla, as
well as this little brush with which to dust mirrors and tables. Is it
not superb? And see, a little pair of bellows, and these trifles for
Brigitta."

"Now the old woman," said the sisters, "will be happy! She is now and
then out of humour, but a feast of coffee, and some little present,
reconcile her with all the world; and to-day she will get both."

"And see," continued Louise, "how capitally these bellows blow: they can
make the very worst wood burn--see how the dust flies!"

"Uh! one can be blown away oneself," said Gabriele, laughing.

While the sisters were still occupied with cleaning and dusting, and
Louise was admiring her own discoveries, the Judge came in, happy and
warm.

"What a deal of business is going forward!" exclaimed he, laughing. "I
must congratulate you," said he, "Louise; your boys please me entirely.
They are animated boys, with, intellects all alive--but, at the same
time, obedient and polite. Little David is a regular hairbrain, and a
magnificent lad--what a pity it is that he will be lame!"

Louise crimsoned from heartfelt joy over the praise of her boys, and
answered quickly to the lamentation over the little David, "You should
hear, father, what a talent he has for the violoncello; he will be a
second Gehrman."

"Nay, that is good," returned the Judge; "such a talent as that is worth
his two feet. But I have hardly had time to notice you properly yet,
Louise. Heavens! it's glorious that you are come again into our
neighbourhood; now I think I shall be able to see you every day! and you
can also enjoy here the fresh air of the country. You have got thin, but
I really think you have grown!"

Louise said laughingly, that the time for that was over with her.

The sisters also, among themselves, made their observations on Louise.
They were rejoiced to see her, among all her things, so exactly herself
again.

Handsomer she certainly had not become--but people cannot grow handsomer
to all eternity. She looked well and she looked good, had no more of the
cathedral about her; she was an excellent Archdeacon's lady.

       *       *       *       *       *

We transport ourselves now to Sara's chamber.

When a beloved and guiltless child returns, after sufferings overcome,
to the bosom of parents into a beloved home, who can describe the sweet
delight of its situation? The pure enjoyment of all the charms of home;
the tenderness of the family; the resigning themselves to the heavenly
feeling of being again at home? But the guilty----

We have seen a picture of the prodigal son which we shall never forget!
It is the moment of reconciliation: the father opens his arms to the
son; the son falls into them and hides his face. Deep compunction of the
heart bows down his head, and over his pale cheek--the only part of his
countenance which is visible, runs a tear--a tear of penitence and pain,
which says everything. The golden ring may be placed upon his hand; the
fatted calf may be killed and served up before him--he cannot feel gay
or happy--embittering tears gush forth from the fountains of memory.

Thus was it with Sara, and exactly to that degree in which her heart was
really purified and ennobled. As she woke out of a refreshing sleep in
her new home, and saw near her her child sleeping on the soft snow-white
bed; as she saw all, by the streaming in light of the morning sun, so
festally pure and fresh; as she saw how the faithful memory of affection
had treasured up all her youthful predilections; as she saw her
favourite flowers, the asters, beaming upon the stove, in an alabaster
vase; and as she thought how all this had been--and how it now was--she
wept bitterly.

Petrea, who was reading in the window of Sara's room waiting for her
awaking, stood now with cordial and consoling words near her bed.

"Oh, Petrea!" said Sara, taking her hand and pressing it to her breast,
"let me speak with you. My heart is full. I feel as if I could tell you
all, and you would understand me. I did not come here of my own
will--your father brought me. He did not ask me--he took me like a
child, and I obeyed like a child. I was weak; I thought soon to die; but
this night under this roof has given me strength. I feel now that I
shall live. Listen, to me, Petrea, and stand by me, for as soon as my
feet will carry me I must go away from here. I will not be a burden to
this house. Stained and despised by the world, as I am, I will not
pollute this sanctuary! Already have I read aversion towards me in
Gabriele's look. Oh, my abode here would be a pain to myself! Might my
innocent little one only remain in this blessed house. I must away from
here! These charms of life; this abundance, they are not for me--they
would wake anguish in my soul! Poverty and labour beseem me! I will
away hence. I must!--but I will trouble nobody: I will not appear
ungrateful. Help me, Petrea--think for me; what I should do and where I
should go!"

"I have already thought," replied Petrea.

"Have you?" said Sara, joyfully surprised, and fixed upon her
searchingly her large eyes.

"Come and divide my solitude," continued Petrea, in a cordial voice.
"You know that I, although in the house of my parents, yet live for
myself alone, and have the most perfect freedom. Next to my room is
another, a very simple but quiet room, which might be exactly according
to your wishes. Come and dwell there! There you can live perfectly as
you please; be alone, or see only me, till the quiet influence of calm
days draw you into the innocent life of the family circle."

"Ah, Petrea," returned Sara, "you are good--but you cannot approach a
person of ill-report--and you do not know----"

"Hush! hush!" interrupted Petrea; "I know very well--because I see and
hear you again! Oh, Sara! who am I that I should turn away from you? God
sees into the heart, and he knows how weak and erring mine is, even if
my outward life remain pure, and if circumstances and that which
surrounds me have protected me, and have caused my conduct to be
blameless. But I know myself, and I have no more earnest prayer to God
than that: 'Forgive me my trespasses!' May I not pray by your side?
Cannot we tread together the path which lies before us? Both of us have
seen into many depths of life--both of us now look up humbly to the
cheerful heaven! Give me your hand--you were always dear to me, and now,
even as in the years of childhood do I feel drawn to you! Let us go; let
us try together the path of life. My heart longs after you; and does not
yours say to you that we are fit for one another, and that we can be
happy together?"

"Should I be a burden to you?" said Sara: "were I but stronger, I would
wait upon you; could I only win my bread by my hands, as in the latter
years I have done--but now!"

"Now give yourself up to me blindly," said Petrea. "I have enough for
us both. In a while, when you are stronger, we will help one another."

"Will not my wasted life--my bitter remembrances make my temper gloomy
and me a burden?" asked Sara; "and do not dark spirits master those who
have been so long in their power?"

"Penitence," said Petrea, "is a goddess--she protects the erring. And if
a heathen can say this, how much more a Christian!--Oh, Sara!
annihilating repentance itself--I know it--can become a strength for
him, by which he can erect himself. It can raise up to new life; it can
arouse a will which can conquer all things--it has raised me erect--it
will do the same for you! You stand now in middle life--a long future is
before you--you have an amiable child; have friends; have to live for
eternal life! Live for these! and you will see how, by degrees, the
night vanishes, the day ascends, and all arranges itself and becomes
clear. Come, and let us two unitedly work at the most important business
of life--improvement!"

Sara, at these words, raised herself in the bed, and new beams were
kindled in her eyes. "I will," said she, "Petrea; an angel speaks
through you; your words strengthen and calm me wonderfully--I will begin
anew----"

Petrea pressed Sara to her breast, and spoke warm and heartfelt
"thanks," and then added softly, "and now be a good child, Sara!--all
weak and sick people are children. Now submit, calmly and resignedly, to
be treated and guided like such a one; gladden by so doing those who are
around you, and who all wish you well! His Excellency, Lou Tseng-tsiang,
Minister of Foreign Affairs of the Republic of China.

EXCHANGE OF NOTES RESPECTING RAILWAYS AND TAXES IN SOUTH MANCHURIA
AND EASTERN INNER MONGOLIA
--Note--Peking, the 25th day of the 5th month of the 4th year of the
Republic of China.

Monsieur le Ministre,

In the name of my Government.

I have the honour to make the following declaration to your Government:--

China will hereafter provide funds for building necessary railways in
South Manchuria and Eastern Inner Mongolia; if foreign capital is required
China may negotiate for a loan with Japanese capitalists first; and
further, the Chinese Government, when making a loan in future on the
security of the taxes in the above- mentioned places (excluding
the salt and customs revenue which have already been pledged by the
Chinese Central Government) may negotiate for it with Japanese
capitalists first.

I avail, etc.

(Signed) LOU TSENG-TSIANG.

His Excellency, Hioki Eki, Japanese Minister.

       

--Reply--
Peking, the 25th day of the 5th month of the 4th year of Taisho.

Excellency,
I have the honour to acknowledge the receipt of Your Excellency's note of
this day's date respecting railways and taxes in South Manchuria and
Eastern Inner Mongolia in which you stated:

"China will hereafter provide funds for building necessary railways
in South Manchuria and Eastern Inner Mongolia; if foreign capital is
required China may negotiate for a loan with Japanese capitalists first;
and further, the Chinese Government, when making a loan in future
on the security of taxes in the above mentioned places (excluding
the salt and customs revenue which has already been pledged by the
Chinese Central Government) may negotiate for it with Japanese
capitalists first.

In reply I beg to state that I have taken note of the same.

I avail, etc.,
(Signed) HIOKI EKI.

His Excellency, Lou Tseng-tsiang, Minister of Foreign Affairs.

EXCHANGE OF NOTES RESPECTING THE EMPLOYMENT OF ADVISERS IN SOUTH
MANCHURIA
--Note--Peking, the 25th day of the 5th month of the 4th year of the
Republic of China.

Monsieur le Ministre,

In the name of the Chinese Government, I have the honour to make the
following declaration to your Government:--
"Hereafter, if foreign advisers or instructors on political, financial,
military or police matters are to be employed in South Manchuria, Japanese
may be employed first."
I avail, etc.,
(Signed) LOU TSENG-TSIANG.

His Excellency, Hioki Eki, Japanese Minister.

--Reply--
Peking, the 25th day of the 5th month of the 4th year of
Taisho.

Excellency,
I have the honour to acknowledge the receipt of Your Excellency's
note of this day's date in which you made the following declaration
in the name of your Government:--
"Hereafter if foreign advisers or instructors in political, financial,
military or police matters are to be employed in South Manchuria,
Japanese may be employed first."
In reply, I beg to state that I have taken note of the same.
I avail, etc., 
(Signed) HIOKI EKI.
Hia Excellency, Lou Tseng-tsiang, Minister of Foreign Affairs.
EXCHANGE OF NOTES RESPECTING THE EXPLANATION OF "LEASE BY NEGOTIATION"
IN SOUTH MANCHURIA 
--Note--
Peking, the 25th day of the 5th month of the 4th year of
Taisho.

Excellency,
I have the honour to state that the term lease by negotiation
contained in Article 2 of the Treaty respecting South Manchuria and
Eastern Inner Mongolia signed this day shall be understood to imply
a long-term lease of not more than thirty years and also the
possibility of its unconditional renewal.

I avail, etc.,
(Signed) HIOKI EKI.
His Excellency, Lou Tseng-tsiang, Minister of Foreign Affairs.
--Reply--
Peking, the 25th day of the 5th month of the 4th year of the Republic
of China.

Monsieur le Ministre,
I have the honour to acknowledge the receipt of Your Excellency's
note of this day's date in which you state.After the little Jacobis had all enjoyed the foaming, elevating liquor,
they became possessed by such a buoyant spirit of life, that Louise was
obliged to command them to exhibit their mighty deeds at a distance.
Hereupon they swarmed forth on journeys of discovery, and began to
tumble head over heels round the place. David hobbled along with his
little crutch over stock and stone, whilst Jonathan gathered for him all
sorts of flowers, and plucked the bilberry plants, to which he pointed
with his finger; little nosegays were then made out of them, with which
they overwhelmed their aunts, especially Gabriele, their chosen friend
and patron. The serious Adam, the eldest of the eight, a boy of
exceedingly staid demeanour, sate quietly by the side of his
grandfather, and appeared to consider himself one of the elderly people;
the little Alfred hopped about his mother.

The Judge looked around him with an animated countenance; he planted
alleys and hedges; set down benches and saw them filled with happy
people, and communicated his plans to Jacobi.

Monsieur le Ministre,
I have the honour to acknowledge the receipt of Your Excellency's
note of this day's date which I have noted.

In reply I beg to inform you that the Chinese Government hereby
declares that it has given no permission to foreign nations to
construct, on the coast of Fukien Province, dock-yards, coaling stations
for military use, naval bases, or to set up other military establishment;
nor does it entertain an intention of borrowing foreign capital
for the purpose of setting up the above- mentioned establishmments.The Judge seized on the idea with joy. "So we will," said he; "we will
unite pleasure with profit. This undertaking will cost more than a
simple public pleasure-ground, but that need not prevent it. In this
beautiful time of peace, and with the prospect of its long continuance,
people may take works in hand, and hope to complete them, even if they
should require a long time."

"And such works," said Jacobi, "operate ennoblingly on life in times of
peace. Peace requires even as great a mass of power as war, but against
another kind of foe. Every ennobling of this earthly existence,
everything which exalts the mind to a more intellectual life, is a
battery directed against the commoner nature in man, and is a service
done to humanity and one's native land."

"Bah!" cried Jeremias with vexation, "humanity and native land! You have
always large words in the mouth; if a fence is thrown down or a bush
planted, it is immediately called a benefit for one's native land. Plant
your fields and throw down your fences, but let the native land rest in
peace! Her Majesty had scarcely left the apartment of the Princess, when
I recollected she had forgotten to give me the cipher and the key for
the letters.

The Princess immediately went to the Queen's apartment, and returned
with them shortly after.

"Now that we are alone," said Her Highness, "I will tell you what Her
Majesty has graciously commanded me to signify to you in her royal
name.
The Queen commands me to say that you are provided for for life;
and that, on the first vacancy which may occur, she intends fixing
you at Court.Have I not to
thank my country for everything that I have? Are they not its laws, its
institutions, its spiritual life, which have developed my whole being,
as man and as a citizen? And are they not the deeds of my fathers which
have fashioned these; which have given them their power and their
individual life? In fact, love and gratitude towards one's parents is
no greater duty than love and gratitude towards one's native land; and
there is no one, be he man or woman, high or low, but who, according to
his own relationships, can and must pay this holy debt. And this is
exactly the signification of a christianly constituted state, that every
one shall occupy with his pound so as to benefit, at the same time, both
the individual and the community at large."

"Thus," added Petrea, "do the rain-drops swell the brook, which pours
its water into the river, and may, even though it be nameless,
communicate benefit in its course."

"So it is, my dear child," said her father, and extended to her his
hand.

"It is a gladdening thought," said Louise, with tearful eyes. "Pay
attention, Adam, to what grandfather and aunt say, and keep it in your
mind;--but don't open your mouth so wide; a whole frigate could sail
into it."

At these words little Alfred began to laugh so shrilly and so heartily
that all the elderly folks irresistibly bore him company. Adam laughed
too; and at the sound of this peal of laughter came bounding forward
from all ends and corners Shem and Seth, Jacob and Solomon, Jonathan and
David, just as a flock of sparrows comes flying down over a handful of
scattered corn. They came laughing because they heard laughter, and
wished to be present at the entertainment.

In the mean time the sun had set, and the cool elves of evening began to
wander over the place as the family, amid the most cheerful talk, arose
in order to return to the house. As they went into the city the ball on
St. Mary's church glimmered like fire in the last beams of the sun, and
the moon ascended like a pale but gentle countenance over the roof of
their house. There was a something in this appearance which made a
sorrowful impression on Gabriele. The star of the church tower glittered
over the grave of her brother, and the look of the moon made her
involuntarily think on the pale, mild countenance of her mother. For the
rest, the evening was so lovely, the blackbird sang among the alders by
the brook, and the heaven lay clear and brightly blue over the earth,
whilst the wind and every disturbing sound became more and more hushed.

Gabriele walked on, full of thought, and did not observe that Baron L.
had approached her; they were almost walking together as he said, "I am
very glad; it was very pleasant to me to see you all again so happy!"

"Ah, yes," answered Gabriele, "now we can all be together again. It is a
great happiness that Louise and her family are come here."

"Perhaps," continued the Baron--"perhaps it might be audacity to disturb
such a happily united life, and to wish to separate a daughter and
sister from such a family--but if the truest----"

"Ah!" hastily interrupted Gabriele, "don't speak of disturbing anything,
of changing anything--everything is so good as it now is!"

He was silent, with an expression of sorrow.

"Let us be all happy together," said Gabriele, bashfully and cordially;
"you will stop some time with us. It is so charming to have friends and
sisters--this united life is so agreeable with them."

The Baron's countenance brightened. He seized Gabriele's hand, and would
have said something, but she hastened from him to her father, whose arm
she took.

Jacobi conducted Petrea; they were cheerful and confidential together,
as happy brother and sister. She spoke to him of her present happiness,
and of the hope which made up her future. He took the liveliest interest
in it, and spoke with her of his plans; of his domestic happiness; and
with especial rapture of his boys; of their obedience to the slightest
word of their parents; of their mutual affection to each other--and
see--all this was Louise's work! And Louise's praise was sung forth in a
harmonious duet--ever a sweet scent for "our eldest," who appeared,
however, to listen to no one but her father.

They soon reached home. The mother stood with the silver ladle in her
hand, and the most friendly smile on her lips, in the library, before a
large steaming bowl of punch, and with look and voice bade the entering
party welcome.

"My dear Elise," said the Judge, embracing her, "you are become twenty
years younger to-day."

"Happiness makes one young," answered she, looking on him
affectionately.

People seated themselves.

Circumstances had so completely changed for the worst, that, though Her
Highness was received with great kindness, her mission was no longer
listened to.

The policy of England shrunk from encouraging twenty thousand French
troops to be sent in a body to the West Indies, and France was
left to its fate.

A conversation with Mr. Burke, in which the disinclination of England to
interfere was distinctly owned, created that deep-rooted grief and
apprehension in the mind of the Queen from which Her Majesty never
recovered. The Princesse de Lamballe was the only one in her confidence.
It is well known that the King of England greatly respected the personal
virtues of Their French Majesties; but upon the point of business,
both King and Ministers were now become ambiguous and evasive. Her
Highness, therefore, resolved to return. It had already been whispered
that she had left France, only to save herself, like the rest; and
she would no longer remain under so slanderous an imputation.

She felt, too, the necessity of her friendship to her royal mistress.
Though the Queen of England, by whom Her Highness was very much
esteemed, and many other persons of the first consequence in the
British nation, foreseeing the inevitable fate of the Royal Family,
and of all their faithful adherents, anxiously entreated her not
to quit England, yet she became insensible to every consideration
as to her own situation and only felt the isolated one of her august
Sovereign, her friend, and benefactress.

SECTION XIV.

Editor in continuation:

Events seemed molded expressly to produce the state of feeling which
marked that disastrous day, the 20th of June, 1792. It frequently
happens that nations, like individuals, rush wildly upon the very dangers
they apprehend, and select such courses as invite what they are
most solicitous to avoid.

So it was with everything preceding this dreadful day. By a series
of singular occurrences I did not witness its horrors, though in some
degree their victim. Not to detain my readers unnecessarily, I
will proceed directly to the accident which withdrew me from the
scene.

The apartment of the Princesse de Lamballe, in the Pavilion of
Flora, looked from one side upon the Pont Royal.

On the day of which I speak, a considerable quantity of combustibles had
been thrown from the bridge into one of her rooms.

The Princess, in great alarm, sent instantly for me. She desired to have
my English man servant, if he were not afraid, secreted in her room,
while she herself withdrew to another part of the palace, till the
extent of the intended mischief could be ascertained. I assured Her
Highness that I was not only ready to answer for my servant, but
would myself remain with him, as he always went armed, and I was
so certain of his courage and fidelity that I could not hesitate
even to trust my life in his hands.

"For God's sake, 'mia cara'," exclaimed the Princess, "do not risk your
own safety, if you have any value for my friendship. I desire you
not to go near the Pavilion of Flora. Your servant's going is quite
sufficient.
Never again let me hear such a proposition. What! after having hitherto
conducted yourself so punctually, would you, by one rash act, devote
yourself to ruin, and deprive us of your valuable services?"
I begged Her Highness would pardon the ardour of the dutiful zeal I felt
for her in the moment of danger.

"Yes, yes," continued she; "that is all very well; but this is not
the first time I have been alarmed at your too great intrepidity;
and if ever I hear of your again attempting to commit yourself so
wantonly, I will have you sent to Turin immediately, there to remain
till you have recovered your senses.

I always thought English heads cool; but I suppose your residence in
France has changed the national character of yours."

Once more, with tears in my eyes, I begged her forgiveness, and, on
my knees, implored that she would not send me away in the hour of
danger.
After having so long enjoyed the honour of her confidence, I trusted
she would overlook my fault, particularly as it was the pure emanation
of my resentment at any conspiracy against one I so dearly loved; and to
whom I had been under so many obligations, that the very idea of being
deprived of such a benefactress drove me frantic.

In his name then!" and
with unspeakable emotion clasped he his long beloved to his heart. He
held her long, and only deep sighs arose from his heart overflowing with
happiness. At length he tore himself from her, and as if animated with
new youth he sprang forward, and exclaimed to the company assembled in
the library, "Nay, now it is all made up--I take her--she shall have
me--she shall have me! She is worthy to be my wife, and I am worthy to
be her husband! Now then, you without there, will not you drink our
healths?"

All gathered around the bowl--Louise with the rest--the eight following
her--it was all a joyful bustle. Leonore and Petrea kept back the little
tumultuous ones amid laughter, and promised to carry the glasses to them
if they would only keep their places.

At length quiet returned to the assembly, the glasses were filled, and
the skål began.

No. 1, which the Judge proposed, was "for the newly betrothed."

No. 2, which Jacobi spoke eloquently, was "for the Parents; for their
happiness and well-being," said he, with emotion, "through which I, and
so many others as well as I, are blessed!"

No. 3, was drunk to "the prosperity of the new Pastor's family."

No. 4, for "the new purchased land."

No. 5, for "the old--ever-new Home."

No. 6, was "the health of all good children!" The eight seemed as if
they could not return thanks enough.

After this yet a many other particular toasts were given. The young
Jacobis drank incessantly to the aunts--Gabriele must continually make
her glass clink against those of her little nephews.

In the mean time Jeremias Munter made with love-warm looks the following
speech to his bride. "That was a joke now! that you should have made me
of such consequence! How did she know that I would have her? To woo me
yourself, and to take me so by surprise! To give me no time to think.
What then? It is quite unheard of! Was the thing arranged beforehand?
No, that is too troublesome. Nay, nay, nay, nay then, nay say I! But now
I think about it, it was quite for the best that I accept you--but
indeed you were a little hasty; I've a good mind to----What now? What is
fresh in hand? Comes her little grace, the little sister-in-law, without
any ceremony and kisses me. Heavens! the world is very merry!"

But nobody in the whole circle found the world so merry as Petrea.

"Are you now satisfied with me, Petrea?" asked Eva, archly laughing.
Petrea clasped her warmly in her arms.

Now the voice of Mother Louise was heard saying, "Nay, nay, children,
you must not drink a drop more! What do you say, my little David? A
thee-and-thou toast with Uncle Munter? No, thank you greatly, my dear
fellow, you can propose that another time. You have drunk to-day toasts
enough--more, perhaps, than your little heads can carry."

"I beg for the boys, sister Louise," said the Assessor; "I will propose
a skål, and they must drink it with me. Fill, yet once more, the
glasses, little carousers!--I propose a skål for peace! peace in our
country, and peace in our homes! A skål for love and knowledge, which
alone can make peace a blessing! A skål, in one word, for--Peace upon
Earth!"

"Amen! amen!" cried Jacobi, drank off his glass, and threw it behind
him. Louise looked at her mother somewhat astonished, but the mother
followed Jacobi's example; she too was carried away.

"All glasses to the ground after this skål!" cried the Judge, and sent
his ringing against the ceiling. With an indescribable pleasure the
little Jacobis threw their glasses up, and endeavoured to make the skål
for Peace as noisy and tumultuous as possible.

       *       *       *       *       *

We leave now the joyful circle, from which we have seen the mother
softly steal away. We see her go into the boudoir, where reposing in
comfortable quiet she writes the following lines to her friend and
sister:

"I have left them now for a few minutes, in order to rest, and to say a
few words to you, my Cecilia. Here it is good and quiet; and joyful
voices--truly festival voices, echo to me here. The heart of my Ernst
enjoys the highest pleasure, for he sees all his children happy around
him. And the children, Cecilia, he has reason to be joyful over them and
proud; they stand all around him, good and excellent human beings; they
thank him that existence has been given to them, and that they have
learned its worth; They are satisfied with their lot. The lost and
again-found-one has come home, in order to begin a new life, and her
charming child is quite established on the knees of the grandfather.

"I hear Gabriele's guitar accompanied by a song. I fancy now they dance.
Louise's eight boys make the floor shake. Jacobi's voice is heard above
all. The good, ever-young man. I also should be joyful, for all in my
house is peaceful and well-arranged. And I am so; my heart is full of
thankfulness, but my body is weary--very weary.

"The fir-trees on the grave wave and beckon me. I see their tops
saluting me in the clear moonlight, and pointing upwards. Dost thou
beckon me, my son? Dost thou call me to come home to thee? My
first-born, my summer-child! Let me whisper to thee that this is my
secret wish. The earth was friendly towards me; friendly was my home:
when thou wast gone, my favourite! I began to follow. Perhaps the day of
my departure is at hand. I feel in myself as if I were able to go to
rest. And might a really bright and beautiful moment be enjoyed by me
before my last sleep, I would yet once more press my husband's hand to
my lips, look around me on earth with a blessing, and upwards towards
heaven with gratitude, and say as now, out of the depths of my heart,
'Thank God for the home here, and the home there.'"


END OF THE HOME.


Transcriber's Notes:

I inserted 'a' into sentence, Never did I envy [a] human being as I
envied her, on Page 90.

In Footnote 3, the word appears to be Niflhem, but the more common
spelling is Niflheim.