Produced by Juliet Sutherland, Keren Vergon, David King, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team


The Delights of Wisdom

Pertaining To

Conjugial Love

_To Which is Added_

The Pleasures of Insanity

Pertaining To

Scortatory Love

By

Emanuel Swedenborg

_A Swede_

_Being a translation of his work_

"Delitiæ Sapientiæ de Amore Conjugiali; post quas sequuntur Voluptates
Insaniæ de Amore Scortatorio" (Amstelodami 1768)


1892

_Published_ A.D. 1850


PRELIMINARY RELATIONS RESPECTING THE JOYS OF HEAVEN AND NUPTIALS THERE.


1. "I am aware that many who read the following pages and the Memorable
Relations annexed to the chapters, will believe that they are fictions
of the imagination; but I solemnly declare they are not fictions, but
were truly done and seen; and that I saw them, not in any state of the
mind asleep, but in a state of perfect wakefulness: for it has pleased
the Lord to manifest himself to me, and to send me to teach the things
relating to the New Church, which is meant by the New Jerusalem in the
Revelation: for which purpose he has opened the interiors of my mind and
spirit; by virtue of which privilege it has been granted me to be in the
spiritual world with angels, and at the same time in the natural world
with men, and this now (1768) for twenty-five years."

2. On a certain time there appeared to me an angel flying beneath the
eastern heaven, with a trumpet in his hand, which he held to his mouth,
and sounded towards the north, the west, and the south. He was clothed
in a robe, which waved behind him as he flew along, and was girt about
the waist with a band that shone like fire and glittered with
carbuncles, and sapphires: he flew with his face downwards, and alighted
gently on the ground, near where I was standing. As soon as he touched
the ground with his feet, he stood erect, and walked to and fro: and on
seeing me he directed his steps towards me. I was in the spirit, and was
standing in that state on a little eminence in the southern quarter of
the spiritual world. When he came near, I addressed him and asked him
his errand, telling him that I had heard the sound of his trumpet, and
had observed his descent through the air. He replied, "My commission is
to call together such of the inhabitants of this part of the spiritual
world, as have come hither from the various kingdoms of Christendom, and
have been most distinguished for their learning, their ingenuity, and
their wisdom, to assemble on this little eminence where you are now
standing, and to declare their real sentiments, as to what they had
thought, understood, and inwardly perceived, while in the natural world,
respecting Heavenly Joy and Eternal Happiness. The occasion of my
commission is this: several who have lately come from the natural world,
and have been admitted into our heavenly society, which is in the east,
have informed us, that there is not a single person throughout the whole
Christian world that is acquainted with the true nature of heavenly joy
and eternal happiness; consequently that not a single person is
acquainted with the nature of heaven. This information greatly surprised
my brethren and companions; and they said to me, 'Go down, call together
and assemble those who are most eminent for wisdom in the world of
spirits, (where all men are first collected after their departure out of
the natural world,) so that we may know of a certainty, from the
testimony of many, whether it be true that such thick darkness, or dense
ignorance, respecting a future life, prevails among Christians.'" The
angel then said to me, "Wait awhile, and you will see several companies
of the wise ones flocking together to this place, and the Lord will
prepare them a house of assembly." I waited, and lo! in the space of
half an hour, I saw two companies from the north, two from the west, and
two from the south; and as they came near, they were introduced by the
angel that blew the trumpet into the house of assembly prepared for
them, where they took their places in the order of the quarters from
which they came. There were six groups or companies, and a seventh from
the east, which, from its superior light, was not visible to the rest.
When they were all assembled, the angel explained to them the reason of
their meeting, and desired that each company in order would declare
their sentiments respecting Heavenly Joy and Eternal Happiness. Then
each company formed themselves into a ring, with their faces turned one
towards another, that they might recall the ideas they had entertained
upon the subject in the natural world, and after examination and
deliberation might declare their sentiments.

3. After some deliberation, the First Company, which was from the north,
declared their opinion, that heavenly joy and eternal happiness
constitute the very life of heaven; so much so that whoever enters
heaven, enters, in regard to his life, into its festivities, just as a
person admitted to a marriage enters into all the festivities of a
marriage. "Is not heaven," they argued, "before our eyes in a particular
place above us? and is there not there and nowhere else a constant
succession of satisfactions and pleasures? When a man therefore is
admitted into heaven, he is also admitted into the full enjoyment of all
these satisfactions and pleasures, both as to mental perception and
bodily sensation. Of course heavenly happiness, which is also eternal
happiness, consists solely in admission into heaven, and that depends
purely on the divine mercy and favor." They having concluded, the Second
Company from the north, according to the measure of the wisdom with
which they were endowed, next declared their sentiments as follows:
"Heavenly joy and eternal happiness consist solely in the enjoyment of
the company of angels, and in holding sweet communications with them, so
that the countenance is kept continually expanded with joy; while the
smiles of mirth and pleasure, arising from cheerful and entertaining
conversation, continually enliven the faces of the company. What else
can constitute heavenly joys, but the variations of such pleasures to
eternity?" The Third Company, which was the first of the wise ones from
the western quarter, next declared their sentiments according to the
ideas which flowed from their affections: "In what else," said they, "do
heavenly joy and eternal happiness consist but in feasting with Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob; at whose tables there will be an abundance of rich and
delicate food, with the finest and most generous wines, which will be
succeeded by sports and dances of virgins and young men, to the tunes of
various musical instruments, enlivened by the most melodious singing of
sweet songs; the evening to conclude with dramatic exhibitions, and this
again to be followed by feasting, and so on to eternity?" When they had
ended, the Fourth Company, which was the second from the western
quarter, declared their sentiments to the following purpose: "We have
entertained," said they, "many ideas respecting heavenly joy and eternal
happiness; and we have examined a variety of joys, and compared them one
with another, and have at length come to the conclusion, that heavenly
joys are paradisiacal joys: for what is heaven but a paradise extended
from the east to the west, and from the south to the north, wherein are
trees laden with fruit, and all kinds of beautiful flowers, and in the
midst the magnificent tree of life, around which the blessed will take
their seats, and feed on fruits most delicious to the taste, being
adorned with garlands of the sweetest smelling flowers? In this paradise
there will be a perpetual spring; so that the fruits and flowers will be
renewed every day with an infinite variety, and by their continual
growth and freshness, added to the vernal temperature of the atmosphere,
the souls of the blessed will be daily fitted to receive and taste new
joys, till they shall be restored to the flower of their age, and
finally to their primitive state, in which Adam and his wife were
created, and thus recover their paradise, which has been transplanted
from earth to heaven." The Fifth Company, which was the first of the
ingenious spirits from the southern quarter, next delivered their
opinion: "Heavenly joys and eternal happiness," said they, "consist
solely in exalted power and dignity, and in abundance of wealth, joined
with more than princely magnificence and splendor. That the joys of
heaven, and their continual fruition, which is eternal happiness,
consist in these things, is plain to us from the examples of such
persons as enjoyed them in the former world; and also from this
circumstance, that the blessed in heaven are to reign with the Lord, and
to become kings and princes; for they are the sons of him who is King of
kings and Lord of lords, and they are to sit on thrones and be
ministered to by angels. Moreover, the magnificence of heaven is plainly
made known to us by the description given of the New Jerusalem, wherein
is represented the glory of heaven; that it is to have gates, each of
which shall consist of a single pearl, and streets of pure gold, and a
wall with foundations of precious stones; consequently, every one that
is received into heaven will have a palace of his own, glittering with
gold and other costly materials, and will enjoy dignity and dominion,
each according to his quality and station: and since we find by
experience, that the joys and happiness arising from such things are
natural, and as it were, innate in us, and since the promises of God
cannot fail, we therefore conclude that the most happy state of heavenly
life can be derived from no other source than this." After this, the
Sixth Company, which was the second from the southern quarter, with a
loud voice spoke as follows: "The joy of heaven and its eternal
happiness consist solely in the perpetual glorification of God, in a
never-ceasing festival of praise and thanksgiving, and in the
blessedness of divine worship, heightened with singing and melody,
whereby the heart is kept in a constant state of elevation towards God,
under a full persuasion that he accepts such prayers and praises, on
account of the divine bounty in imparting blessedness." Some of the
company added further, that this glorification would be attended with
magnificent illuminations, with most fragrant incense, and with stately
processions, preceded by the chief priest with a grand trumpet, who
would be followed by primates and officers of various orders, by men
carrying palms, and by women with golden images in their hand.

4. The Seventh Company, which, from its superior light, was invisible to
the rest, came from the east of heaven, and consisted of angels of the
same society as the angel that had sounded the trumpet. When these heard
in their heaven, that not a single person throughout the Christian world
was acquainted with the true nature of heavenly joy and eternal
happiness, they said one to another, "Surely this cannot be true; it is
impossible that such thick darkness and stupidity should prevail amongst
Christians: let us even go down and hear whether it be true; for if it
be so, it is indeed wonderful." Then those angels said to the one that
had the trumpet, "You know that every one that has desired heaven, and
has formed any definite conception in his mind respecting its joys, is
introduced after death into those particular joys which he had imagined;
and after he experiences that such joys are only the offspring of the
vain delusions of his own fancy, he is led out of his error, and
instructed in the truth. This is the case with most of those in the
world of spirits, who in their former life have thought about heaven,
and from their notions of its joys have desired to possess them." On
hearing this, the angel that had the trumpet said to the six companies
of the assembled wise ones, "Follow me; and I will introduce you into
your respective joys, and thereby into heaven."

5. When the angel had thus spoken, he went before them; and he was first
attended by the company who were of opinion that the joys of heaven
consisted solely in pleasant associations and entertaining conversation.
These the angel introduced to an assembly of spirits in the northern
quarter, who, during their abode in the former world, had entertained
the same ideas of the joys of heaven. There was in the place a large and
spacious house, wherein all these spirits were assembled. In the house
there were more than fifty different apartments, allotted to different
kinds and subjects of conversation: in some of these apartments they
conversed about such matters as they had seen or heard in the public
places of resort and the streets of the city; in others the conversation
turned upon the various charms of the fair sex, with a mixture of wit
and humor, producing cheerful smiles on the countenances of all present;
in others they talked about the news relating to courts, to public
ministers, and state policy, and to various matters which had transpired
from privy councils, interspersing many conjectures and reasonings of
their own respecting the issues of such councils; in others again they
conversed about trade and merchandise; in others upon subjects of
literature; in others upon points of civil prudence and morals; and in
others about affairs relating to the Church, its sects, &c. Permission
was granted me to enter and look about the house; and I saw people
running from one apartment to another, seeking such company as was most
suited to their own tempers and inclinations; and in the different
parties I could distinguish three kinds of persons; some as it were
panting to converse, some eager to ask questions, and others greedily
devouring what was said. The house had four doors, one towards each
quarter; and I observed several leaving their respective companies with
a great desire to get out of the house. I followed some of them to the
east door, where I saw several sitting with great marks of dejection on
their faces; and on my inquiring into the cause of their trouble, they
replied, "The doors of this house are kept shut against all persons who
wish to go out; and this is the third day since we entered, to be
entertained according to our desire with company and conversation; and
now we are grown so weary with continual discoursing, that we can
scarcely bear to hear the sound of a human voice; wherefore, from mere
irksomeness, we have betaken ourselves to this door; but on our knocking
to have it opened, we were told, that the doors of this house are never
opened to let any persons out, but only to let them in, and that we must
stay here and enjoy the delights of heaven; from which information we
conclude, that we are to remain here to eternity; and this is the cause
of our sorrow and lowness of spirits; now too we begin to feel an
oppression in the breast, and to be overwhelmed with anxiety." The angel
then addressing them said: "These things in which you imagined the true
joys of heaven to consist, prove, you find, the destruction of all
happiness; since they do not of themselves constitute true heavenly
joys, but only contribute thereto." "In what then," said they to the
angel, "does heavenly joy consist?" The angel replied briefly, "In the
delight of doing something that is useful to ourselves and others; which
delight derives its essence from love and its existence from wisdom. The
delight of being useful, originating in love, and operating by wisdom,
is the very soul and life of all heavenly joys. In the heavens there are
frequent occasions of cheerful intercourse and conversation, whereby the
minds (_mentes_) of the angels are exhilarated, their minds (_animi_)
entertained, their bosoms delighted, and their bodies refreshed; but
such occasions do not occur, till they have fulfilled their appointed
uses in the discharge of their respective business and duties. It is
this fulfilling of uses that gives soul and life to all their delights
and entertainments; and if this soul and life be taken away, the
contributory joys gradually cease, first exciting indifference, then
disgust, and lastly sorrow and anxiety." As the angel ended, the door
was thrown open, and those who were sitting near it burst out in haste,
and went home to their respective labors and employments, and so found
relief and refreshment to their spirits.

6. After this the angel addressed those who fancied the joys of heaven
and eternal happiness consisted of partaking of feasts with Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob, succeeded by sports and public exhibitions, and these
by other feasts, and so on to eternity. He said, "Follow me; and I will
introduce you into the possession of your enjoyments:" and immediately
he led them through a grove into a plain floored with planks, on which
were set tables, fifteen on one side and fifteen on the other. They then
asked, "What is the meaning of so many tables?" and the angel replied,
"The first table is for Abraham, the second for Isaac, the third for
Jacob, and the rest in order for the twelve apostles: on the other side
are the same number of tables for their wives; the first three are for
Sarah, Abraham's wife, for Rebecca, the wife of Isaac, and for Leah and
Rachel, the wives of Jacob; and the other twelve are for the wives of
the twelve apostles." They had not waited long before the tables were
covered with dishes; between which, at stated distances, were ornaments
of small pyramids holding sweetmeats. The guests stood around the tables
waiting to see their respective presidents: these soon entered according
to their order of precedency, beginning with Abraham, and ending with
the last of the apostles; and then each president, taking his place at
the head of his own table, reclined on a couch, and invited the
bystanders to take their places, each on his couch: accordingly the men
reclined with the patriarchs and apostles, and the women with their
wives: and they ate and drank with much festivity, but with due decorum.
When the repast was ended, the patriarchs and apostles retired; and then
were introduced various sports and dances of virgins and young men; and
these were succeeded by exhibitions. At the conclusion of these
entertainments, they were again invited to feasting; but with this
particular restriction, that on the first day they should eat with
Abraham, on the second with Isaac, on the third with Jacob, on the
fourth with Peter, on the fifth with James, on the sixth with John, on
the seventh with Paul, and with the rest in order till the fifteenth
day, when their festivity should be renewed again in like order, only
changing their seats, and so on to eternity. After this the angel called
together the company that had attended him, and said to them, "All those
whom you have observed at the several tables, had entertained the same
imaginary ideas as yourselves, respecting the joys of heaven and eternal
happiness; and it is with the intent that they may see the vanity of
such ideas, and be withdrawn from them, that those festive
representations were appointed and permitted by the Lord. Those who with
so much dignity presided at the tables, were merely old people and
feigned characters, many of them husbandmen and peasants, who, wearing
long beards, and from their wealth being exceedingly proud and arrogant,
were easily induced to imagine that they were those patriarchs and
apostles. But follow me to the ways that lead from this place of
festivity." They accordingly followed, and observed groups of fifty or
more, here and there, surfeited with the load of meat which lay on their
stomachs, and wishing above all things to return to their domestic
employments, their professions, trades, and handicraft works; but many
of them were detained by the keepers of the grove, who questioned them
concerning the days they had feasted, and whether they had as yet taken
their turns with Peter and Paul; representing to them the shame and
indecency of departing till they had paid equal respect to the apostles.
But the general reply was, "We are surfeited with our entertainment; our
food has become insipid to us, we have lost all relish for it, and the
very sight of it is loathsome to us; we have spent many days and nights
in such repasts of luxury, and can endure it no longer: we therefore
earnestly request leave to depart." Then the keepers dismissed them, and
they made all possible haste to their respective homes.

After this the angel called the company that attended him, and as they
went along he gave them the following information respecting
heaven:--"There are in heaven," says he, "as in the world, both meats
and drinks, both feasts and repasts; and at the tables of the great
there is a variety of the most exquisite food, and all kinds of rich
dainties and delicacies, wherewith their minds are exhilarated and
refreshed. There are likewise sports and exhibitions, concerts of music,
vocal and instrumental, and all these things in the highest perfection.
Such things are a source of joy to them, but not of happiness; for
happiness ought to be within external joys, and to flow from them. This
inward happiness abiding in external joys, is necessary to give them
their proper relish, and make them joys; it enriches them, and prevents
their becoming loathsome and disgusting; and this happiness is derived
to every angel from the use he performs in his duty or employment. There
is a certain vein latent in the affection of the will of every angel,
which attracts his mind to the execution of some purpose or other,
wherein his mind finds itself in tranquillity, and is satisfied. This
tranquillity and satisfaction form a state of mind capable of receiving
from the Lord the love of uses; and from the reception of this love
springs heavenly happiness, which is the life of the above-mentioned
joys. Heavenly food in its essence is nothing but love, wisdom, and use
united together; that is, use effected by wisdom and derived from love;
wherefore food for the body is given to every one in heaven according to
the use which he performs; sumptuous food to those who perform eminent
uses; moderate, but of an exquisite relish, to those who perform less
eminent uses; and ordinary to such as live in the performance of
ordinary uses; but none at all to the slothful."

7. After this the angel called to him the company of the so-called wise
ones, who supposed heavenly joys, and the eternal happiness thence
derived, to consist in exalted power and dominion, with the possession
of abundant treasures, attended with more than princely splendor and
magnificence, and who had been betrayed into this supposition by what is
written in the Word,--that they should be kings and princes, and should
reign for ever with Christ, and should be ministered unto by angels;
with many other similar expressions. "Follow me," said the angel to
them, "and I will introduce you to your joys." So he led them into a
portico constructed of pillars and pyramids: in the front there was a
low porch, through which lay the entrance to the portico; through this
porch he introduced them, and lo! there appeared to be about twenty
people assembled. After waiting some time, they were accosted by a
certain person, having the garb and appearance of an angel, and who said
to them, "The way to heaven is through this portico; wait awhile and
prepare yourselves; for the elder among you are to be kings, and the
younger princes." As he said this, they saw near each pillar a throne,
and on each throne a silken robe, and on each robe a sceptre and crown;
and near each pyramid a seat raised three feet from the ground, and on
each seat a massive gold chain, and the ensigns of an order of
knighthood, fastened at each end with diamond clasps. After this they
heard a voice, saying, "Go now and put on your robes; be seated, and
wait awhile:" and instantly the elder ones ran to the thrones, and the
younger to the seats; and they put on their robes and seated themselves.
When lo! there arose a mist from below, which, communicating its
influence to those on the thrones and the seats, caused them instantly
to assume airs of authority, and to swell with their new greatness, and
to be persuaded in good earnest that they were kings and princes. That
mist was an _aura_ of phantasy or imagination with which their minds
were possessed. Then on a sudden, several young pages presented
themselves, as if they came on wings from heaven; and two of them stood
in waiting behind every throne, and one behind every seat. Afterwards at
intervals a herald proclaimed:--"Ye kings and princes, wait a little
longer; your palaces in heaven are making ready for you; your courtiers
and guards will soon attend to introduce you." Then they waited and
waited in anxious expectation, till their spirits were exhausted, and
they grew weary with desire.

After about three hours, the heavens above them were seen to open, and
the angels looked down in pity upon them, and said, "Why sit ye in this
state of infatuation, assuming characters which do not belong to you?
They have made a mockery of you, and have changed you from men into mere
images, because of the imagination which has possessed you, that you
should reign with Christ as kings and princes, and that angels should
minister unto you. Have you forgotten the Lord's words, that whosoever
would be the greatest in the kingdom of heaven must be the least of all,
and the servant of all? Learn then what is meant by kings and princes,
and by reigning with Christ; that it is to be wise and perform uses. The
kingdom of Christ, which is heaven, is a kingdom of uses; for the Lord
loves every one, and is desirous to do good to every one; and good is
the same thing as use: and as the Lord promotes good or use by the
mediation of angels in heaven, and of men on earth, therefore to such as
faithfully perform uses, he communicates the love thereof, and its
reward, which is internal blessedness; and this is true eternal
happiness. There are in the heavens, as on earth, distinctions of
dignity and eminence, with abundance of the richest treasures; for there
are governments and forms of government, and consequently a variety of
ranks and orders of power and authority. Those of the highest rank have
courts and palaces to live in, which for splendor and magnificence
exceed every thing that the kings and princes of the earth can boast of;
and they derive honor and glory from the number and magnificence of
their courtiers, ministers, and attendants; but then these persons of
high rank are chosen from those whose heartfelt delight consists in
promoting the public good, and who are only externally pleased with the
distinctions of dignity for the sake of order and obedience; and as the
public good requires that every individual, being a member of the common
body, should be an instrument of use in the society to which he belongs,
which use is from the Lord and is effected by angels and men as of
themselves, it is plain that this is meant by reigning with the Lord."
As soon as the angels had concluded, the kings and princes descended
from their thrones and seats, and cast away their sceptres, crowns, and
robes; and the mist which contained the _aura_ of phantasy was
dispersed, and a bright cloud, containing the _aura_ of wisdom
encompassed them, and thus they were presently restored to their sober
senses.

8. After this the angel returned to the house of assembly, and called to
him those who had conceived the joys of heaven and eternal happiness to
consist in paradisiacal delights; to whom he said, "Follow me, and I
will introduce you into your paradisiacal heaven, that you may enter
upon the beatitudes of your eternal happiness." Immediately he
introduced them through a lofty portal, formed of the boughs and shoots
of the finest trees interwoven with each other. After their admission,
he led them through a variety of winding paths in different directions.
The place was a real paradise, on the confines of heaven, intended for
the reception of such as, during their abode on earth, had fancied the
whole heaven to be a single paradise, because it is so called, and had
been led to conceive that after death there would be a perfect rest from
all kinds of labor; which rest would consist in a continual feast of
pleasures, such as walking among roses, being exhilarated with the most
exquisite wines, and participating in continual mirth and festivity; and
that this kind of life could only be enjoyed in a heavenly paradise. As
they followed the angel, they saw a great number of old and young, of
both sexes, sitting by threes and tens in a company on banks of roses;
some of whom were wreathing garlands to adorn the heads of the seniors,
the arms of the young, and the bosoms of the children; others were
pressing the juice out of grapes, cherries, and mulberries, which they
collected in cups, and then drank with much festivity; some were
delighting themselves with the fragrant smells that exhaled far and wide
from the flowers, fruits, and odoriferous leaves of a variety of plants;
others were singing most melodious songs, to the great entertainment of
the hearers; some were sitting by the sides of fountains, and directing
the bubbling streams into various forms and channels; others were
walking, and amusing one another with cheerful and pleasant
conversation; others were retiring into shady arbors to repose on
couches; besides a variety of other paradisiacal entertainment. After
observing these things, the angel led his companions through various
winding paths, till he brought them at length to a most beautiful grove
of roses, surrounded by olive, orange, and citron trees. Here they found
many persons sitting in a disconsolate posture, with their heads
reclined on their hands, and exhibiting all the signs of sorrow and
discontent. The companions of the angel accosted them, and inquired into
the cause of their grief. They replied, "This is the seventh day since
we came into this paradise: on our first admission we seemed to
ourselves to be elevated into heaven, and introduced into a
participation of its inmost joys; but after three days our pleasures
began to pall on the appetite, and our relish was lost, till at length
we became insensible to their taste, and found that they had lost the
power of pleasing. Our imaginary joys being thus annihilated we were
afraid of losing with them all the satisfaction of life, and we began to
doubt whether any such thing as eternal happiness exists. We then
wandered through a variety of paths and passages, in search of the gate
at which we were admitted; but our wandering was in vain: for on
inquiring the way of some persons we met, they informed us, that it was
impossible to find the gate, as this paradisiacal garden is a spacious
labyrinth of such a nature, that whoever wishes to go out, enters
further and further into it; 'wherefore,' said they, 'you must of
necessity remain here to eternity; you are now in the middle of the
garden, where all delights are centred.'" They further said to the
angel's companions, "We have now been in this place for a day and a
half, and as we despair of ever finding our way out, we have sat down to
repose on this bank of roses, where we view around us olive-trees,
vines, orange and citron-trees, in great abundance; but the longer we
look at them, the more our eyes are wearied with seeing, our noses with
smelling, and our palates with tasting: and this is the cause of the
sadness, sorrow, and weeping, in which you now behold us." On hearing
this relation, the attendant angel said to them, "This paradisiacal
labyrinth is truly an entrance into heaven; I know the way that leads
out of it; and if you will follow me, I will shew it you." No sooner had
he uttered those words than they arose from the ground, and, embracing
the angel, attended him with his companions. The angel as they went
along, instructed them in the true nature of heavenly joy and eternal
happiness thence derived. "They do not," said he, "consist in external
paradisiacal delights, unless they are also attended with internal.
External paradisiacal delights reach only the senses of the body; but
internal paradisiacal delights reach the affections of the soul; and the
former without the latter are devoid of all heavenly life, because they
are devoid of soul; and every delight without its corresponding soul,
continually grows more and more languid and dull, and fatigues the mind
more than labor. There are in every part of heaven paradisiacal gardens,
in which the angels find much joy; and so far as it is attended with a
delight of the soul, the joy is real and true." Hereupon they all asked,
"What is the delight of the soul, and whence is it derived?" The angel
replied, "The delight of the soul is derived from love and wisdom
proceeding from the Lord; and as love is operative, and that by means of
wisdom, therefore they are both fixed together in the effect of such
operation; which effect is use. This delight enters into the soul by
influx from the Lord, and descends through the superior and inferior
regions of the mind into all the senses of the body, and in them is full
and complete; becoming hereby a true joy, and partaking of an eternal
nature from the eternal fountain whence it proceeds. You have just now
seen a paradisiacal garden; and I can assure you that there is not a
single thing therein, even the smallest leaf, which does not exist from
the marriage of love and wisdom in use: wherefore if a man be in this
marriage, he is in a celestial paradise, and therefore in heaven."

9. After this, the conducting angel returned to the house of assembly,
and addressed those who had persuaded themselves that heavenly joy and
eternal happiness consist in a perpetual glorification of God, and a
continued festival of prayer and praise to eternity; in consequence of a
belief they had entertained in the world that they should then see God,
and because the life of heaven, originating in the worship of God, is
called a perpetual sabbath. "Follow me," said the angel to them, "and I
will introduce you to your joy." So he led them into a little city, in
the middle of which was a temple, and where all the houses were said to
be consecrated chapels. In that city they observed a great concourse of
people flocking together from all parts of the neighboring country; and
among them a number of priests, who received and saluted them on their
arrival, and led them by the hand to the gates of the temple, and from
thence into some of the chapels around it, where they initiated them
into the perpetual worship of God; telling them that the city was one of
the courts leading to heaven, and that the temple was an entrance to a
most spacious and magnificent temple in heaven, where the angels glorify
God by prayers and praises to eternity. "It is ordained," said they,
"both here and in heaven, that you are first to enter into the temple,
and remain there for three days and three nights and after this
initiation you are to enter the houses of the city, which are so many
chapels consecrated by us to divine worship, and in every house join the
congregation in a communion of prayers, praises, and repetitions of holy
things; you are to take heed also that nothing but pious, holy, and
religious subjects enter into your thoughts, or make a part of your
conversation." After this the angel introduced his companions into the
temple, which they found filled and crowded with many persons, who on
earth had lived in exalted stations, and also with many of an inferior
class: guards were stationed at the doors to prevent any one from
departing until he had completed his stay of three days. Then said the
angel, "This is the second day since the present congregation entered
the temple: examine them, and you will see their manner of glorifying
God." On their examining them, they observed that most of them were fast
asleep, and that those who were awake were listless and yawning; many of
them, in consequence of the continual elevation of their thoughts to
God, without any attention to the inferior concerns of the body, seemed
to themselves, and thence also to others, as if their faces were
unconnected with their bodies; several again had a wild and raving look
with their eyes, because of their long abstraction from visible objects;
in short, every one, being quite tired out, seemed to feel an oppression
at the chest, and great weariness of spirits, which showed itself in a
violent aversion to what they heard from the pulpit, so that they cried
out to the preacher to put an end to his discourse, for their ears were
stunned, they could not understand a single word he said, and the very
sound of his voice was become painful to them. They then all left their
seats, and, crowding in a body to the doors, broke them open, and by
mere violence made their way through the guards. The priests hereupon
followed, and walked close beside them, teaching, praying, sighing, and
encouraging them to celebrate the solemn festival, and to glorify God,
and sanctify themselves; "and then," said they, "we will initiate you
into the eternal glorification of God in that most magnificent and
spacious temple which is in heaven, and so will introduce you to the
enjoyment of eternal happiness." These words, however, made but little
impression upon them, on account of the listlessness of their minds,
arising from the long elevation of their thoughts above their ordinary
labors and employments. But when they attempted to disengage themselves
from them, the priests caught hold of their hands and garments, in order
to force them back again into the temple to a repetition of their
prayers and praises; but in vain: they insisted on being left to
themselves to recruit their spirits; "we shall else die," they said,
"through mere faintness and weariness." At that instant, lo! there
appeared four men in white garments, with mitres on their heads; one of
them while on earth had been an archbishop, and the other three bishops,
all of whom had now become angels. As they approached, they addressed
themselves to the priests, and said, "We have observed from heaven how
you feed these sheep. Your instruction tends to their infatuation. Do
you not know that to glorify God means to bring forth the fruits of
love; that is, to discharge all the duties of our callings with
faithfulness, sincerity, and diligence? for this is the nature of love
towards God and our neighbor; and this is the bond and blessing of
society. Hereby God is glorified, as well as by acts of worship at
stated times after these duties. Have you never read these words of the
Lord, _Herein is my Father glorified, that ye bring forth much fruit; so
shall ye be my disciples_, John xv. 8. Ye priests indeed may glorify God
by your attendance on his worship, since this is your office, and from
the discharge of it you derive honor, glory, and recompense; but it
would be as impossible for you as for others thus to glorify God, unless
honor, glory, and recompense were annexed to your office." Having said
this, the bishops ordered the doorkeepers to give free ingress and
egress to all, there being so great a number of people, who, from their
ignorance of the state and nature of heaven, can form no other idea of
heavenly joy than that it consists in the perpetual worship of God.

10. After this the angel returned with his companions to the place of
assembly, where the several companions of the wise ones were still
waiting; and next he addressed those who fancied that heavenly joy and
eternal happiness depend only on admittance into heaven, which is
obtained merely by divine grace and favor; and that in such case the
persons introduced would enter into the enjoyments of heaven, just as
those introduced to a court-festival or a marriage, enter into the
enjoyment of such scenes. "Wait here awhile," said the angel, "until I
sound my trumpet, and call together those who have been most
distinguished for their wisdom in regard to the spiritual things of the
Church." After some hours, there appeared nine men, each having a wreath
of laurel on his head as a mark of distinction: these the angel
introduced into the house of assembly, where all the companies before
collected were still waiting; and then in their presence he addressed
the nine strangers, and said, "I am informed, that in compliance with
your desire, you have been permitted to ascend into heaven, according to
your ideas thereof, and that you have returned to this inferior or
sub-celestial earth, perfectly well informed as to the nature and state
of heaven: tell us therefore what you have seen, and how heaven appeared
to you." Then they replied in order; and the First thus began: "My idea
of heaven from my earliest infancy to the end of my life on earth was,
that it was a place abounding with all sorts of blessings,
satisfactions, enjoyments, gratifications, and delights; and that if I
were introduced there, I should be encompassed as by an atmosphere of
such felicities, and should receive it with the highest relish, like a
bridegroom at the celebration of his nuptials, and when he enters the
chamber with his bride. Full of this idea, I ascended into heaven, and
passed the first guard and also the second; but when I came to the
third, the captain of the guard accosted me and said, 'Who are you,
friend?' I replied, 'Is not this heaven? My longing desire to ascend
into heaven has brought me hither; I pray you therefore permit me to
enter.' Then he permitted me; and I saw angels in white garments, who
came about me and examined me, and whispered to each other, 'What new
guest is this, who is not clothed in heavenly raiment?' I heard what
they said, and thought within myself, This is a similar case to that
which the Lord describes, of the person who came to the wedding, and had
not on a wedding garment: and I said, 'Give me such garments;' at which
they smiled: and instantly one came from the judgment-hall with this
command: 'Strip him naked, cast him out, and throw his clothes after
him;' and so I was cast out." The Second in order then began as follows:
"I also supposed that if I were but admitted into heaven, which was over
my head, I should there be encompassed with joys, which I should partake
of to eternity. I likewise wished to be there, and my wish was granted;
but the angels on seeing me fled away, and said one to another, 'What
prodigy is this! how came this bird of night here?' On hearing which, I
really felt as if I had undergone some change, and was no longer a man:
this however was merely imaginary, and arose from my breathing the
heavenly atmosphere. Presently, however, there came one running from the
judgment-hall, with an order that two servants should lead me out, and
conduct me back by the way I had ascended, till I had reached my own
home; and when I arrived there, I again appeared to others and also to
myself as a man." The Third said, "I always conceived heaven to be some
place of blessedness independent of the state of the affections;
wherefore as soon as I came into this world, I felt a most ardent desire
to go to heaven. Accordingly I followed some whom I saw ascending
thither, and was admitted along with them; but I did not proceed far;
for when I was desirous to delight my mind (_animus_) according to my
idea of heavenly blessedness, a sudden stupor, occasioned by the light
of heaven, which is as white as snow, and whose essence is said to be
wisdom, seized my mind (_mens_) and darkness my eyes, and I was reduced
to a state of insanity: and presently, from the heat of heaven, which
corresponds with the brightness of its light, and whose essence is said
to be love, there arose in my heart a violent palpitation, a general
uneasiness seized my whole frame, and I was inwardly excruciated to such
a degree that I threw myself flat on the ground. While I was in this
situation, one of the attendants came from the judgment-hall with an
order to carry me gently to my own light and heat; and when I came there
my spirit and my heart presently returned to me." The Fourth said that
he also had conceived heaven to be some place of blessedness independent
of the state of the affections. "As soon therefore," said he, "as I came
into the spiritual world, I inquired of certain wise ones whether I
might be permitted to ascend into heaven, and was informed that this
liberty was granted to all, but that there was need of caution how they
used it, lest they should be cast down again. I made light of this
caution, and ascended in full confidence that all were alike qualified
for the reception of heavenly bliss in all its fulness: but alas! I was
no sooner within the confines of heaven, than my life seemed to be
departing from me, and from the violent pains and anguish which seized
my head and body, I threw myself prostrate on the ground, where I
writhed about like a snake when it is brought near the fire. In this
state I crawled to the brink of a precipice, from which I threw myself
down, and being taken up by some people who were standing near the place
where I fell, by proper care I was soon brought to myself again." The
other Five then gave a wonderful relation of what befell them in their
ascents into heaven, and compared the changes they experienced as to
their states of life, with the state of fish when raised out of water
into air, and with that of birds when raised out of air into ether; and
they declared that, after having suffered so much pain, they had no
longer any desire to ascend into heaven, and only wished to live a life
agreeable to the state of their own affections, among their like in any
place whatever. "We are well informed," they added, "that in the world
of spirits, where we now are, all persons undergo a previous
preparation, the good for heaven, and the wicked for hell; and that
after such preparation they discover ways open for them to societies of
their like, with whom they are to live eternally; and that they enter
such ways with the utmost delight, because they are suitable to their
love." When those of the first assembly had heard these relations, they
all likewise acknowledged, that they had never entertained any other
notion of heaven than as of a place where they should enter upon the
fruition of never-ceasing delights. Then the angel who had the trumpet
thus addressed them: "You see now that the joys of heaven and eternal
happiness arise not from the place, but from the state of the man's
life; and a state of heavenly life is derived from love and wisdom; and
since it is use which contains love and wisdom, and in which they are
fixed and subsist, therefore a state of heavenly life is derived from
the conjunction of love and wisdom in use. It amounts to the same if we
call them charity, faith, and good works; for charity is love, faith is
truth whence wisdom is derived, and good works are uses. Moreover in our
spiritual world there are places as in the natural world; otherwise
there could be no habitations and distinct abodes; nevertheless place
with us is not place, but an appearance of place according to the state
of love and wisdom, or of charity and faith. Every one who becomes an
angel, carries his own heaven within himself, because he carries in
himself the love of his own heaven; for a man from creation is the
smallest effigy, image, and type of the great heaven, and the human form
is nothing else; wherefore every one after death comes into that society
of heaven of whose general form he is an individual effigy;
consequently, when he enters into that society he enters into a form
corresponding to his own; thus he passes as it were from himself into
that form as into another self, and again from that other self into the
same form in himself, and enjoys his own life in that of the society,
and that of the society in his own; for every society in heaven may be
considered as one common body, and the constituent angels as the similar
parts thereof, from which the common body exists. Hence it follows, that
those who are in evils, and thence in falses, have formed in themselves
an effigy of hell, which suffers torment in heaven from the influx and
violent activity of one opposite upon another; for infernal love is
opposite to heavenly love, and consequently the delights of those two
loves are in a state of discord and enmity, and whenever they meet they
endeavor to destroy each other."

11. After this a voice was heard from heaven, saying to the angel that
had the trumpet, "Select ten out of the whole assembly, and introduce
them to us. We have heard from the Lord that He will prepare them so as
to prevent the heat and light, or the love and wisdom, of our heaven,
from doing them any injury during the space of three days." Ten were
then selected and followed the angel. They ascended by a steep path up a
certain hill, and from thence up a mountain, on the summit of which was
situated the heaven of those angels, which had before appeared to them
at a distance like an expanse in the clouds. The gates were opened for
them; and after they had passed the third gate, the introducing angel
hastened to the prince of the society, or of that heaven, and announced
their arrival. The prince said, "Take some of my attendants, and carry
them word that their arrival is agreeable to me, and introduce them into
my reception-room, and provide for each a separate apartment with a
chamber, and appoint some of my attendants and servants to wait upon
them and attend to their wishes:" all which was done. On being
introduced by the angel, they asked whether they might go and see the
prince; and the angel replied, "It is now morning, and it is not
allowable before noon; till that time every one is engaged in his
particular duty and employment: but you are invited to dinner, and then
you will sit at table with our prince; in the meantime I will introduce
you into his palace, and show you its splendid and magnificent
contents."

12. When they were come to the palace, they first viewed it from
without. It was large and spacious, built of porphyry, with a foundation
of jasper; and before the gates were six lofty columns of lapis lazuli;
the roof was of plates of gold, the lofty windows, of the most
transparent crystal, had frames also of gold. After viewing the outside
they were introduced within, and were conducted from one apartment to
another; in each of which they saw ornaments of inexpressible elegance
and beauty; and beneath the roof were sculptured decorations of
inimitable workmanship. Near the walls were set silver tables overlaid
with gold, on which were placed various implements made of precious
stones, and of entire gems in heavenly forms, with several other things,
such as no eye had ever seen on earth, and consequently such as could
never be supposed to exist in heaven. While they were struck with
astonishment at these magnificent sights, the angel said, "Be not
surprised; the things which you now behold are not the production and
workmanship of any angelic hand, but are framed by the Builder of the
universe, and presented as a gift to our prince; wherefore the
architectonic art is here in its essential perfection, and hence are
derived all the rules of that art which are known and practised in the
world." The angel further said, "You may possibly conceive that such
objects charm our eyes, and infatuate us by their grandeur, so that we
consider them as constituting the joys of our heaven: this however is
not the case; for our affections not being set on such things, they are
only contributory to the joys of our hearts; and therefore, so far as we
contemplate them as such, and as the workmanship of God, so far we
contemplate in them the divine omnipotence and mercy."

13. Here he got off the wheels, and stepped out into the centre of the
shop.
"Our master will do that for you. I swear for him, and who can
say that Parpon was ever a liar?"
The blacksmith's hand tightened on his daughter's shoulder. He was trembling
with excitement.

"Is it true? is it true?" he asked, and the sweat stood out on his
forehead.

"He sends this for Madelinette," answered the dwarf, handing over a
little bag of gold to the girl, who drew back. But Parpon went close to
her, and gently forced it into her hands.

"Open it," he said. She did so, and the blacksmith's eyes gloated on the
gold. Muroc and Duclosse drew near, and peered in also. And so they
stood there for a little while, all looking and exclaiming.

Presently Lajeunesse scratched his head. "Nobody does nothing for
nothing," said he. "What horse do I shoe for this?"
"La, la!" said the charcoalman, sticking a thumb in the blacksmith's side;
"you only give him the happy hand--like that!"
Duclosse was more serious. "It is the will of God that you become a marshal
or a duke," he said wheezingly to the blacksmith. "You can't say no;
it is the will of God, and you must bear it like a man."
The child saw further; perhaps the artistic strain in her gave her keener
reasoning.

"Father," she said, "Monsieur Valmond wants you for a soldier."
"Wants me?" he roared in astonishment. "Who's to shoe the horses a week
days, and throw the weight o' Sundays after mass? Who's to handle a
stick for the Cure when there's fighting among the river-men?

"But there, la, la! many a time my wife, my good Florienne, said to me,
'Jose--Jose Lajeunesse, with a chest like yours, you ought to be a
corporal at least.'"
Parpon beckoned to Lagroin, and nodded. "Corporal! corporal!" cried Lagroin;
"in a week you shall be a lieutenant and a month shall make you a captain,
and maybe better than that!"
"Better than that--bagosh!" cried the charcoalman in surprise, proudly
using the innocuous English oath. "Better than that--sutler, maybe?"
said the mealman, smacking his lips.

"Better than that," replied Lagroin, swelling with importance. "Ay, ay,
my dears, great things are for you. I command the army, and I have free
hand from my master.

Ah, what joy to serve a Napoleon once again! What joy! Lord, how I
remember--"
"Better than that-eh?" persisted Duclosse, perspiring, the meal on his
face making a sort of paste.

"A general or a governor, my children," said Lagroin. "First in, first
served. Best men, best pickings. But every man must love his chief, and
serve him with blood and bayonet; and march o' nights if need, and
limber up the guns if need, and shoe a horse if need, and draw a cork
if need, and cook a potato if need; and be a hussar, or a tirailleur,
or a trencher, or a general, if need. But yes, that's it; no pride
but the love of France and the cause, and--"
"And Monsieur Valmond," said the charcoalman slyly.

"And Monsieur the Emperor!" cried Lagroin almost savagely.

He caught Parpon's eye, and instantly his hand went to his pocket.

"Ah, he is a comrade, that! Nothing is too good for his friends, for his
soldiers. See!" he added.

He took from his pocket ten gold pieces. "'These are bagatelles,' said
His Excellency to me; 'but tell my friends, Monsieur Muroc and Monsieur
Duclosse and Monsieur Garotte, that they are buttons for the coats of
my sergeants, and that my captains' coats have ten times as many
buttons.
Tell them,' said he, 'that my friends shall share my fortunes; that
France needs us; that Pontiac shall be called the nest of heroes. Tell
them that I will come to them at nine o'clock tonight, and we will swear
fidelity.'"
"And a damned good speech too--bagosh!" cried the mealman, his fingers
hungering for the gold pieces. "We're to be captains pretty soon--eh?"
asked Muroc.

"As quick as I've taught you to handle a company," answered Lagroin,
with importance.

"I was a patriot in '37," said Muroc. "I went against the English; I
held abridge for two hours. I have my musket yet."
"I am a patriot now," urged Duclosse. "Why the devil not the English
first, then go to France, and lick the Orleans!"
"They're a skittish lot, the Orleans; they might take it in their heads
to fight," suggested Muroc, with a little grin.

"What the devil do you expect?"

roared the blacksmith, blowing the bellows hard in his excitement,
one arm still round his daughter's shoulder. "D'you think we're going
to play leap-frog into the Tuileries?
There's blood to let, and we're to let it!"
"Good, my leeches!" said Parpon; "you shall have blood to suck. But we'll
leave the English be. France first, then our dogs will take a snap at the
flag on the citadel yonder." He nodded in the direction of Quebec.

Lagroin then put five gold pieces each into the hands of Muroc and
Duclosse, and said:

"I take you into the service of Prince Valmond Napoleon, and you do hereby
swear to serve him loyally, even to the shedding of your blood, for
his honour and the honour of France; and you do also vow to require a
like loyalty and obedience of all men under your command. Swear."

There was a slight pause, for the old man's voice had the ring of a fatal
earnestness. It was no farce, but a real thing.

"Swear," he said again. "Raise your right hand."
"Done!" said Muroc. "To the devil with the charcoal! I'll go wash
my face."
"There's my hand on it," added Duclosse; "but that rascal Petrie
will get my trade, and I'd rather be strung by the Orleans than
that."
"Till I've no more wind in my bellows!" responded Lajeunesse, raising
his hand, "if he keeps faith with my Madelinette."
"On the honour of a soldier," said Lagroin, and he crossed himself.

"God save us all!" said Parpon. Obeying a motion of the dwarf's hand,
Lagroin drew from his pocket a flask of cognac, with four little tin
cups fitting into each other. Handing one to each, he poured them brimming
full. Then, filling his own, he spilled a little in the steely dust of
the smithy floor. All did the same, though they knew not why.

"What's that for?" asked the mealman.

"To show the Little Corporal, dear Corporal Violet, and my comrades of
the Old Guard, that we don't forget them," cried Lagroin.

He drank slowly, holding his head far back, and as he brought it straight
again, he swung on his heel, for two tears were racing down his
cheeks.

The mealman wiped his eyes in sympathy; the charcoalman shook his head at
the blacksmith, as though to say, "Poor devil!" and Parpon straightway
filled their glasses again. Madelinette took the flask to the old
sergeant. He looked at her kindly, and patted her shoulder. Then he
raised his glass.

"Ah, the brave Caron, the dear Lucette Caron! Ah, the time she dragged me
from under the Russian's mare!" He smiled into the distance. "Who
can tell? Perhaps, perhaps--again!" he added.

Then, all at once, as if conscious of the pitiful humour of his
meditations, he came to his feet, straightened his shoulders, and
cried:

"To her we love best!"
The charcoalman drank, and smacked his lips. "Yes, yes," he said, looking
into the cup admiringly; "like mother's milk that. White of my eye,
but I do love her!"
The mealman cocked his glance towards the open door. "Elise!" he said
sentimentally, and drank. The blacksmith kissed his daughter, and his
hand rested on her head as he lifted the cup, but he said never a
word.

Parpon took one sip, then poured his liquor upon the ground, as though
down there was what he loved best; but his eyes were turned to Dalgrothe
Mountain, which he could see through the open door.

"France!" cried the old soldier stoutly, and tossed off the
liquor.

CHAPTER VIII
That night Valmond and his three new recruits, to whom Garotte the limeburner
had been added, met in the smithy and swore fealty to the great
cause. Lajeunesse, by virtue of his position in the parish, and his former
military experience, was made a captain, and the others sergeants
of companies yet unnamed and unformed. The limeburner was a dry,
thin man of no particular stature, who coughed a little between his
sentences, and had a habit, when not talking, of humming to himself, as
if in apology for his silence. This humming had no sort of tune or
purpose, and was but a vague musical sputtering. He almost perilled the
gravity of the oath they all took to Valmond by this idiosyncrasy. His
occupation gave him a lean, arid look; his hair was crisp and straight,
shooting out at all points, and it flew to meet his cap as if it
were alive. He was a genius after a fashion, too, and at all the feasts
and on national holidays he invented some new feature in the
entertainments. With an eye for the grotesque, he had formed a company
of jovial blades, called Kalathumpians, after the manner of the mimes
of old times in his beloved Dauphiny.

"All right, all right," he said, when Lagroin, in the half-lighted
blacksmith shop, asked him to swear allegiance and service. "'Brigadier,
vous avez raison,'" he added, quoting a well-known song. Then he hummed
a little and coughed. "We must have a show"--he hummed again--"we must
tickle 'em up a bit--touch 'em where they're silly with a fiddle and
fife-raddy dee dee, ra dee, ra dee, ra dee!" Then, to Valmond: "We gave
the fools who fought the Little Corporal sour apples in Dauphiny, my
dear!"
He followed this extraordinary speech with a plan for making an ingenious
coup for Valmond, when his Kalathumpians should parade the streets
on the evening of St. John the Baptist's Day.

With hands clasped the new recruits sang:

"When from the war we come, Allons gai!
Oh, when we ride back home, If we be spared that day, Ma luronne lurette,
We'll laugh our scars away, Ma luronne lure, We'll lift the latch and
stay, Ma luronne lure."
The huge frame of the blacksmith, his love for his daughter, his simple
faith in this new creed of patriotism, his tenderness of heart, joined
to his irascible disposition, spasmodic humour, and strong arm, roused
in Valmond an immediate liking, as keen, after its kind, as that he had
for the Cure; and the avocat. With both of these he had had long talks
of late, on everything but purely personal matters. They would have
thought it a gross breach of etiquette to question him on that which he
avoided.
His admiration of them was complete, although he sometimes laughed
half sadly, half whimsically, as he thought of their simple faith
in him.

At dusk on the eve of St. John the Baptist's Day, after a long conference
with Lagroin and Parpon, Valmond went through the village, and came
to the smithy to talk with Lajeunesse. Those who recognised him in
passing took off their bonnets rouges, some saying, "Good-night,
your Highness;" some, "How are you, monseigneur?" some, "God
bless your Excellency;" and a batch of bacchanalian river-men, who had
been drinking, called him "General," and insisted on embracing him,
offering him cognac from their tin flasks.

The appearance among them of old Madame Degardy shifted the good-natured
attack. For many a year, winter and summer, she had come and gone in the
parish, all rags and tatters, wearing men's kneeboots and cap, her
grey hair hanging down in straggling curls, her lower lip thrust out
fiercely, her quick eyes wandering to and fro, and her sharp tongue, like
Parpon's, clearing a path before her whichever way she turned. On
her arm she carried a little basket of cakes and confitures, and
these she dreamed she sold, for they were few who bought of Crazy
Joan. The stout stick she carried was as compelling as her tongue,
so that when the river-men surrounded her in amiable derision, it
was used freely and with a heart all kindness: "For the good of
their souls," she said, "since the Cure was too mild, Mary in heaven
bless him high and low!"
She was the Cure's champion everywhere, and he in turn was tender
towards the homeless body, whose history even to him was obscure,
save in the few particulars that he had given to Valmond the last
time they had met.
In her youth Madame Degardy was pretty and much admired. Her lover
had deserted her, and in a fit of mad indignation and despair she
had fled from the village, and vanished no one knew where, though
it had been declared by a wandering hunter that she had been seen
in the far-off hills that march into the south, and that she lived
there with a barbarous mountaineer, who had himself long been an
outlaw from his kind.
But this had been mere gossip, and after twenty-five years she came
back to Pontiac, a half-mad creature, and took up the thread of her
life alone; and Parpon and the Cure saw that she suffered nothing
in the hard winters.
Valmond left the river-men to the tyranny of her tongue and stick,
and came on to where the red light of the forge showed through the
smithy window. As he neared the door, he heard a voice singularly
sweet, and another of commoner calibre was joining in the refrain
of a song:
"'Oh, traveller, see where the red sparks rise,' (Fly away, my
heart, fly away!) But dark is the mist in the traveller's eyes.
(Fly away, my heart, fly away!) 'Oh, traveller, see far down the
gorge, The crimson light from my father's forge.
(Fly away, my heart, fly away!)
"'Oh, traveller, hear how the anvils ring.' (Fly away, my heart,
fly away!) But the traveller heard, ah, never a thing.
(Fly away, my heart, fly away!) 'Oh, traveller, loud do the bellows
roar, And my father waits by the smithy door.
(Fly away, my heart, fly away!)
"'Oh, traveller, see you thy true love's grace.' (Fly away, my
heart, fly away!) And now there is joy in the traveller's face.
(Fly away, my heart, fly away!) Oh, wild does he ride through the
rain and mire, To greet his love by the smithy fire.
(Fly away, my heart, fly away!)"
In accompaniment, some one was beating softly on the anvil, and the
bellows were blowing rhythmically.
He lingered for a moment, loath to interrupt the song, and then
softly opened the upper half of the door, for it was divided
horizontally, and leaned over the lower part.
Beside the bellows, her sleeves rolled up, her glowing face cowled
in her black hair, comely and strong, stood Elise Malboir, pushing
a rod of steel into the sputtering coals. Over the anvil, with a
small bar caught in a pair of tongs, hovered Madelinette Lajeunesse,
beating, almost tenderly, the red-hot point of the steel. The sound
of the iron hammer on the malleable metal was like muffled silver,
and the sparks flew out like jocund fireflies. She was making two
hooks for her kitchen wall, for she was clever at the forge, and
could shoe a horse if she were let to do so.
She was but half-turned to Valmond, but he caught the pure outlines
of her face and neck, her extreme delicacy of expression, which had
a pathetic, subtle refinement, in acute contrast to the quick,
abundant health, the warm energy, the half defiant look of Elise.
It was a picture of labour and life.
A dozen thoughts ran through Valmond's mind. He was responsible,
to an extent, for the happiness of these two young creatures. He
had promised to make a songstress of the one, to send her to Paris;
had roused in her wild, ambitious hopes of fame and fortune--dreams
that, in any case, could be little like the real thing: fanciful
visions of conquest and golden living, where never the breath of
her hawthorn and wild violets entered; only sickly perfumes, as
from an odalisque's fan, amid the enervating splendour of voluptuous
boudoirs--for she had read of these things.
Valmond had, in a vague, graceless sort of way, worked upon the
quick emotions of Elise.Hence it is a maxim inscribed on the wisdom of the wise, that
no one is wise for himself alone, or lives for himself, but for others
at the same time: this is the origin of society, which otherwise could
not exist. To live for others is to perform uses. Uses are the bonds of
society, which are as many in number as there are good uses; and the
number of uses is infinite. There are spiritual uses, such as regard
love to God and love towards our neighbour; there are moral and civil
uses, such as regard the love of the society and state to which a man
belongs, and of his fellow-citizens among whom he lives; there are
natural uses, which regard the love of the world and its necessities;
and there are corporeal uses, such as regard the love of
self-preservation with a view to superior uses. All these uses are
inscribed on man, and follow in order one after another; and when they
are together, one is in the other. Those who are in the first uses,
which are spiritual, are in all the succeeding ones, and such persons
are wise; but those who are not in the first, and yet are in the second,
and thereby in the succeeding ones, are not so highly principled in
wisdom, but only appear to be so by virtue of an external morality and
civility; those who are neither in the first nor second, but only in the
third and fourth, have not the least pretensions to wisdom; for they are
satans, loving only the world and themselves for the sake of the world;
but those who are only in the fourth, are least wise of all; for they
are devils, because they live to themselves alone, and only to others
for the sake of themselves. Moreover, every love has its particular
delight; for it is by delight that love is kept alive; and the delight
of the love of uses is a heavenly delight, which enters into succeeding
delights in their order, and according to the order of succession,
exalts them and makes them eternal." After this they enumerated the
heavenly delights proceeding from the love of uses, and said, that they
are a thousand times ten thousand; and that all who enter heaven enter
into those delights. With further wise conversation on the love of use,
they passed the day with them until evening.

19. Towards evening there came a messenger clothed in linen to the ten
strangers who attended the angel, and invited them to a
marriage-ceremony which was to be celebrated the next day, and the
strangers were much rejoiced to think that they were also to be present
at a marriage-ceremony in heaven. After this they were conducted to the
house of one of the counsellors, and supped with him; and after supper
they returned to the palace, and each retired to his own chamber, where
they slept till morning. When they awoke, they heard the singing of the
virgins and young girls from the houses around the public places of
resort, which we mentioned above. They sung that morning the affection
of conjugial love; the sweetness of which so affected and moved the
hearers, that they perceived sensibly a blessed serenity instilled into
their joys, which at the some time exalted and renewed them. At the hour
appointed the angel said, "Make yourselves ready, and put on the
heavenly garments which our prince sent you;" and they did so, and lo!
the garments were resplendent as with a flaming light; and on their
asking the angel, "Whence is this?" he replied, "Because you are going
to a marriage-ceremony; and when that is the case, our garments always
assume a shining appearance, and become marriage garments."

20. After this the angel conducted them to the house where the nuptials
were to be celebrated, and the porter opened the door; and presently
being admitted within the house, they were received and welcomed by an
angel sent from the bridegroom, and were introduced and shewn to the
seats intended for them: and soon after they were invited into an
ante-chamber, in the middle of which they saw a table, and on it a
magnificent candlestick with seven branches and sconces of gold: against
the walls there were hung silver lamps, which being lighted made the
atmosphere appear of a golden hue: and they observed on each side of the
candlestick two tables, on which were set loaves in three rows; there
were tables also at the four corners of the room, on which were placed
crystal cups. While they were viewing these things, lo! a door opened
from a closet near the marriage-chamber, and six virgins came out, and
after them the bridegroom and the bride, holding each other by the hand,
and advancing towards a seat placed opposite to the candlestick, on
which they seated themselves, the bridegroom on the left hand, and the
bride on the right, while the six virgins stood by the seat near the
bride. The bridegroom was dressed in a robe of bright purple, and a
tunic of fine shining linen, with an ephod, on which was a golden plate
set round with diamonds, and on the plate was engraved a young eagle,
the marriage-ensign of that heavenly society; on his head he wore a
mitre: the bride was dressed in a scarlet mantle, under which was a
gown, ornamented with fine needle-work, that reached from her neck to
her feet, and beneath her bosom she wore a golden girdle, and on her
head a golden crown set with rubies. When they were thus seated, the
bridegroom turning himself towards the bride, put a golden ring on her
finger; he then took bracelets and a pearl necklace, and clasped the
bracelets about her wrists, and the necklace about her neck, and said,
"_Accept these pledges_;" and as she accepted them he kissed her, and
said, "Now thou art mine;" and he called her his wife. On this all the
company cried out, "May the divine blessing be upon you!" These words
were first pronounced by each separately, and afterwards by all
together. They were pronounced also in turn by a certain person sent
from the prince as his representative; and at that instant the
ante-chamber was filled with an aromatic smoke, which was a token of
blessing from heaven. Then the servants in waiting took loaves from the
two tables near the candlestick, and cups, now filled with wine, from
the tables at the corners of the room, and gave to each of the guests
his own loaf and his own cup, and they ate and drank. After this the
husband and his wife arose, and the six virgins attended them with the
silver lamps, now lighted, in their hands to the threshold; and the
married pair entered their chamber; and the door was shut.

21. Afterwards the conducting angel talked with the guests about his ten
companions, acquainting them how he was commissioned to introduce them,
and shew them the magnificent things contained in the prince's palace,
and other wonderful sights; and how they had dined at table with him,
and afterwards had conversed with the wise ones of the society; and he
said, "May I be permitted to introduce them also to you, in order that
they may enjoy the pleasure of your conversation?" So he introduced
them, and they entered into discourse together. Then a certain wise
personage, one of the marriage-guests, said, "Do you understand the
meaning of what you have seen?" They replied, "But little;" and then
they asked him, "Why was the bridegroom, who is now a husband, dressed
in that particular manner?" He answered, "Because the bridegroom, now a
husband, represented the Lord, and the bride, who is now a wife,
represented the church; for marriages in heaven represent the marriage
of the Lord with the church. This is the reason why he wore a mitre on
his head, and was dressed in a robe, a tunic, and an ephod, like Aaron;
and why the bride had a crown on her head, and wore a mantle like a
queen; but to-morrow they will be dressed differently, because this
representation lasts no longer than to-day." They further asked, "Since
he represented the Lord, and she the church, why did she sit at his
right hand?" The wise one replied, "Because there are two things which
constitute the marriage of the Lord with the church--love and wisdom;
the Lord is love, and the church is wisdom; and wisdom is at the right
hand of love; for every member of the church is wise as of himself, and
in proportion as he is wise he receives love from the Lord. The right
hand also signifies power; and love has power by means of wisdom; but,
as we have just observed, after the marriage-ceremony the representation
is changed; for then the husband represents wisdom, and the wife the
love of his wisdom. This love however is not primary, but secondary
love; being derived from the Lord to the wife through the wisdom of the
husband: the love of the Lord, which is the primary love, is the
husband's love of being wise; therefore after marriage, both together,
the husband and his wife, represent the church." They asked again, "Why
did not you men stand by the bridegroom, now the husband, as the six
virgins stood by the bride, now the wife?" The wise one answered,
"Because we to-day are numbered among the virgins; and the number six
signifies all and what is complete." But they said, "Explain your
meaning." He replied, "Virgins signify the church; and the church
consists of both sexes: therefore also we, with respect to the church,
are virgins. That this is the case, is evident from these words in the
Revelation: '_These are those who were not defiled with women; for they
are Virgins: and they follow the Lamb whithersoever he goeth_,' chap.
xiv. 4. And as virgins signify the church, therefore the Lord likened it
to ten Virgins invited to a marriage, Mat. xxv. And as Israel, Zion, and
Jerusalem, signify the church, therefore mention is so often made in the
Word, of the Virgin and Daughter of Israel, of Zion, and of Jerusalem.
The Lord also describes his marriage with the church in these words:
'_upon thy right hand did stand the Queen in gold of Ophir: her clothing
is of wrought gold: she shall be brought unto the king in raiment of
needlework: the Virgins her companions that follow her shall enter into
the king's palace_.' Psalm xlv. 9-16." Lastly they asked, "Is it not
expedient that a priest be present and minister at the marriage
ceremony?" The wise one answered, "This is expedient on the
earth, but not in the heavens, by reason of the representation of the
Lord himself and the church. On the earth they are not aware of this;
but even with us a priest ministers in whatever relates to betrothings,
or marriage contracts, and hears, receives, confirms, and consecrates
the consent of the parties. Consent is the essential of marriage; all
succeeding ceremonies are its formalities."

22. After this the conducting angel went to the six virgins, and gave
them an account of his companions, and requested that they would
vouchsafe to join company with them. Accordingly they came; but when
they drew near, they suddenly retired, and went into the ladies'
apartment to the virgins their companions. On seeing this, the
conducting angel followed them, and asked why they retired so suddenly
without entering into conversation? They replied. "We cannot approach:"
and he said, "Why not?" They answered, "We do not know; but we perceived
something which repelled us and drove us back again. We hope they will
excuse us." The angel then returned to his companions, and told them
what the virgins had said, and added, "I conjecture that your love of
the sex is not chaste. In heaven we love virgins for their beauty and
the elegance of their manners; and we love them intensely, but
chastely." Hereupon his companions smiled and said, "You conjecture
right: who can behold such beauties near and not feel some excitement?"

23. After much entertaining conversation the marriage-guests departed,
and also the ten strangers with their attendant angel; and the evening
being far advanced, they retired to rest. In the morning they heard a
proclamation, TO-DAY IS THE SABBATH. They then arose and asked the angel
what it meant: he replied, "It is for the worship of God, which returns
at stated periods, and is proclaimed by the priests. The worship is
performed in our temples and lasts about two hours; wherefore if it
please you, come along with me, and I will introduce you." So they made
themselves ready, and attended the angel, and entered the temple. It was
a large building capable of containing about three thousand persons, of
a semicircular form, with benches or seats carried round in a continued
sweep according to the figure of the temple; the hinder ones being more
elevated than those in front. The pulpit in front of the seats was drawn
a little from the centre; the door was behind the pulpit on the left
hand. The ten strangers entered with their conducting angel, who pointed
out to them the places where they were to sit; telling them, "Every one
that enters the temple knows his own place by a kind of innate
perception; nor can he sit in any place but his own: in case he takes
another place, he neither hears nor perceives anything, and he also
disturbs the order; the consequence of which is, that the priest is not
inspired."

24. When the congregation had assembled, the priest ascended the pulpit,
and preached a sermon full of the spirit of wisdom. The discourse was
concerning the sanctity of the Holy Scriptures, and the conjunction of
the Lord with both worlds, the spiritual and the natural, by means
thereof. In the illustration in which he then was, he fully proved, that
that holy book was dictated by Jehovah the Lord, and that consequently
He is in it, so as to be the wisdom it contains; but that the wisdom
which is Himself therein, lies concealed under the sense of the letter,
and is opened only to those who are in the truths of doctrine, and at
the same time in goodness of life, and thus who are in the Lord, and the
Lord in them. To his discourse he added a votive prayer and descended.
As the audience were going out, the angel requested the priest to speak
a few words of peace with his ten companions; so he came to them, and
they conversed together for about half an hour. He discoursed concerning
the divine trinity--that it is in Jesus Christ, in whom all the fulness
of the Godhead dwells bodily, according to the declaration of the
apostle Paul; and afterwards concerning the union of charity and faith;
but he said, "the union of charity and truth;" because faith is truth.

25. After expressing their thanks they returned home; and then the angel
said to them, "This is the third day since you came into the society of
this heaven, and you were prepared by the Lord to stay here three days;
it is time therefore that we separate; put off therefore the garments
sent you by the prince, and put on your own." When they had done so,
they were inspired with a desire to be gone; so they departed and
descended, the angel attending them to the place of assembly; and there
they gave thanks to the Lord for vouchsafing to bless them with
knowledge, and thereby with intelligence, concerning heavenly joys and
eternal happiness.

26. "I again solemnly declare, that these things were done and said as
they are related; the former in the world of spirits, which is
intermediate between heaven and hell, and the latter in the society of
heaven to which the angel with the trumpet and the conductor belonged.
Who in the Christian world would have known anything concerning heaven,
and the joys and happiness there experienced, the knowledge of which is
the knowledge of salvation, unless it had pleased the Lord to open to
some person the sight of his spirit, in order to shew and teach them?
That similar things exist in the spiritual world is very manifest from
what were seen and heard by the apostle John, as described in the
Revelation; as that he saw the Son of Man in the midst of seven
candlesticks; also a tabernacle, temple, ark, and altar in heaven; a
book sealed with seven seals; the book opened, and horses going forth
thence; four animals around the throne; twelve thousand chosen out of
every tribe; locusts ascending out of the bottomless pit; a dragon, and
his combat with Michael; a woman bringing forth a male child, and flying
into a wilderness on account of the dragon; two beasts, one ascending
out of the sea, the other out of the earth; a woman sitting upon a
scarlet beast; the dragon cast out into a lake of fire and brimstone; a
white horse and a great supper; a new heaven and a new earth, and the
holy Jerusalem descending described as to its gates, wall, and
foundation; also a river of the water of life, and trees of life bearing
fruits every month; besides several other particulars; all which things
were seen by John, while as to his spirit he was in the spiritual world
and in heaven: not to mention the things seen by the apostles after the
Lord's resurrection; and what were afterwards seen and heard by Peter,
Acts xi.; also by Paul; moreover by the prophets; as by Ezekiel, who saw
four animals which were cherubs, chap i. and chap x.; a new temple and a
new earth, and an angel measuring them, chap. xl.-xlviii.; and was led
away to Jerusalem, and saw there abominations: and also into Chaldea
into captivity, chap. viii. and chap. xi. The case was similar with
Zechariah, who saw a man riding among myrtles; also four horns, chap. i.
8, and following verses; and afterwards a man with a measuring-line in
his hand, chap. ii. 1, and following verses; likewise a candlestick and
two olive trees, chap. iv. 2, and following verses; also a flying roll
and an ephah, chap. v. 1, 6; also four chariots going forth between two
mountains, and horses, chap. vi. 1, and following verses. So likewise
with Daniel, who saw four beasts coming up out of the sea, chap. vii. 1,
and following verses; also combats of a ram and he-goat, chap. viii. 1,
and following verses; who also saw the angel Gabriel, and had much
discourse with him, chap. ix.: the youth of Elisha saw chariots and
horses of fire round about Elisha, and saw them when his eyes were
opened, 2 Kings vi. 15, and following verses. From these and several
other instances in the Word, it is evident, that the things which exist
in the spiritual world, appeared to many both before and after the
Lord's coming: is it any wonder then, that the same things should now
also appear when the church is commencing, or when the New Jerusalem is
coming down from the Lord out of heaven?"

ON MARRIAGES IN HEAVEN.

27. That there are marriages in heaven cannot be admitted as an article
of faith by those who imagine that a man after death is a soul or
spirit, and who conceive of a soul or spirit as of a rarefied ether or
vapor; who imagine also, that a man will not live as a man till after
the day of the last judgment; and in general who know nothing respecting
the spiritual world, in which angels and spirits dwell, consequently in
which there are heavens and hells: and as that world has been heretofore
unknown, and mankind have been in total ignorance that the angels of
heaven are men, in a perfect form, and in like manner infernal spirits,
but in an imperfect form, therefore it was impossible for anything to be
revealed concerning marriages in that world; for if it had it would have
been objected, "How can a soul be joined with a soul, or a vapor with a
vapor, as one married partner with another here on earth?" not to
mention other similar objections, which, the instant they were made,
would take away and dissipate all faith respecting marriages in another
life. But now, since several particulars have been revealed concerning
that world, and a description has also been given of its nature and
quality, in the treatise on HEAVEN AND HELL, and also in the APOCALYPSE
REVEALED, the assertion, that marriages take place in that world, may be
so far confirmed as even to convince the reason by the following
propositions: I. _A man (homo) lives a man after death._ II. _In this
case a male is a male, and a female a female._ III. _Every one's
peculiar love remains with him after death._ IV. _The love of the sex
especially remains; and with those who go to heaven, which is the case
with all who become spiritual here on earth, conjugial love remains._ V.
_These things fully confirmed by ocular demonstration._ VI.
_Consequently that there are marriages in the heavens._ VII. _Spiritual
nuptials are to be understood by the Lord's words, where he says, that
after the resurrection they are not given in marriage._ We will now give
an explanation of these propositions in their order.

28. I. A MAN LIVES A MAN AFTER DEATH. That a man lives a man after death
has been heretofore unknown in the world, for the reasons just now
mentioned; and, what is surprising, it has been unknown even in the
Christian world, where they have the Word, and illustration thence
concerning eternal life, and where the Lord himself teaches, _That all
the dead rise again; and that God is not the God of the dead but of the
living_, Matt. xxii. 31, 32. Luke xx. 37, 38. Moreover, a man, as to the
affections and thoughts of his mind, is in the midst of angels and
spirits, and is so consociated with them that were he to be separated
from them he would instantly die. It is still more surprising that this
is unknown, when yet every man that has departed this life since the
beginning of creation, after his decease has come and does still come to
his own, or, as it is said in the Word, has been gathered and is
gathered to his own: besides every one has a common perception, which is
the same thing as the influx of heaven into the interiors of his mind,
by virtue of which he inwardly perceives truths, and as it were sees
them, and especially this truth, that he lives a man after death; a
happy man if he has lived well, and an unhappy one if he has lived ill.
For who does not think thus, while he elevates his mind in any degree
above the body, and above the thought which is nearest to the senses; as
is the case when he is interiorly engaged in divine worship, and when he
lies on his death-bed expecting his dissolution; also when he hears of
those who are deceased, and their lot? I have related a thousand
particulars respecting departed spirits, informing certain persons that
are now alive concerning the state of their deceased brethren, their
married partners, and their friends. I have written also concerning the
state of the English, the Dutch, the Papists, the Jews, the Gentiles,
and likewise concerning the state of Luther, Calvin, and Melancthon; and
hitherto I never heard any one object, "How can such be their lot, when
they are not yet risen from their tombs, the last judgement not being
yet accomplished? Are they not in the meantime mere vaporous and
unsubstantial souls residing, in some place of confinement (_in quodam
pu seu ubi_)?" Such objections I have never yet heard from any quarter;
whence I have been led to conclude, that every one perceives in himself
that he lives a man after death. Who that has loved his married partner
and his children when they are dying or are dead, will not say within
himself (if his thought be elevated above the sensual principles of the
body) that they are in the hand of God, and that he shall see them again
after his own death, and again be joined with them in a life of love and
joy?

29. Who, that is willing, cannot see from reason, that a man after death
is not a mere vapor, of which no idea can be formed but as of a breath
of wind, or of air and ether, and that such vapor constitutes or
contains in it the human soul, which desires and expects conjunction
with its body, in order that it may enjoy the bodily senses and their
delights, as previously in the world? We cannot see, that if this were
the case with a man after death, his state would be more deplorable than
that of fishes, birds, and terrestrial animals, whose souls are not
alive, and consequently are not in such anxiety of desire and
expectation? Supposing a man after death to be such a vapor, and thus a
breath of wind, he would either fly about in the universe, or according
to certain traditions, would be reserved in a place of confinement, or
in the _limbo_ of the ancient fathers, until the last judgement. Who
cannot hence from reason conclude, that those who have lived since the
beginning of creation, which is computed to be about six thousand years
ago, must be still in a similar anxious state, and progressively more
anxious, because all expectation arising from desire produces anxiety,
and being continued from time to time increases it; consequently, that
they must still be either floating about in the universe, or be kept
shut up in confinement, and thereby in extreme misery; and that must be
the case with Adam and his wife, with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and
with all who have lived since that time? All this being supposed true,
it must needs follow, that nothing would be more deplorable than to be
born a man. But the reverse of this is provided by the Lord, who is
Jehovah from eternity and the Creator of the universe; for the state of
the man that conjoins himself with him by a life according to his
precepts, becomes more blessed and happy after death than before it in
the world; and it is more blessed and happy from this circumstance, that
the man then is spiritual, and a spiritual man is sensible of and
perceives spiritual delight, which is a thousand times superior to
natural delight.

30. That angels and spirits are men, may plainly appear from those seen
by Abraham, Gideon, Daniel, and the prophets, and especially by John
when he wrote the Revelation, and also by the women in the Lord's
sepulchre, yea, from the Lord himself as seen by the disciples after his
resurrection. The reason of their being seen was, because the eyes of
the spirits of those who saw them were opened; and when the eyes of the
spirit are opened, angels appear in their proper form, which is the
human; but when the eyes of the spirit are closed, that is, when they
are veiled by the vision of the bodily eyes, which derive all their
impressions from the material world, then they do not appear.

31. It is however to be observed, that a man after death is not a
natural, but a spiritual man; nevertheless he still appears in all
respects like himself; and so much so, that he knows not but, that he is
still in the natural world: for he has a similar body, countenance,
speech, and senses; for he has a similar affection and thought, or will
and understanding. He is indeed actually not similar, because he is a
spiritual, and consequently an interior man; but the difference does not
appear to him, because he cannot compare his spiritual state with his
former natural state, having put off the latter, and being in the
former; therefore I have often heard such persons say, that they know
not but that they are in the former world, with this difference,
however, that they no longer see those whom they had left in that world;
but that they see those who had departed out of it, or were deceased.
The reason why they now see the latter and not the former, is, because
they are no longer natural men, but spiritual or substantial; and a
spiritual or substantial man sees a spiritual or substantial man, as a
natural or material man sees a natural or material man, but not _vice
versa_, on account of the difference between what is substantial and
what is material, which is like the difference between what is prior and
what is posterior; and what is prior, being in itself purer, cannot
appear to what is posterior, which in itself is grosser; nor can what is
posterior, being grosser, appear to what is prior, which in itself is
purer; consequently an angel cannot appear to a man of this world, nor a
man of this world to an angel. The reason why a man after death is a
spiritual or substantial man, is, because this spiritual or substantial
man lay inwardly concealed in the natural or material man; which natural
or material man was to it as a covering, or as a skin about to be cast
off; and when the covering or skin is cast off, the spiritual or
substantial man comes forth, a purer, interior, and more perfect man.
That the spiritual man is still a perfect man, notwithstanding his being
invisible to the natural man, is evident from the Lord's being seen by
the apostles after his resurrection, when he appeared, and presently he
did not appear; and yet he was a man like to himself both when seen and
when not seen: it is also said, that when they saw him, their eyes were
opened.

32. II. IN THIS CASE A MALE IS A MALE, AND A FEMALE A FEMALE. Since a
man (_homo_) lives a man after death, and man is male and female, and
there is such a distinction between the male principle and the female
principle, that the one cannot be changed into the other, it follows,
that after death the male lives a male, and the female a female, each
being a spiritual man. It is said that the male principle cannot be
changed into the female principle, nor the female into the male, and
that therefore after death the male is a male, and the female a female;
but as it is not known in what the masculine principle essentially
consists, and in what the feminine, it may be expedient briefly to
explain it. The essential distinction between the two is this: in the
masculine principle, love is inmost, and its covering is wisdom; or,
what is the same, the masculine principle is love covered (or veiled) by
wisdom; whereas in the feminine principle, the wisdom of the male is
inmost, and its covering is love thence derived; but this latter love is
feminine, and is given by the Lord to the wife through the wisdom of the
husband; whereas the former love is masculine, which is the love of
growing wise, and is given by the Lord to the husband according to the
reception of wisdom. It is from this circumstance, that the male is the
wisdom of love, and the female is the love of that wisdom; therefore
from creation there is implanted in each a love of conjunction so as to
become a one; but on this subject more will be said in the following
pages. That the female principle is derived from the male, or that the
woman was taken out of the man, is evident from these words in Genesis:
_Jehovah God took out one of the man's ribs, and closed up the flesh in
the place thereof; and he builded the rib, which he had taken out of the
man, into a woman; and he brought her to the man; and the man said, This
is bone of my bones, and flesh of my flesh; hence she shall be called
Eve, because she was taken out of man_, chap. ii. 21-23: the
signification of a rib and of flesh will be shewn elsewhere.

33. From this primitive formation it follows, that by birth the
character of the male is intellectual, and that the female character
partakes more of the will principle; or, what amounts to the same, that
the male is born into the affection of knowing, understanding, and
growing wise, and the female into the love of conjoining herself with
that affection in the male. And as the interiors form the exteriors to
their own likeness, and the masculine form is the form of intellect, and
the feminine is the form of the love of that intellect, therefore the
male and the female differ as to the features of the face, the tone of
the voice, and the form of the body; the male having harder features, a
harsher tone of voice, a stronger body, and also a bearded chin, and in
general a form less beautiful than that of the female; they differ also
in their gestures and manners; in a word, they are not exactly similar
in a single respect; but still, in every particular of each, there is a
tendency to conjunction; yea, the male principle in the male, is male in
every part of his body, even the most minute, and also in every idea of
his thought, and every spark of his affection; the same is true of the
female principle in the female; and since of consequence the one cannot
be changed into the other, it follows, that after death a male is a
male, and a female a female.

34. III. EVERY ONE'S PECULIAR LOVE REMAINS WITH HIM AFTER DEATH. Man
knows that there is such a thing as love; but he does not know what love
is. He knows that there is such a thing from common discourse; as when
it is said, that such a one loves me, that a king loves his subjects,
and subjects love their king; that a husband loves his wife, and a
mother her children, and _vice versa_; also when it is said, that any
one loves his country, his fellow citizens, and his neighbour; in like
manner of things abstracted from persons; as when it is said that a man
loves this or that. But although the term love is thus universally
applied in conversation, still there is scarcely any one that knows what
love is: even while meditating on the subject, as he is not then able to
form any distinct idea concerning it, and thus not to fix it as present
in the light of the understanding, because of its having relation not to
light but to heat, he either denies its reality, or he calls it merely
an influent effect arising from the sight, the hearing, and the
conversation, and thus accounts for the motions to which it gives birth;
not being at all aware, that love is his very life, not only the common
life of his whole body and of all his thoughts, but also the life of all
their particulars. A wise man may perceive this from the consideration,
that if the affection of love be removed, he is incapable both of
thinking and acting; for in proportion as that affection grows cold, do
not thought, speech, and action grow cold also? and in proportion as
that affection grows warm, do not they also grow warm in the same
degree? Love therefore is the heat of the life of man (_hominis_), or
his vital heat. The heat of the blood, and also its redness, are from
this source alone. The fire of the angelic sun, which is pure love,
produces this effect.

35. That every one has his own peculiar love, or a love distinct from
that of another; that is, that no two men have exactly the same love,
may appear from the infinite variety of human countenances, the
countenance being a type of the love; for it is well known that the
countenance is changed and varied according to the affection of love; a
man's desires also, which are of love, and likewise his joys and
sorrows, are manifested in the countenance. From this consideration it
is evident, that every man is his own peculiar love; yea, that he is the
form of his love. It is however to be observed, that the interior man,
which is the same with his spirit which lives after death, is the form
of his love, and not so the exterior man which lives in this world,
because the latter has learnt from infancy to conceal the desires of his
love; yea, to make a pretence and show of desires which are different
from his own.

36. The reason why every one's peculiar love remains with him after
death, is, because, as was said just above, n. 34, love is a man's
(_hominis_) life; and hence it is the man himself. A man also is his own
peculiar thought, thus his own peculiar intelligence and wisdom; but
these make a one with his love; for a man thinks from this love and
according to it; yea, if he be in freedom, he speaks and acts in like
manner; from which it may appear, that love is the _esse_ or essence of
a man's life, and that thought is the _existere_ or existence of his
life thence derived; therefore speech and action, which are said to flow
from the thought, do not flow from the thought, but from the love
through the thought. From much experience I have learned that a man
after death is not his own peculiar thought, but that he is his own
peculiar affection and derivative thought; or that he is his own
peculiar love and derivative intelligence; also that a man after death
puts off everything which does not agree with his love; yea, that he
successively puts on the countenance, the tone of voice, the speech, the
gestures, and the manners of the love proper to his life: hence it is,
that the whole heaven is arranged in order according to all the
varieties of the affections of the love of good, and the whole hell
according to all the affections of the love of evil.

37. IV. THE LOVE OF THE SEX ESPECIALLY REMAINS; AND WITH THOSE WHO GO TO
HEAVEN, WHICH IS THE CASE WITH ALL WHO BECOME SPIRITUAL HERE ON EARTH,
CONJUGIAL LOVE REMAINS. The reason why the love of the sex remains with
man (_homo_) after death, is, because after death a male is a male and a
female a female; and the male principle in the male is male (or
masculine) in the whole and in every part thereof; and so is the female
principle in the female; and there is a tendency to conjunction in all
their parts, even the most singular; and as this conjunctive tendency
was implanted from creation, and thence perpetually influences, it
follows, that the one desires and seeks conjunction with the other.
Love, considered itself, is a desire and consequent tendency to
conjunction; and conjugial love to conjunction into a one; for the
male-man and the female-man were so created, that from two they may
become as it were one man, or one flesh; and when they become a one,
then, taken together they are a man (_homo_) in his fulness; but without
such conjunction, they are two, and each is a divided or half-man. Now
as the above conjunctive tendency lies concealed in the inmost of every
part of the male, and of every part of the female, and the same is true
of the faculty and desire to be conjoined together into a one, it
follows, that the mutual and reciprocal love of the sex remains with men
(_homines_) after death.

38. We speak distinctively of the love of the sex and of conjugial love,
because the one differs from the other. The love of the sex exists with
the natural man; conjugial love with the spiritual man. The natural man
loves and desires only external conjunctions, and the bodily pleasures
thence derived; whereas the spiritual man loves and desires internal
conjunctions and the spiritual satisfactions thence derived; and these
satisfactions he perceives are granted with one wife, with whom he can
perpetually be more and more joined together into a one: and the more he
enters into such conjunction the more he perceives his satisfactions
ascending in a similar degree, and enduring to eternity; but respecting
anything like this the natural man has no idea. This then is the reason
why it is said, that after death conjugial love remains with those who
go to heaven, which is the case with all those who become spiritual here
on earth.

39. V. THESE THINGS FULLY CONFIRMED BY OCULAR DEMONSTRATION. That a man
(_homo_) lives as a man after death, and that in this case a male is a
male, and a female a female; and that every one's peculiar love remains
with him after death, especially the love of the sex and conjugial love,
are positions which I have wished hitherto to confirm by such arguments
as respect the understanding, and are called rational; but since man
(_homo_) from his infancy, in consequence of what has been taught him by
his parents and masters, and afterwards by the learned and the clergy,
has been induced to believe, that he shall not live a man after death
until the day of the last judgement, which has now been expected for six
thousand years; and several have regarded this article of faith as one
which ought to be believed, but not intellectually conceived, it was
therefore necessary that the above positions should be confirmed also by
ocular proofs; otherwise a man who believes only the evidence of his
senses, in consequence of the faith previously implanted, would object
thus: "If men lived men after death, I should certainly see and hear
them: who has ever descended from heaven, or ascended from hell, and
given such information?" In reply to such objections it is to be
observed, that it never was possible, nor can it ever be, that any angel
of heaven should descend, or any spirit of hell ascend, and speak with
any man, except with those who have the interiors of the mind or spirit
opened by the Lord; and this opening of the interiors cannot be fully
effected except with those who have been prepared by the Lord to receive
the things which are of spiritual wisdom: on which accounts it has
pleased the Lord thus to prepare me, that the state of heaven and hell,
and of the life of men after death, might not remain unknown, and be
laid asleep in ignorance, and at length buried in denial. Nevertheless,
ocular proofs on the subjects above mentioned, by reason of their
copiousness, cannot here be adduced; but they have been already adduced
in the treatise on HEAVEN and HELL, and in the CONTINUATION RESPECTING
THE SPIRITUAL WORLD, and afterwards in the APOCALYPSE REVEALED; but
especially, in regard to the present subject of marriages, in the
MEMORABLE RELATIONS which are annexed to the several paragraphs or
chapters of this work.

40. VI. CONSEQUENTLY THERE ARE MARRIAGES IN HEAVEN. This position having
been confirmed by reason, and at the same time by experience, needs no
further demonstration.

41. VII. SPIRITUAL NUPTIALS ARE TO BE UNDERSTOOD BY THE LORD'S WORDS,
"AFTER THE RESURRECTION THEY ARE NOT GIVEN IN MARRIAGE." In the
Evangelists are these words, _Certain of the Sadducees, who say that
there is no resurrection, asked Jesus, saying, Master, Moses wrote, If a
man die, having no children, his brother shall take his wife, and raise
up seed unto his brother. Now there were with us seven brethren and the
first, when he had married a wife, deceased, and having no issue, left
his wife unto his brother; likewise the second also, and the third unto
the seventh; last of all the woman died also; therefore in the
resurrection whose wife shall she be of the seven? But Jesus answering,
said unto them, The sons of this generation marry, and are given in
marriage; but those who shall be accounted worthy to attain to another
generation, and the resurrection from the dead, shall neither marry nor
be given in marriage, neither can they die any more; for they are like
unto the angels, and are the sons of God, being sons of the
resurrection. But that the dead rise again, even Moses shewed at the
bush, when he called the Lord the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac,
and the God of Jacob; for he is not the God of the dead, but of the
living; for all live unto him_, Luke xx. 27-38, Matt. xxii. 22-32; Mark
xii. 18-27. By these words the Lord taught two things; first, that a man
(_homo_) rises again after death; and secondly, that in heaven they are
not given in marriage. That a man rises again after death, he taught by
these words, _God is not the God of the dead, but of the living_, and
when he said that Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, are alive: he taught the
same also in the parable concerning the rich man in hell, and Lazarus in
heaven, Luke xvi. 22-31. Secondly, that in heaven they are not given in
marriage, he taught by these words, "_Those who shall be accounted
worthy to attain to another generation, neither marry nor are given in
marriage_." That none other than spiritual nuptials are here meant, is
very evident from the words which immediately follow--"_neither can they
die any more; because they are like unto the angels, and are the sons of
God, being sons of the resurrection_." Spiritual nuptials mean
conjunction with the Lord, which is effected on earth; and when it is
effected on earth, it is also effected in the heavens; therefore in the
heavens there is no repetition of nuptials, nor are they again given in
marriage: this is also meant by these words, "_The sons of this
generation marry and are given in marriage; but those who are accounted
worthy to attain to another generation, neither marry nor are given in
marriage_". The latter are also called by the Lord "_sons of nuptials_"
Matt, ix. 15; Mark ii. 19; and in this place, _angels, sons of God, and
sons of the resurrection_. That to celebrate nuptials, signifies to be
joined with the Lord, and that to enter into nuptials is to be received
into heaven by the Lord, is manifest from the following passages: _The
kingdom of heaven is like unto a man, a king, who made a marriage
(nuptials) his son, and sent out servants and invited to the marriage_.
Matt. xxii. 2-14. _The kingdom of heaven is like unto ten virgins, who
went forth to meet the bridegroom: of whom five being prepared entered
into the marriage (nuptials)_, Matt. xxv. 1, and the following verses.
That the Lord here meant himself, is evident from verse 13, where it is
said, _Watch ye; because ye know not the day and hour in which the Son
of Man will come_: also from the Revelation, _The time of the marriage
of the Lamb is come, and his wife hath made herself ready; blessed are
those who are called to the marriage supper of the Lamb_, xix. 7, 9.
That there is a spiritual meaning in everything which the Lord spake,
has been fully shewn in the DOCTRINE OF THE NEW JERUSALEM CONCERNING THE
SACRED SCRIPTURE, published at Amsterdam in the year 1763.

       *       *       *       *       *

42. To the above I shall add two MEMORABLE RELATIONS RESPECTING THE
SPIRITUAL WORLD. The first is as follows: One morning I was looking
upwards into heaven and saw over me three expanses one above another; I
saw that the first expanse, which was nearest, opened, and presently the
second which was above it, and lastly the third which was highest; and
by virtue of illustration thence, I perceived, that above the first
expanse were the angels who compose the first or lowest heaven; above
the second expanse were the angels who compose the second or middle
heaven; and above the third expanse were the angels who compose the
third or highest heaven. I wondered at first what all this meant: and
presently I heard from heaven a voice as of a trumpet, saying, "We have
perceived, and now see, that you are meditating on CONJUGIAL LOVE; and
we are aware that no one on earth as yet knows what true conjugial love
is in its origin and in its essence; and yet it is of importance that it
should be known: therefore it has pleased the Lord to open the heavens
to you in order that illustrating light and consequent perception may
flow into the interiors of your mind. With us in the heavens, especially
in the third heaven, our heavenly delights are principally derived from
conjugial love; therefore, in consequence of leave granted us, we will
send down to you a conjugial pair for your inspection and observation;"
and lo! instantly there appeared a chariot descending from the highest
or third heaven, in which I saw one angel; but as it approached I saw
therein two. The chariot at a distance glittered before my eyes like a
diamond, and to it were harnessed young horses white as snow; and those
who sat in the chariot held in their hands two turtle-doves, and called
to me, saying, "Do you wish us to come nearer to you? but in this case
take heed, lest the radiance, which is from the heaven whence we have
descended, and is of a flaming quality, penetrate too interiorly; by its
influence the superior ideas of your understanding, which are in
themselves heavenly, may indeed be illustrated; but these ideas are
ineffable in the world in which you dwell: therefore what you are about
to hear, receive rationally, that you may explain it so that it may be
understood." I replied, "I will observe your caution; come nearer:" so
they came nearer; and lo! it was a husband and his wife; who said, "We
are a conjugial pair: we have lived happy in heaven from the earliest
period, which you call the golden age, and have continued during that
time in the same bloom of youth in which you now see us." I viewed each
of them attentively, because I perceived they represented conjugial love
in its life and in its decoration; in its life in their faces, and in
its decoration in their raiment; for all the angels are affections of
love in a human form. The ruling affection itself shines forth from
their faces; and from the affection, and according to it, the kind and
quality of their raiment is derived and determined: therefore it is said
in heaven, that every one is clothed by his own affection. The husband
appeared of a middle age, between manhood and youth: from his eyes
darted forth sparkling light derived from the wisdom of love; by virtue
of which light his face was radiant from its inmost ground; and in
consequence of such radiance the surface of his skin had a kind of
refulgence, whereby his whole face was one resplendent comeliness. He
was dressed in an upper robe which reached down to his feet and
underneath it was a vesture of hyacinthine blue, girded about with a
golden band, upon which were three precious stones, two sapphires on the
sides, and a carbuncle in the middle; his stockings were of bright
shining linen, with threads of silver interwoven, and his shoes were of
velvet: such was the representative form of conjugial love with the
husband. With the wife it was this; I saw her face, and I did not see
it; I saw it as essential beauty, and I did not see it because this
beauty was inexpressible; for in her face there was a splendor of
flaming light, such as the angels in the third heaven enjoy, and this
light made my sight dim; so that I was lost in astonishment: she
observing this addressed me, saying, "What do you see?" I replied, "I
see nothing but conjugial love and the form thereof; but I see, and I do
not see." Hereupon she turned herself sideways from her husband; and
then I was enabled to view her more attentively. Her eyes were bright
and sparkling from the light of her own heaven, which light, as was
said, is of a flaming quality, which it derives from the love of wisdom;
for in that heaven wives love their husbands from their wisdom, and in
it, and husbands love their wives from that love of wisdom and in it, as
directed towards themselves; and thus they are united. This was the
origin of her beauty; which was such that it would be impossible for any
painter to imitate and exhibit it in its form, for he has no colors
bright and vivid enough to express its lustre; nor is it in the power of
his art to depict such beauty: her hair was arranged in becoming order
so as to correspond with her beauty; and in it were inserted diadems of
flowers; she had a necklace of carbuncles, from which hung a rosary of
chrysolites; and she wore pearl bracelets: her upper robe was scarlet,
and underneath it she had a purple stomacher, fastened in front with
clasps of rubies; but what surprised me was, that the colors varied
according to her aspect in regard to her husband, being sometimes more
glittering, sometimes less; if she were looking towards him, more, if
sideways, less. When I had made these observations, they again talked
with me; and when the husband was speaking, he spoke at the same time as
from his wife; and when the wife was speaking, she spoke at the same
time as from her husband; such was the union of their minds from whence
speech flows; and on this occasion I also heard the tone of voice of
conjugial love; inwardly it was simultaneous, and it proceeded from the
delights of a state of peace and innocence. At length they said, "We are
recalled; we must depart;" and instantly they again appeared to be
conveyed in a chariot as before. They went by a paved way through
flowering shrubberies, from the beds of which arose olive and
orange-trees laden with fruit: and when they approached their own
heaven, they were met by several virgins, who welcomed and introduced
them.

43. After this I saw an angel from that heaven holding in his hand a
roll of parchment, which he unfolded, saying, "I see that you are
meditating on conjugial love; in this parchment are contained arcana of
wisdom respecting that love, which have never yet been disclosed in the
world. They are now to be disclosed, because it is of importance that
they should be: those arcana abound more in our heaven than in the rest,
because we are in the marriage of love and wisdom; but I prophesy that
none will appropriate to themselves that love, but those who are
received by the Lord into the New Church, which is the New Jerusalem."
Having said this, the angel let down the unfolded parchment, which a
certain angelic spirit received from him, and laid on a table in a
certain closet, which he instantly locked, and holding out the key to
me, said, "Write."

44. THE SECOND MEMORABLE RELATION. I once saw three spirits recently
deceased, who were wandering about in the world of spirits, examining
whatever came in their way, and inquiring concerning it. They were all
amazement to find that men lived altogether as before, and that the
objects they saw were similar to those they had seen before: for they
knew that they were departed out of the former or natural world, and
that in that world they believed that they should not live as men until
after the day of the last judgement, when they should be again clothed
with the flesh and bones that had been laid in the tomb; therefore, in
order to remove all doubt of their being really and truly men, they by
turns viewed and touched themselves and others, and felt the surrounding
objects and by a thousand proofs convinced themselves that they now were
men as in the former world; besides which they saw each other in a
brighter light, and the surrounding objects in superior splendor, and
thus their vision was more perfect. At that instant two angelic spirits
happening to meet them, accosted them, saying, "Whence are you?" They
replied, "We have departed out of a world, and again we live in a world;
thus we have removed from one world to another; and this surprises us."
Hereupon the three novitiate spirits questioned the two angelic spirits
concerning heaven; and as two of the three novitiates were youths, and
there darted from their eyes as it were a sparkling fire of lust for the
sex, the angelic spirit said, "Possibly you have seen some females;" and
they replied in the affirmative; and as they made inquiry respecting
heaven, the angelic spirits gave them the following information: "In
heaven there is every variety of magnificent and splendid objects, and
such things as the eye had never seen; there are also virgins and young
men; virgins of such beauty that they may be called personifications of
beauty, and young men of such morality that they may be called
personifications of morality; moreover the beauty of the virgins and the
morality of the young men correspond to each other, as forms mutually
suited to each other." Hereupon the two novitiates asked, "Are there in
heaven human forms altogether similar to those in the natural world?"
And it was replied, "They are altogether similar; nothing is wanting in
the male, and nothing in the female; in a word, the male is a male, and
the female a female, in all the perfection of form in which they were
created: retire, if you please, and examine if you are deficient in
anything, and whether you are not a complete man as before." Again, the
novitiates said, "We have been told in the world we have left, that in
heaven they are not given in marriage, because they are angels:--is
there then the love of the sex there?" And the angelic spirits replied,
"In heaven _your_ love of the sex does not exist; but we have the
angelic love of the sex, which is chaste, and devoid all libidinous
allurement." Hereupon the novitiates observed, "If there be a love of
the sex devoid of all allurement, what in such cases is the love of the
sex?" And while they were thinking about this love they sighed, and
said, "Oh, how dry and insipid is the joy of heaven! What young man, if
this be the case, can possibly wish for heaven? Is not such love barren
and devoid of life?" To this the angelic spirits replied, with a smile,
"The angelic love of the sex, such as exists in heaven, is nevertheless
full of the inmost delights: it is the most agreeable expansion of all
the principles of the mind, and thence of all the parts of the breast,
existing inwardly in the breast, and sporting therein as the heart
sports with the lungs, giving birth thereby to respiration, tone of
voice, and speech; so that the intercourse between the sexes, or between
youths and virgins, is an intercourse of essential celestial sweets,
which are pure. All novitiates, on ascending into heaven, are examined
as to the quality of their chastity, being let into the company of
virgins, the beauties of heaven, who from their tone of voice, their
speech, their face, their eyes, their gesture, and their exhaling
sphere, perceive what is their quality in regard to the love of the sex;
and if their love be unchaste, they instantly quit them, and tell their
fellow angels that they have seen satyrs or priapuses. The new comers
also undergo a change, and in the eyes of the angels appear rough and
hairy, and with feet like calves' or leopards', and presently they are
cast down again, lest by their lust they should defile the heavenly
atmosphere." On receiving this information, the two novitiates again
said, "According to this, there is no love of the sex in heaven; for
what is a chaste love of the sex, but a love deprived of the essence of
its life? And must not all the intercourse of youths and virgins, in
such case, consist of dry insipid joys? We are not stocks and stones,
but perceptions and affections of life." To this the angelic spirits
indignantly replied, "You are altogether ignorant what a chaste love of
the sex is; because as yet you are not chaste. This love is the very
essential delight of the mind, and thence of the heart; and not at the
same time of the flesh beneath the heart. Angelic chastity, which is
common to each sex, prevents the passage of that love beyond the
enclosure of the heart; but within that and above it, the morality of a
youth is delighted with the beauty of a virgin in the delights of the
chaste love of the sex: which delights are of too interior a nature, and
too abundantly pleasant, to admit of any description in words. The
angels have this love of the sex, because they have conjugial love only;
which love cannot exist together with the unchaste love of the sex. Love
truly conjugial is chaste, and has nothing in common with unchaste love,
being confined to one of the sex, and separate from all others; for it
is a love of the spirit and thence of the body, and not a love of the
body and thence of the spirit; that is, it is not a love infesting the
spirit." On hearing this, the two young novitiates rejoiced, and said,
"There still exists in heaven a love of the sex; what else is conjugial
love?" But the angelic spirits replied, "Think more profoundly, weigh
the matter well in your minds, and you will perceive, that your love of
the sex is a love extra-conjugial, and quite different from conjugial
love; the latter being as distinct from the former, as wheat is from
chaff, or rather as the human principle is from the bestial. If you
should ask the females in heaven, 'What is love extra-conjugial?' I take
upon me to say, their reply will be, 'What do you mean? What do you say?
How can you utter a question which so wounds our ears? How can a love
that is not created be implanted in any one?' If you should then ask
them, 'What is love truly conjugial?' I know they will reply, 'It is not
the love of the sex, but the love of one of the sex; and it has no other
ground of existence than this, that when a youth sees a virgin provided
by the Lord, and a virgin sees a youth, they are each made sensible of a
conjugial principle kindling in their hearts, and perceive that each is
the other's, he hers, and she his; for love meets love and causes them
to know each other, and instantly conjoins their souls, and afterwards
their minds, and thence enters their bosoms, and after the nuptials
penetrates further, and thus becomes love in its fulness, which grows
every day into conjunction, till they are no longer two, but as it were
one.' I know also that they will be ready to affirm in the most solemn
manner, that they are not acquainted with any other love of the sex; for
they say, 'How can there be a love of the sex, unless it be tending
mutually to meet, and reciprocal, so as to seek an eternal union, which
consists in two becoming one flesh?'" To this the angelic spirits added,
"In heaven they are in total ignorance what whoredom is; nor do they
know that it exists, or that its existence is even possible. The angels
feel a chill all over the body at the idea of unchaste or
extra-conjugial love; and on the other hand, they feel a genial warmth
throughout the body arising from chaste or conjugial love. With the
males, all the nerves lose their proper tension at the sight of a
harlot, and recover it again at the sight of a wife." The three
novitiates, on hearing this, asked, "Does a similar love exist between
married partners in the heavens as in the earths?" The two angelic
spirits replied, that it was altogether similar; and as they perceived
in the novitiates an inclination to know, whether in heaven there were
similar ultimate delights, they said, that they were exactly similar,
but much more blessed, because angelic perception and sensation is much
more exquisite than human: "and what," added they, "is the life of that
love unless derived from a flow of vigor? When this vigor fails, must
not the love itself also fail and grow cold? Is not this vigor the very
measure, degree, and basis of that love? Is it not its beginning, its
support, and its fulfilment? It is a universal law, that things primary
exist, subsist, and persist from things ultimate: this is true also of
that love; therefore unless there were ultimate delights, there would be
no delights of conjugial love." The novitiates then asked, whether from
the ultimate delights of that love in heaven any offspring were
produced; and if not, to what use did those delights serve? The angelic
spirit answered, that natural offspring were not produced, but spiritual
offspring: and the novitiates said, "What are spiritual offspring?" They
replied, "Two conjugial partners by ultimate delights are more and more
united in the marriage of good and truth, which is the marriage of love
and wisdom; and love and wisdom are the offspring produced therefrom: in
heaven the husband is wisdom, and the wife is the love thereof, and both
are spiritual; therefore, no other than spiritual offspring can be there
conceived and born: hence it is that the angels, after such delights, do
not experience sadness, as some do on earth, but are cheerful; and this
in consequence of a continual influx of fresh powers succeeding the
former, which serve for their renovation, and at the same time
illustration: for all who come into heaven, return into their vernal
youth, and into the vigor of that age, and thus continue to eternity."
The three novitiates, on hearing this, said, "Is it not written in the
Word, that in heaven they are not given in marriage, because they are
angels?" To which the angelic spirits replied, "Look up into heaven and
you will receive an answer:" and they asked, "Why are we to look up into
heaven?" They said, "Because thence we receive all interpretations of
the Word. The Word is altogether spiritual and the angels being
spiritual, will teach the spiritual understanding of it." They did not
wait long before heaven was opened over their heads, and two angels
appeared in view, and said, "There are nuptials in the heavens, as on
earth; but only with those in the heavens who are in the marriage of
good and truth; nor are any other angels: therefore it is spiritual
nuptials, which relate to the marriage of good and truth, that are there
understood. These (viz. spiritual nuptials) take place on earth, but not
after departure thence, thus not in the heavens; as it is said of the
live foolish virgins, who were also invited to the nuptials, that they
could not enter, because they were not in the marriage of good and
truth; for they had no oil, but only lamps. Oil signifies good, and
lamps truth; and to be given in marriage denotes to enter heaven, where
the marriage of good and truth takes place." The three novitiates were
made glad by this intelligence; and being filled with a desire of
heaven, and with the hope of heavenly nuptials, they said, "We will
apply ourselves with all diligence to the practice of morality and a
becoming conduct of life, that we may enjoy our wishes."

       *       *       *       *       *

ON THE STATE OF MARRIED PARTNERS AFTER DEATH.

45. That there are marriages in the heavens, has been shewn just above;
it remains now to be considered, whether the marriage-covenant ratified
in the world will remain and be in force after death, or not. As this is
a question not of judgement but of experience, and as experience herein
has been granted me by consociation with angels and spirits, I will here
adduce it; but yet so that reason may assent thereto. To have this
question determined, is also an object of the wishes and desires of all
married persons; for husbands who have loved their wives, in case they
die, are desirous to know whether it be well with them, and whether they
shall ever meet again; and the same is true of wives in regard to their
husbands. Many married pairs also wish to know beforehand whether they
are to be separated after death, or to live together: those who have
disagreed in their tempers, wish to know whether they are to be
separated; and those who have agreed, whether they are to live together.
Information on this subject then being much wished for, we will now
proceed to give it in the following order: I. _The love of the sex
remains with every man (homo) after death, according to its interior
quality; that is, such as it had been in his interior will and thought
in the world._ II. _The same is true of conjugial love._ III. _Married
partners most commonly meet after death, know each other, again
associate and for a time live together: this is the case in the first
state, thus while they are in externals as in the world._ IV. _But
successively, as they put off their externals, and enter into their
internals, they perceive what had been the quality of their love and
inclination for each other, and consequently whether they can live
together or not._ V. _If they can live together, they remain married
partners; but if they cannot they separate; sometimes the husband from
the wife, sometimes the wife from the husband, and sometimes each from
the other._ VI. _In this case there is given to the man a suitable wife,
and to the woman a suitable husband._ VII. _Married partners enjoy
similar communications with each other as in the world, but more
delightful and blessed, yet without prolification; in the place of which
they experience spiritual prolification, which is that of love and
wisdom._ VIII. _This is the case with those who go to heaven; but it is
otherwise with those who go to hell._ We now proceed to an explanation
of these propositions, by which they may be illustrated and confirmed.

46. I. THE LOVE OF THE SEX REMAINS WITH EVERY MAN AFTER DEATH, ACCORDING
TO ITS INTERIOR QUALITY; THAT IS, SUCH AS IT HAD BEEN IN HIS INTERIOR
WILL AND THEREBY IN THE WOMAN. Every love follows a man after death,
because it is the _esse_ of his life; and the ruling love, which is the
head of the rest, remains with him to eternity, and together with it the
subordinate loves. The reason why they remain, is, because love properly
appertains to the spirit of man, and to the body by derivation from the
spirit; and a man after death becomes a spirit and thereby carries his
love along with him; as love is the _esse_ of a man's life, it is
evident, that such as a man's life has been in the world, such is his
lot after death. The love of the sex is the most universal of all loves,
being implanted from creation in the very soul of man, from which the
essence of the whole man is derived, and this for the sake of the
propagation of the human race. The reason why this love chiefly remains
is, because after death a male is a male, and a female a female, and
because there is nothing in the soul, the mind, and the body, which is
not male (or masculine) in the male, and female (or feminine) in the
female; and these two (the male and female) are so created, that they
have a continual tendency to conjunction, yea, to such a conjunction as
to become a one. This tendency is the love of the sex, which precedes
conjugial love. Now, since a conjunctive inclination is inscribed on
every part and principle of the male and of the female, it follows, that
this inclination cannot be destroyed and die with the body.

47. The reason why the love of the sex remains such as it was interiorly
in the world, is, because every man has an internal and an external,
which are also called the internal and external man; and hence there is
an internal and an external will and thought. A man when he dies, quits
his external, and retains his internal; for externals properly belong to
his body, and internals to his spirit. Now since every man is his own
love, and love resides in the spirit, it follows, that the love of the
sex remains with him after death, such as it was interiorly with him; as
for example, if the love interiorly had been conjugial and chaste, it
remains such after death; but if it had been interiorly adulterous
(anti-conjugial), it remains such also after death. It is however to be
observed that the love of the sex is not the same with one person as
with another; its differences are infinite: nevertheless, such as it is
in any one's spirit, such it remains.

48. II. CONJUGIAL LOVE IN LIKE MANNER REMAINS SUCH AS IT HAD BEEN
INTERIORLY; THAT IS, SUCH AS IT HAD BEEN IN THE MAN'S INTERIOR WILL AND
THOUGHT IN THE WORLD. As the love of the sex is one thing, and conjugial
love another, therefore mention is made of each; and it is said, that
the latter also remains after death such as it has been internally with
a man, during his abode in the world: but as few know the distinction
between the love of the sex and conjugial love, therefore, before we
proceed further in the subject of this treatise, it may be expedient
briefly to point it out. The love of the sex is directed to several, and
contracted with several of the sex; but conjugial love is directed to
only one, and contracted with one of the sex; moreover, love directed to
and contracted with several is a natural love; for it is common to man
with beasts and birds, which are natural: but conjugial love is a
spiritual love, and peculiar and proper to men; because men were
created, and are therefore born to become spiritual; therefore, so far
as a man becomes spiritual, so far he puts off the love of the sex, and
puts on conjugial love. In the beginning of marriage the love of the sex
appears as if conjoined with conjugial love; but in the progress of
marriage they are separated; and in this case, with such as are
spiritual, the love of the sex is removed, and conjugial love is
imparted; but with such as are natural, the contrary happens. From these
observations it is evident, that the love of the sex, being directed to
and contracted with several and being in itself natural, yea, animal, is
impure and unchaste, and being vague and indeterminate in its object, is
adulterous; but the case is altogether different with conjugial love.
That conjugial love is spiritual, and truly human, will manifestly
appear from what follows.

[Transcriber's Note: The out-of-order section numbers which follow are
in the original text, as are the asterisks which do not seem to indicate
footnotes. There are several cases of this in the text, apparently
indicating insertions by the author.]

47.* III. MARRIED PARTNERS MOST COMMONLY MEET AFTER DEATH, KNOW EACH
OTHER, AGAIN ASSOCIATE, AND FOR A TIME LIVE TOGETHER: THIS IS THE CASE
IN THE FIRST STATE, THUS WHILE THEY ARE IN EXTERNALS AS IN THE WORLD.
There are two states in which a man (_homo_) enters after death, an
external and an internal state. He comes first into his external state,
and afterwards into his internal; and during the external state, married
partners meet each other, (supposing they are both deceased,) know each
other, and if they have lived together in the world, associate again,
and for some time live together; and while they are in this state they
do not know the inclination of each to the other, this being concealed
in the internals of each; but afterwards, when they come into their
internal state, the inclination manifests itself; and if it be in mutual
agreement and sympathy, they continue to live together a conjugial life;
but if it be in disagreement and antipathy, their marriage is dissolved.
In case a man had had several wives, he successively joins himself with
them, while he is in his external state; but when he enters into his
internal state, in which lie perceives the inclinations of his love, and
of what quality they are, he then either adopts one or leaves them all;
for in the spiritual world, as well as in the natural, it is not
allowable for any Christian to have more than one wife, as it infests
and profanes religion. The case is the same with a woman that had had
several husbands: nevertheless the women in this case do not join
themselves to their husbands; they only present themselves, and the
husbands join them to themselves. It is to be observed that husbands
rarely know their wives, but that wives well know their husbands, women
having an interior perception of love, and men only an exterior.

48.* IV. BUT SUCCESSIVELY, AS THEY PUT OFF THEIR EXTERNALS AND ENTER
INTO THEIR INTERNALS, THEY PERCEIVE WHAT HAD BEEN THE QUALITY OF THEIR
LOVE AND INCLINATION FOR EACH OTHER, AND CONSEQUENTLY WHETHER THEY CAN
LIVE TOGETHER OR NOT. There is no occasion to explain this further, as
it follows from what is shewn in the previous section; suffice it here
to shew how a man (_homo_) after death puts off his externals and puts
on his internals. Every one after death is first introduced into the
world which is called the world of spirits, and which is intermediate
between heaven and hell; and in that world he is prepared, for heaven if
he is good, and for hell if he is evil. The end or design of this
preparation is, that the internal and external may agree together and
make a one, and not disagree and make two: in the natural world they
frequently make two, and only make a one with those who are sincere in
heart. That they make two is evident from the deceitful and the cunning;
especially from hypocrites, flatterers, dissemblers, and liars: but in
the spiritual world it is not allowable thus to have a divided mind; for
whoever has been internally wicked must also be externally wicked; in
like manner, whoever has been good, must be good in each principle: for
every man after death becomes of such a quality as he had been
interiorly, and not such as he had been exteriorly. For this end, after
his decease, he is let alternately into his external and his internal;
and every one, while he is in his external, is wise, that is, he wishes
to appear wise, even though he be wicked; but a wicked person internally
is insane. By those changes he is enabled to see his follies, and to
repent of them: but if he had not repented in the world, he cannot
afterwards; for he loves his follies, and wishes to remain in them:
therefore he forces his external also to be equally insane: thus his
internal and his external become a one; and when this is effected, he is
prepared for hell. But it is otherwise with a good spirit: such a one,
as in the world he had looked unto God and had repented, was more wise
in his internal than in his external: in his external also, through the
allurements and vanities of the world, he was sometimes led astray;
therefore his external is likewise reduced to agreement with his
internal, which, as was said, is wise; and when this is effected he is
prepared for heaven. From these considerations it may plainly appear,
how the case is in regard to putting off the external and putting on the
internal after death.

49. V. IF THEY CAN LIVE TOGETHER, THEY REMAIN MARRIED PARTNERS; BUT IF
THEY CANNOT, THEY SEPARATE; SOMETIMES THE HUSBAND FROM THE WIFE,
SOMETIMES THE WIFE FROM THE HUSBAND, AND SOMETIMES EACH FROM THE OTHER.
The reason why separations take place after death is, because the
conjunctions which are made on earth are seldom made from any internal
perception of love, but from an external perception, which hides the
internal. The external perception of love originates in such things as
regard the love of the world and of the body. Wealth and large
possessions are peculiarly the objects of worldly love, while dignities
and honors are those of the love of the body: besides these objects,
there are also various enticing allurements, such as beauty and an
external polish of manners, and sometimes even an unchasteness of
character. Moreover, matrimonial engagements are frequently contracted
within the particular district, city, or village, in which the parties
were born, and where they live; in which case the choice is confined and
limited to families that are known, and to such as are in similar
circumstances in life: hence matrimonial connections made in the world
are for the most part external, and not at the same time internal; when
yet it is the internal conjunction, or the conjunction of souls, which
constitutes a real marriage; and this conjunction is not perceivable
until the man puts off the external and puts on the internal; as is the
case after death. This then is the reason why separations take place,
and afterwards new conjunctions are formed with such as are of a similar
nature and disposition; unless these conjunctions have been provided on
earth, as happens with those who from an early age have loved, have
desired, and have asked of the Lord an honorable and lovely connection
with one of the sex, shunning and abominating the impulses of a loose
and wandering lust.

50. VI. IN THIS CASE THERE IS GIVEN TO THE MAN A SUITABLE WIFE, AND TO
THE WOMAN A SUITABLE HUSBAND. The reason of this is, because no married
partners can be received into heaven, so as to remain there, but such as
have been interiorly united, or as are capable of being so united; for
in heaven two married partners are not called two, but one angel; this
is understood by the Lord's words "_They are no longer two, but one
flesh_." The reason why no other married partners are there received is,
because in heaven no others can live together in one house, and in one
chamber and bed; for all in the heavens are associated according to the
affinities and relationships of love, and have their habitations
accordingly. In the spiritual world there are not spaces, but the
appearance of spaces; and these appearances are according to the states
of life of the inhabitants, which are according to their states of love;
therefore in that world no one can dwell but in his own house, which is
provided for him and assigned to him according to the quality of his
love: if he dwells in any other, he is straitened and pained in his
breast and breathing; and it is impossible for two to dwell together in
the same house unless they are likenesses; neither can married partners
so dwell together, unless they are mutual inclinations; if they are
external inclinations, and not at the same time internal, the very house
or place itself separates, and rejects and expels them. This is the
reason why for those who after preparation are introduced into heaven,
there is provided a marriage with a consort whose soul inclines to
mutual union with the soul of another, so that they no longer wish to be
two lives, but one. This is the reason why after separation there is
given to the man a suitable wife and to the woman in like manner a
suitable husband.

51. VII. MARRIED PAIRS ENJOY SIMILAR COMMUNICATIONS WITH EACH OTHER AS
IN THE WORLD, BUT MORE DELIGHTFUL AND BLESSED, YET WITHOUT
PROLIFICATION; IN THE PLACE OF WHICH THEY EXPERIENCE SPIRITUAL
PROLIFICATION, WHICH IS THAT OF LOVE AND WISDOM. The reason why married
pairs enjoy similar communications as in the world, is, because after
death a male is a male, and a female a female, and there is implanted in
each at creation an inclination to conjunction; and this inclination
with man is the inclination of his spirit and thence of his body;
therefore after death, when a man becomes a spirit, the same mutual
inclination remains, and this cannot exist without similar
communications; for after death a man is a man as before; neither is
there any thing wanting either in the male or in the female: as to form
they are like themselves, and also as to affections and thoughts; and
what must be the necessary consequence, but that they must enjoy like
communications? And as conjugial love is chaste, pure, and holy,
therefore their communications are ample and complete; but on this
subject see what was said in the MEMORABLE RELATION, n. 44. The reason
why such communications are more delightful and blessed than in the
world, is, because conjugial love, as it is the love of the spirit,
becomes interior and purer, and thereby more perceivable; and every
delight increases according to perception, and to such a degree that its
blessedness is discernible in its delight.

52. The reason why marriages in the heavens are without prolification,
and that in place thereof there is experienced spiritual prolification,
which is that of love and wisdom, is, because with the inhabitants of
the spiritual world, the third principle--the natural, is wanting; and
it is this which contains the spiritual principles; and these without
that which contains them have no consistence, like the productions of
the natural world: moreover spiritual principles, considered in
themselves, have relation to love and wisdom; therefore love and wisdom
are the births produced from marriages in the heavens. These are called
births, because conjugial love perfects an angel, uniting him with his
consort, in consequence whereof he becomes more and more a man (_homo_)
for, as was said above, two married partners in heaven are not two but
one angel; wherefore by conjugial unition they fill themselves with the
human principle, which consists in desiring to grow wise, and in loving
whatever relates to wisdom.

53. VIII. THIS IS THE CASE WITH THOSE WHO GO TO HEAVEN; BUT IT IS
OTHERWISE WITH THOSE WHO GO TO HELL. That after death a suitable wife is
given to a husband, and a suitable husband to a wife, and that they
enjoy delightful and blessed communications, but without prolification,
except of a spiritual kind, is to be understood of those who are
received into heaven and become angels; because such are spiritual, and
marriages in themselves are spiritual and thence holy: but with respect
to those who go to hell, they are all natural; and marriages merely
natural are not marriages, but conjunctions which originate in unchaste
lust. The nature and quality of such conjunctions will be shewn in the
following pages, when we come to treat of the chaste and the unchaste
principles, and further when we come to treat of adulterous love.

54. To what has been above related concerning the state of married
partners after death, it may be expedient to add the following
circumstances. I. That all those married partners who are merely
natural, are separated after death; because with them the love of
marriage grows cold, and the love of adultery grows warm: nevertheless
after separation, they sometimes associate as married partners with
others; but after a short time they withdraw from each other: and this
in many cases is done repeatedly; till at length the man is made over to
some harlot, and the woman to some adulterer; which is effected in an
infernal prison: concerning which prison, see the APOCALYPSE REVEALED,
n. 153, § x., where promiscuous whoredom is forbidden each party under
certain pains and penalties. II. Married partners, of whom one is
spiritual and the other natural, are also separated after death; and to
the spiritual is given a suitable married partner: whereas the natural
one is sent to the resorts of the lascivious among his like. III. But
those, who in the world have lived a single life, and have altogether
alienated their minds from marriage, in case they be spiritual, remain
single; but if natural, they become whoremongers. It is otherwise with
those, who in their single state have desired marriage, and especially
if they have solicited it without success; for such, if they are
spiritual, blessed marriages are provided, but not until they come into
heaven. IV. Those who in the world have been shut up in monasteries,
both men and women, at the conclusion of the monastic life, which
continues some time after death, are let loose and discharged, and enjoy
the free indulgence of their desires, whether they are disposed to live
in a married state or not: if they are disposed to live in a married
state, this is granted them; but if otherwise, they are conveyed to
those who live in celibacy on the side of heaven; such, however, as have
indulged the fires of prohibited lust, are cast down. V. The reason why
those who live in celibacy are on the side of heaven, is, because the
sphere of perpetual celibacy infests the sphere of conjugial love, which
is the very essential sphere of heaven; and the reason why the sphere of
conjugial love is the very essential sphere of heaven, is, because it
descends from the heavenly marriage of the Lord and the church.

       *        *        *        *        *

55. To the above, I shall add two MEMORABLE RELATIONS: the FIRST is
this. On a certain time I heard from heaven the sweetest melody, arising
from a song that was sung by wives and virgins in heaven. The sweetness
of their singing was like the affection of some kind of love flowing
forth harmoniously. Heavenly songs are in reality sonorous affections,
or affections expressed and modified by sounds; for as the thoughts are
expressed by speech, so the affections are expressed by songs; and from
the measure and flow of the modulation, the angels perceive the object
of the affection. On this occasion there were many spirits about me; and
some of them informed me that they heard this delightful melody, and
that it was the melody of some lovely affection, the object of which
they did not know: they therefore made various conjectures about it, but
in vain. Some conjectured that the singing expressed the affection of a
bridegroom and bride when they sign the marriage-articles; some that it
expressed the affection of a bridegroom and a bride at the solemnizing
of the nuptials; and some that it expressed the primitive love of a
husband and a wife. But at that instant there appeared in the midst of
them an angel from heaven, who said, that they were singing the chaste
love of the sex. Hereupon some of the bystanders asked, "What is the
chaste love of the sex?" And the angel answered, "It is the love which a
man bears towards a beautiful and elegant virgin or wife, free from
every lascivious idea, and the same love experienced by a virgin or a
wife towards a man." As he said this, he disappeared. The singing
continued; and as the bystanders then knew the subject of the affection
which it expressed, they heard it very variously, every one according to
the state of his love. Those who looked upon women chastely, heard it as
a song of symphony and sweetness; those who looked upon them unchastely,
heard it as a discordant and mournful song; and those who looked upon
them disdainfully, heard it as a song that was harsh and grating. At
that instant the place on which they stood was suddenly changed into a
theatre, and a voice was heard, saying, "INVESTIGATE THIS LOVE:" and
immediately spirits from various societies presented themselves, and in
the midst of them some angels in white. The latter then said, "We in
this spiritual world have inquired into every species of love, not only
into the love which a man has for a man, and a woman for a woman; and
into the reciprocal love of a husband and a wife; but also into the love
which a man has for woman, and which a woman has for men; and we have
been permitted to pass through societies and examine them, and we have
never yet found the common love of the sex chaste, except with those who
from true conjugial love are in continual potency, and these are in the
highest heavens. We have also been permitted to perceive the influx of
this love into the affections of our hearts, and have been made sensible
that it surpasses in sweetness every other love, except the love of two
conjugial partners whose hearts are as one: but we have besought you to
investigate this love, because it is new and unknown to you; and since
it is essential pleasantness, we in heaven call it heavenly sweetness."
They then began the investigation; and those spoke first who were unable
to think chastely of marriages. They said, "What man when he beholds a
beautiful and lovely virgin or wife, can so correct or purify the ideas
of his thought from concupiscence, as to love the beauty and yet have no
inclination to taste it, if it be allowable? Who can convert
concupiscence, which is innate in every man, into such chastity, thus
into somewhat not itself, and yet love? Can the love of the sex, when it
enters by the eyes into the thoughts, stop at the face of a woman? Does
it not descend instantly into the breast, and beyond it? The angels talk
idly in saying that this love is chaste, and yet is the sweetest of all
loves, and that it can only exist with husbands who are in true
conjugial love, and thence in an extreme degree of potency with their
wives. Do such husbands possess any peculiar power more than other men,
when they see a beautiful woman, of keeping the ideas of their thought
in a state of elevation, and as it were of suspending them, so that they
cannot descend and proceed to what constitutes that love?" The argument
was next taken up by those who were in cold and in heat; in cold towards
their wives, and in heat towards the sex; and they said, "What is the
chaste love of the sex? Is it not a contradiction in terms to talk of
such a love? If chastity be predicated of the love of the sex, is not
this destroying the very thing of which it is predicated? How can the
chaste love of the sex be the sweetest of all loves, when chastity
deprives it of its sweetness? You all know where the sweetness of that
love resides; when therefore the idea connected therewith is banished
from the mind, where and whence is the sweetness?" At that instant
certain spirits interrupted them, and said, "We have been in company
with the most beautiful females and have had no lust; therefore we know
what the chaste love of the sex is." But their companions, who were
acquainted with their lasciviousness, replied, "You were at those times
in a state of loathing towards the sex, arising from impotence; and this
is not the chaste love of the sex, but the ultimate of unchaste love."
On hearing what had been said, the angels were indignant and requested
those who stood on the right, or to the south, to deliver their
sentiments. They said, "There is a love of one man to another, and also
of one woman to another; and there is a love of a man to a woman, and of
a woman to a man; and these three pairs of loves totally differ from
each other. The love of one man to another is as the love of
understanding and understanding; for the man was created and
consequently born to become understanding; the love of one woman to
another is as the love of affection and affection of the understanding
of men; for the woman was created and born to become a love of the
understanding of a man. These loves, viz., of one man to another, and of
one woman to another, do not enter deeply into the bosom, but remain
without, and only touch each other; thus they do not interiorly conjoin
the two parties: wherefore also two men, by their mutual reasonings,
sometimes engage in combat together like two wrestlers; and two women,
by their mutual concupiscences, are at war with each other like two
prize-fighters. But the love of a man and a woman is the love of the
understanding and of its affection; and this love enters deeply and
effects conjunction, which is that love; but the conjunction of minds,
and not at the same time of bodies, or the endeavour towards that
conjunction alone, is spiritual love, and consequently chaste love; and
this love exists only with those who are in true conjugial love, and
thence in an eminent degree of potency; because such, from their
chastity, do not admit an influx of love from the body of any other
woman than of their own wives; and as they are in an extreme degree of
potency, they cannot do otherwise than love the sex, and at the same
time hold in aversion whatever is unchaste. Hence they are principled in
a chaste love of the sex, which, considered in itself, is interior
spiritual friendship, deriving its sweetness from an eminent degree of
potency, but still being chaste. "I'm sorry," I said gently, "but I
don't think you've got things quite right. This is more like the position
of things at present," and I waved my arm in the direction of our war
map.

When at last he regained speech he made some remarks which might have
given offence to people less sure of themselves than I.

"No," I said, "I do know the flags of the nations, and so does my wife.

But I must beg you to keep that map a secret. You see, I have a friend
in the inner circle who has given me some information of which the outside
world knows nothing.

I can rely on your discretion, I am sure."
"Of course, my dear fellow." He seemed dazed and strangely silent. He had
one long last look at the map and departed muttering to himself: "A
Belgian fleet off the Outer Hebrides! French troops in Nijni Novgorod!!

A Montenegrin squadron menacing Mitylene!!!"
It is strange how strong the force of habit is. I went to the City
as usual to-day. At lunch I met Collins, who told me he had it on very
good authority that there was an Austrian fleet bombarding the
forts along the Mersey and that a combined force of French and Russians
had crossed the Dutch frontier from Arnheim and was advancing on
Berlin.

I hurried home to record these new developments on my map, and was compelled,
through shortage of flags, to displace the Servian fleet from the North
Sea and Gladys's Belgian contingent from Monte Carlo.

* * * * *
Illustration: _German Bird._ "I SEE IT DOESN'T SAY ANYTHING ABOUT
EAGLES."
* * * * *
Illustration: _The Hohenzollern (megaphonically)._ "TAKE COURAGE,
MY BRAVE GERMANS. YOUR KAISER IS PREPARED TO SACRIFICE A MILLION OF
YOU."
* * * * *
ANOTHER IMPENDING APOLOGY.

"500,000 copies of 'With the Flag to Pretoria' were sold a few days after
publication and thousands were disappointed."--_Advt._
* * * * *
Illustration: A FAUX PAS.

_London Hawker (addressing obvious Teuton)._ "WEAR YER FLAG, SIR."
* * * * *
IN THE CITY.

Because beneath grey Northern skies Some grey hulls heave and fall, The
merchants sell their merchandise All just as usual; Our cargoes
sail for man's content The same as yesterday, And war-risk's down to 2
per cent., The underwriters say.

The clerks they sit with page and pen And fill the desks a-row, Because
outside of Cuxhaven There's them to make it so; We go to lunch, as
natural, From one o'clock till two, Because outside of Kiel Canal There's
those that let us do.

We check and add our pass-books up Or keep our weekly Boards Unhampered
by the works of KRUPP And all the KAISER'S swords; At five o'clock
we have our tea And catch our usual bus-- So thank the LORD for those
at sea Who guard the likes of us.

* * * * *
THE COWARDLY CONSUMERS CO-OPERATIVE COMPANY.

The C.C.C.C. has been formed to provide for the wants of unpatriotic
or panic-stricken persons in all parts of the country.

WRITE TO US TO-DAY.

WE HAVE MADE COMPLETE ARRANGEMENTS FOR YOUR CONVENIENCE.

A FULL DINNER-TABLE FOR YOU WHILE OTHERS STARVE.

HORS D'OEUVRES.--Ensure your _hors d'oeuvres_ by allowing us to turn your
bath into a sardine tank. Your basement too should make an excellent
oyster bed. We would flood it for you.

SOUPS.--The mock turtles we supply are quite tame, and while waiting to
be made into soup should keep your children amused. We also deliver
Salted Oxtail by the furlong. Send for patterns.

FISH.--Try one of our Frozen Whales and assure your fish course
for the next six months.

       

JOINTS.

--Sheep-folds (with sheep) supplied at shortest notice to fit your tennis
court, or you might order one of our Handy Styes, which have accommodation
for half-a-dozen pigs (congenial company) and are suitable for erection
in a corner of any flat or private residence.

SWEETS.--Our "one ton" plum puddings placed in position on your premises
by our own cranes.

* * * * *
READ OUR TESTIMONIALS.

_A Grateful Customer writes_:--"Your transformation of my boudoir into a
hen-pen is quite admirable, and enables us to face the future with
complete calm. As your circular reminds us, one feels more comfortable
about one's country when one is safe oneself."
_Another writes_:--"Many thanks for prompt attention. The night-nursery
makes an excellent cow-house, and the two cows used the passenger-lift
with perfect success."
* * * * *
WRITE US FOR QUOTATIONS FOR ANY QUANTITY OF PROVISIONS REQUIRED.

So long as the order is large enough we will execute it. No orders for
less value than £50 accepted.

_SPECIAL NOTICE._
Our Hoarding Department has prepared a neat stocking capable of
holding 750 sovereigns. Please ask to see one.

* * * * *
All goods are delivered in our own heavily armoured pantechnicons.

A charming miniature White Feather, suitable for personal adornment,
will be presented to all customers.

Take no notice whatever of any warnings in the newspapers not to buy
largely. Think of yourselves. It is only you who matter. Buy now; buy
quantities.

* * * * *
From the regulations governing special constables:--
"A special constable guilty of misconduct may be suspended from duty, and,
if so suspended, shall forthwith give up his warrant card, truncheon,
armlet, and whistle to the police officer suspending him."

What tune must he whistle to him?

* * * * *
"Admiral Jellicoe has a reputation for thoroughness in the naval service,
but a story which shows his kindly nature was told to me to-day (says
'F.' in the 'Citizen'). A defence boom was being constructed at Sheerness,
and the admiral was dissatisfied with it.
He told the officer in command of some defects, and said it was not so
good as the boom at Portsmouth."
We feel sure there must be even better stories about him than this.

* * * * *
"THEY ALSO SERVE."
Jeremy threw away the stump of his after-dinner cigar and began to
light another one.

"Where's the economy of giving up smoking when you've got lots of
cigars in the house?" he asked.

"Oh, Jeremy," said his wife, "who says you ought to?"
"The Vicar. He only smokes one non-throat cigarette a day himself. I told
him he ought to give that up, but he said it was different. I say, it
will want rather a large soldier for that shirt, won't it?" He sat
on the arm of his wife's chair and began to play with the
sleeve.

"Jeremy, can't you find something to do?"
"Yes." He went out and returned with his golf clubs, which he began to
polish lovingly. "I think I shall have a round to-morrow. If FRANCIS
DRAKE played bowls when the Spanish Fleet was in sight, I don't see why
Jeremy Smith shouldn't play golf when the German Fleet is out of
sight."
"I thought you said you weren't going to till the war was over?"
"I don't see why I shouldn't. Golf keeps us fit, and it is the duty of
every Englishman to be fit just now."
"But you really play golf because you like it."
Jeremy looked up at her in surprise.

"Really," he said, "I don't see why I shouldn't like doing my duty."

"Oh, Jeremy!" sighed his wife. "You know I didn't mean that."
"I know exactly what you meant." He dropped his clubs and began to
pace the room. "You're filled with the idea that the only way a man can
serve his country is by doing something he absolutely detests. That's why
you made me a special constable." He stopped and glared at her. "A
special constable! Me!"
"Darling, it was your own idea entirely."
"You said to yourself, 'There are men who would make excellent special
constables--men with red faces and angry moustaches who take naturally
to ordering other people about, men who instinctively push their way
into the middle of a row when they see one, men with a lust for gore,
great powerful men who have learnt ju-jitsu. But the fact that they'd all
rather like it shows that it can't really be their duty to join; they
wouldn't be making a big enough sacrifice. The men we want are the
quiet, the mild, the inoffensive, the butterflies of life, the men who
would simply loathe being special constables, the men who would be
entirely useless at it'--and, having said this to yourself, you
looked round and you saw _me_."
Mrs. Jeremy smiled and shook her head at her husband, sighed again,
and returned to her work.

"And so now I'm a special constable, and I wear a belt and a truncheon,
and what good do I do? Baby loves it, I admit that; Baby admires
me immensely.

When Nurse says, 'If you're not a good girl the special constable will be
after you,' Baby shrieks with delight. But officially, in the village,
I am useless.... Oh but I forgot, I arrested a man this morning."
"Jeremy, and you never told me!" said Mrs. Jeremy excitedly.

"Well, I wasn't quite sure at the time whether I arrested him or he
arrested me. But in the clearer light of evening I see that it was really
I who was doing the arresting. At any rate it was I who had the belt and
the note-book."
"Was it a German spy?"
"No, it was old Jack, rather drunk. I arrested him for being intoxicated
on a bridge--the one over the brook, you know, by Claytons. He put his
arm round my neck and we started for the Haverley police-station together.
I didn't want to go to the police-station, because it's three miles
off, but Jack insisted.... He had me tight by the neck. I couldn't
even make a note."
"Wasn't he afraid of your truncheon?"
"My darling, one couldn't hit old Jack with a truncheon; he's such
a jolly old boy when he's sober."

Jeremy played nervously with his wife's scissors, and added, "Besides
he was doing things with the truncheon himself."
"What sort of things?"
"Conducting the _Marseillaise_ chiefly--we marched along in time to it."
A smile spread slowly over Jeremy's face as the scene came back to
him.
"It must have looked splendid."
"How dared he?" said Mrs. Jeremy indignantly.

"Oh, well, if you make your husband a special constable you must expect
these things. I consoled myself with the thought that I was doing my
duty ... and that there was nobody about. You see, we made a detour and
missed Haverley, and when we were nearly home again he left me. I
mean I released him. You know, I'm not what I call a _good_
special constable.
I did what I could, but there must be more in it than that."
Mrs. Jeremy looked up and blew a kiss to him.

"However," he went on, "I dropped in on him this evening and made
him sign the pledge."

"Well, there you are; you _have_ done some good."
"Yes, but I hadn't got my truncheon on then. I spoke as Jeremy Smith,
Esq." He put a brassey to his shoulder and said, "Bang," and went
on, "I should be no good at all at the front, and Lord KITCHENER would
be no good trying to paint my water-colours, but all the same I scored
an inner last night. The scene at the range when it got about that the
President had scored an inner was one of wild enthusiasm. When the news
is flashed to Berlin it will give the GERMAN EMPEROR pause. Do you know
that the most unpatriotic thing you can do is to make shirts
for the wounded, when there are lots of poor women in the village
who'd be only too glad of the job? Like little Miss Merton. And
yet you think to get out of it by making your husband a special
constable."
Mrs. Jeremy put down her work and went over to her husband and knelt
by his chair.

"Do you know," she said, taking his hands in hers, "that there isn't
a man, woman or child in this village who is idle or neglected or
forgotten? That those who wanted to enlist have been encouraged
and told how to, and that those who didn't want to have been shown other
ways of helping?

That it's all been done without any fuss or high-falutin or busy-bodying,
and chiefly because of an absurd husband of mine who never talks
seriously about anything, but somehow manages to make everybody else
willing and good-tempered?"
"Is that a fact?" said Jeremy, rather pleased.

"It is. And this absurd husband didn't understand how much he was
helping, and he had an idea that he ought to do something thoroughly
uncomfortable, so he ordered a truncheon and gave up golf and made
himself quite miserable ... and then put it all on to his wife."
"Well, why didn't you stop me?"

said Jeremy helplessly.

"I wasn't going to be a drag on you; if you'd volunteered for a submarine
I should have said nothing."
"I should be useless in a submarine," said Jeremy thoughtfully; "I should
only fall over the white mice. But I really thought you wanted----
Why then," he cried happily, "I might play golf to-morrow, you think?"
"I wish you would," said Mrs. Jeremy.
Jeremy took up his brassey and addressed an imaginary ball.
"Sir Jeremy Smith playing golf in a crisis," he said. "Subject for
historical picture." 
A. A. M.

* * * * *
Illustration: A DESPERATE MEASURE.
_West Country Skipper (stationary in small Cornish port and ignorant
of our Navy's control of the sea)._ "IF I PUTS OUT AN' GOES EAST I
BE SUNK BY T' GERMANS, AN' IF I GOES SOUTH I BE SUNK BY T'
AUSTRIA-'UNGRIANS. IT DU SEEM AS 'OW I WERE BEST TO BIDE WHERE I
BE AN' GI' T' OLD SHIP A COAT O' PAAINT!" 
* * * * *
THE WATCH DOGS.
MY DEAR BILL,--It is now upwards of a fortnight since we were torn
asunder, I being taken away to cope with the Germans and you being
left at home to protect our property against the predatory attacks
of our landlady. I imagine you would like to know how things are
going with me, but please don't trouble to answer, for I don't in
the least want to know how things are going with you. No one does,
my boy; you are what we refer to as a _something_ civilian. You
must forgive us, Bill; it is one of the too few pleasures in the
life of the mobilized Territorial.
Has that rosy, well-groomed body of yours ever sought repose on the
tessellated floor of a public hall? Has it ever washed itself in
an enamel mug? Has it ever set out on a round of visits with luggage
limited to 35 lbs., inclusive of its bed? No, nor had mine before;
and yet it doesn't seem to suffer much harm from the experience.
What is more, we are beginning to find scope for little luxuries
even in this narrow compass; there are mess tins, for instance, of
the larger sort in which one may, with a little ingenuity, have a
complete bath.
When I set off last Tuesday week, with my chest out and my eyes
right, I only got as far as the Infants School round the corner,
where my company was foregathered. Here we spent our time, the
hundred odd of us, getting together the necessaries of life: the
most formidable of these was undoubtedly the housewife. I confess
to a faint heart when I think of myself darning my socks in off
moments between battles.
From the Infants School we went to the Town Hall to join the
Battalion, and the thousand of us marched to our war station, some
thirty miles away. I hope I looked like a soldier as I stepped out,
but I felt more like a general stores with all my stock hanging in
my shop window. Next time I do this sort of thing I'm going to have
a row of pegs on my back and an extra storey in my head-gear for
oddments. There is no denying that the whole arrangement is an
efficient one, the only failure being the cellar equipment. It seems
to me that the War Office ought to have discovered some shady nook
about the human body where one's drinking water could be kept cool.
Also I think they have wasted space by not utilizing the inside of
one's field-glasses for the carriage of something or other. A
combination sword and razor would also be an economy.
We increased in numbers as we progressed. At our war-station we
joined the Brigade, making us four thousand in all, and from there
we joined the Division, becoming about sixteen thousand. If we go
on at this pace, we shall be getting into the millions soon, and
then I think somebody's meals _must_ be overlooked. There's bound
to be some limit to the capacity of these organizing people, although
it certainly hasn't appeared yet. They moved our Brigade two hundred
miles by train with less shouting and fuss than is usual with the
single British family mobilising for its seaside resort. Their
system of train-catching however is worth mentioning.
Section Commanders were told to have their section ready by
six-thirty.
That was the order issued by us Lieutenants responsible for
half-companies. We had been told to be ready by seven o'clock, under
a threat of execution on the following dawn. Hence the margin of
half an hour. We took our orders from our Captains, who had them
from the Majors, who had them from the Adjutant, who had them from
the C.O., who had them from the Brigadier, who had them from goodness
knows where.
Every rank is prepared to be shot, if need be, but desires, if
possible, not to have it happen at dawn; so each officer, taking
his order from his superior, puts on his margin before instructing
his inferior.
The Brigadier came round this morning to have a look at a guard.
He found our one and only T. B. Ponks doing sentry. "Turn out the
guard," was the order. "Eh?" was the response. "Where is the guard?"
asked the flushed suite. "A dunno," said T. B. The suite was inclined
to be fussy, but our Brigadier is essentially human. "Where are the
other lads?" he asked genially. "They 'm in theer," said T. B.,
pointing to the entrance with no particular enthusiasm. The Brigadier
and his staff made as if to enter. "'Ere, you," called T. B., now
galvanized into activity, "you can't go in theer," and he barred
the way. We have since been lectured on the elements of military
ceremonial, but at the same time we have been asked to volunteer
as a unit for the fighting line if need be. I think the Brigadier
has his doubts as to how T. B. and his sort will impress the Allies,
but feels quite confident of their manner towards the enemy. It was
the same T. B. who, being sent by the magnificent Lieutenant d'Arcy
to summon Lance-Corporal Brown, was overheard calling, "Hi, Mr.
Brown, d'Arcy wants yer."
I must break off here, for I have had an intimation from Private
Cox that now is my opportunity to see his bare feet.These two marriages, from which conjugial love, as
a slip or shoot, descends, are essentially holy, therefore if it be
received from its author, the Lord, holiness from him follows of
consequence, which continually cleanses and purifies it: in this case,
if there be in the man's will a desire and tendency to it, this love
becomes daily and continually cleaner and purer. Conjugial love is
called celestial and spiritual because it is with the angels of heaven;
celestial, as with the angels of the highest heaven, these being called
celestial angels; and spiritual, as with the angels beneath that heaven,
these being called spiritual angels. Those angels are so called, because
the celestial are loves, and thence wisdoms, and the spiritual are
wisdoms and thence loves; similar thereto is their conjugial principle.
Now as conjugial love is with the angels of both the superior and the
inferior heavens, as was also shewn in the first paragraph concerning
marriages in heaven, it is manifest that it is holy and pure. The reason
why this love in its essence, considered in regard to its origin, is
holy and pure above every other love with angels and men, is, because it
is as it were the head of the other loves: concerning its excellence
something shall be said in the following article.

65. V. IT IS ALSO THE FOUNDATION LOVE OF ALL CELESTIAL AND SPIRITUAL
LOVES, AND THENCE OF ALL NATURAL LOVES. The reason why conjugial love
considered in its essence is the foundation love of all the loves of
heaven and the church, is, because it originates in the marriage of good
and truth, and from this marriage proceed all the loves which constitute
heaven and the church with man: the good of this marriage constitutes
love, and its truth constitutes wisdom; and when love draws near to
wisdom, or joins itself therewith, then love becomes love; and when
wisdom in its turn draws near to love, and joins itself therewith, then
wisdom becomes wisdom. Love truly conjugial is the conjunction of love
and wisdom. Two married partners, between or in whom this love subsists,
are an image and form of it: all likewise in the heavens, where faces
are the genuine types of the affections of every one's love, are
likenesses of it; for, as was shewn above, it pervades them in the whole
and in every part. Now as two married partners are an image and form of
this love, it follows that every love which proceeds from the form of
essential love itself, is a resemblance thereof; therefore if conjugial
love be celestial and spiritual, the loves proceeding from it are also
celestial and spiritual. Conjugial love therefore is as a parent, and
all other loves are as the offspring. Hence it is, that from the
marriages of the angels in the heavens are produced spiritual offspring,
which are those of love and wisdom, or of good and truth; concerning
which production, see above, n. 51, 52.

66. The same is evident from man's having been created for this love,
and from his formation afterwards by means of it. The male was created
to become wisdom grounded in the love of growing wise, and the female
was created to become the love of the male grounded in his wisdom, and
consequently was formed according thereto; from which consideration it
is manifest, that two married partners are the very forms and images of
the marriage of love and wisdom, or of good and truth. It is well to be
observed, that there is not any good or truth which is not in a
substance as in its subject: there are no abstract goods and truths;
for, having no abode or habitation, they no where exist, neither can
they appear as airy unfixed principles; therefore in such case they are
mere entities, concerning which reason seems to itself to think
abstractedly; but still it cannot conceive of them except as annexed to
subjects: for every human idea, however elevated, is substantial, that
is, affixed to substances. It is moreover to be observed, that there is
no substance without a form; an unformed substance not being any thing,
because nothing can be predicated of it; and a subject without
predicates is also an entity which has no existence in reason. These
philosophical considerations are adduced in order to shew still more
clearly, that two married partners who are principled in love truly
conjugial, are actually forms of the marriage of good and truth, or of
love and wisdom.

67. Since natural loves flow from spiritual, and spiritual from
celestial, therefore it is said that conjugial love is the foundation
love of all celestial and spiritual loves, and thence of all natural
loves. Natural loves relate to the loves of self and of the world;
spiritual loves to love towards the neighbour; and celestial loves to
love to the Lord; and such as are the relations of the loves, it is
evident in what order they follow and are present with man. When they
are in this order, then the natural loves live from the spiritual, and
the spiritual from the celestial, and all in this order from the Lord,
in whom they originate.

68. VI. INTO THIS LOVE ARE COLLECTED ALL JOYS AND DELIGHTS FROM FIRST TO
LAST. All delights whatever, of which a man (_homo_) has any perception,
are delights of his love; the love manifesting itself, yea, existing and
living thereby. It is well known that the delights are exalted in
proportion as the love is exalted, and also in proportion as the
incident affections touch the ruling love more nearly. Now as conjugial
love is the foundation love of all good loves, and as it is inscribed on
all the parts and principles of man, even the most particular, as was
shewn above, it follows that its delights exceed the delights of all
other loves, and also that it gives delight to the other loves,
according to its presence and conjunction with them; for it expands the
inmost principles of the mind, and at the same time the inmost
principles of the body, as the delicious current of its fountain flows
through and opens them. The reason why all delights from first to last
are collected into this love, is on account of the superior excellence
of its use, which is the propagation of the human race, and thence of
the angelic heaven; and as this use was the chief end of creation, it
follows that all the beatitudes, satisfactions, delights,
pleasantnesses, and pleasures, which the Lord the Creator could possibly
confer upon man, are collected into this his love. That delights follow
use, and are also communicated to man according to the love thereof, is
manifest from the delights of the five senses, seeing, hearing,
smelling, taste, and touch: each of these has its delights with
variations according to the specific uses of each; what then must be the
delight annexed to the sense of conjugial love, the use of which
comprehends all other uses?

69. I am aware that few will acknowledge that all joys and delights from
first to last are collected into conjugial love; because love truly
conjugial, into which they are collected, is at this day so rare that
its quality is not known, and scarcely its existence, agreeably to what
was explained and confirmed above, n. 58, 59; for such joys and delights
exist only in genuine conjugial love; and as this is so rare on earth,
it is impossible to describe its super-eminent felicities any otherwise
than from the mouth of angels, because they are principled in it. They
have declared, that the inmost delights of this love, which are delights
of the soul, into which the conjugial principle of love and wisdom, or
of good and truth from the Lord, first flows, are imperceptible and
thence ineffable, because they are the delights of peace and innocence
conjointly; but that in their descent they become more and more
perceptible; in the superior principles of the mind as beatitudes, in
the inferior as satisfactions, in the breast as delights thence derived;
and that from the breast they diffuse themselves into every part of the
body, and at length unite themselves in ultimates and become the delight
of delights. Moreover the angels have related wonderful things
respecting these delights; adding further, that their varieties in the
souls of conjugial pairs, and from their souls in their minds, and from
their minds in their breasts, are infinite and also eternal; that they
are exalted according to the prevalence of wisdom with the husband; and
this, because they live to eternity in the bloom of their age, and
because they know no greater blessedness than to grow wiser and wiser.
But a fuller account of these delights, as given by the angels, may be
seen in the MEMORABLE RELATIONS, especially in those added to some of
the following chapters.

70. VII. NONE HOWEVER COME INTO THIS LOVE, AND CAN REMAIN IN IT, BUT
THOSE WHO APPROACH THE LORD, AND LOVE THE TRUTHS OF THE CHURCH AND
PRACTISE ITS GOODS. The reason why none come into that love but those
who approach the Lord, is, because monogamical marriages, which are of
one husband with one wife, correspond to the marriage of the Lord and
the church, and because such marriages originate in the marriage of good
and truth; on which subject, see above, n. 60 and 62. That from this
origin and correspondence it follows, that love truly conjugial is from
the Lord, and exists only with those who come directly to him, cannot be
fully confirmed unless these two arcana be specifically treated of, as
shall be done in the chapters which immediately follow; one of which
will treat on the origin of conjugial love as derived from the marriage
of good and truth, and the other on the marriage of the Lord and the
church, and on its correspondence. That it hence follows, that,
conjugial love with man (_homo_) is according to the state of the church
with him, will also be seen in those chapters.

71. The reason why none can be principled in love truly conjugial but
those who receive it from the Lord, that is, who come directly to him,
and by derivation from him live the life of the church, is, because this
love, considered in its origin and correspondence, is celestial,
spiritual, holy, pure, and clean, above every love implanted in the
angels of heaven and the men of the church; as was shewn above, n. 64;
and these its distinguishing characters and qualities cannot possibly
exist, except with those who are conjoined to the Lord, and by him are
consociated with the angels of heaven; for these shun extra-conjugial
loves, which are conjunctions with others than their own conjugial
partner, as they would shun the loss of the soul and the lakes of hell;
and in proportion as married partners shun such conjunctions, even as to
the libidinous desires of the will and the intentions thence derived, so
far love truly conjugial is purified with them, and becomes successively
spiritual, first during their abode on earth, and afterwards in heaven.
It is not however possible that any love should become perfectly pure
either with men or with angels; consequently neither can this love:
nevertheless, since the intention of the will is what the Lord
principally regards, therefore so far as any one is in this intention,
and perseveres in it, so far he is initiated into its purity and
sanctity, and successively advances therein. The reason why none can be
principled in spiritual conjugial love, but those who are of the above
description by virtue of conjunction with the Lord, is, because heaven
is in this love; and the natural man, whose conjugial love derives its
pleasure only from the flesh, cannot approach to heaven nor to any
angel, no, nor to any man principled in this love, it being the
foundation of all celestial and spiritual loves; which may be seen
above, n. 65-67. That this is the case, has been confirmed to me by
experience. I have seen genii in the spiritual world, who were in a
state of preparation for hell, approaching to an angel while he was
being entertained by his consort; and at a distance, as they approached,
they became like furies, and sought out caverns and ditches as asylums,
into which they cast themselves. That wicked spirits love what is
similar to their affection, however unclean it is, and hold in aversion
the spirits of heaven, as what is dissimilar, because it is pure, may be
concluded from what was said in the PRELIMINARY MEMORABLE RELATION, n.
10.

72. The reason why those who love the truths of the church and practise
its goods, come into this love and are capable of remaining in it, is,
because no others are received by the Lord; for these are in conjunction
with him, and thereby are capable of being kept in that love by
influence from him. The two constituents of the church and heaven in man
(_homo_) are the truth of faith and the good of life; the truth of faith
constitutes the Lord's presence, and the good of life according to the
truths of faith constitutes conjunction with him, and thereby the church
and heaven. The reason why the truth of faith constitutes the Lord's
presence, is, because it relates to light, spiritual light being nothing
else; and the reason why the good of life constitutes conjunction, is,
because it relates to heat; and spiritual heat is nothing but the good
of life, for it is love; and the good of life originates in love; and it
is well known, that all light, even that of winter, causes presence, and
that heat united to light causes conjunction; for gardens and
shrubberies appear in all degrees of light, but they do not bear flowers
and fruits unless when heat joins itself to light. From these
considerations the conclusion is obvious, that those are not gifted by
the Lord with love truly conjugial, who merely know the truths of the
church, but those who know them and practise their good.

73. VIII. THIS LOVE WAS THE LOVE OF LOVES WITH THE ANCIENTS, WHO LIVED
IN THE GOLDEN, SILVER, AND COPPER AGES. That conjugial love was the love
of loves with the most ancient and the ancient people, who lived in the
ages thus named, cannot be known from historical records, because their
writings are not extant; and there is no account given of them except by
writers in succeeding ages, who mention them, and describe the purity
and integrity of their lives, and also the successive decrease of such
purity and integrity, resembling the debasement of gold to iron: but an
account of the last or iron age, which commenced from the time of those
writers, may in some measure be gathered from the historical records of
the lives of some of their kings, judges, and wise men, who were called
_sophi_ in Greece and other countries. That this age however should not
endure, as iron endures in itself, but that it should be like iron mixed
with clay, which do not cohere, is foretold by Daniel, chap. ii. 43. Now
as the golden, silver, and copper ages passed away before the time when
writing came into use, and thus it is impossible on earth to acquire any
knowledge concerning their marriages, it has pleased the Lord to unfold
to me such knowledge by a spiritual way, by conducting me to the heavens
inhabited by those most ancient people, that I might learn from their
own mouths the nature and quality of their marriages during their abode
here on earth in their several ages: for all, who from the beginning of
creation have departed by death out of the natural world, are in the
spiritual world, and as to their loves resemble what they were when
alive in the natural world, and continue such to eternity. As the
particulars of this knowledge are worthy to be known and related, and
tend to confirm the sanctity of marriages, I am desirous to make them
public as they were shown me in the spirit when awake, and were
afterwards recalled to my remembrance by an angel, and thus described.
And as they are from the spiritual world, like the other accounts
annexed to each chapter, I am desirous to arrange them so as to form six
MEMORABLE RELATIONS according to the progressions of the several periods
of time.

       *       *       *       *       *

74. THESE SIX MEMORABLE RELATIONS from the spiritual world, concerning
conjugial love, discover the nature and quality of that love in the
earliest times and afterwards, and also at the present day; whence it
appears that that love has successively fallen away from its sanctity
and purity, until it became adulterous; but that nevertheless there is a
hope of its being brought back again to its primeval or ancient
sanctity.

75. THE FIRST MEMORABLE RELATION. On a time, while I was meditating on
conjugial love, my mind was seized with a desire of knowing what had
been the nature and quality of that love among those who lived in the
GOLDEN AGE, and afterwards among those who lived in the following ages,
which have their names from silver, copper, and iron: and as I knew that
all who lived well in those ages are in the heavens, I prayed to the
Lord that I might be allowed to converse with them and be informed: and
lo! an angel presented himself and said, "I am sent by the Lord to be
your guide and companion: I will first lead and attend you to those who
lived in the first age or period of time, which is called golden:" and
he said, "The way to them is difficult; it lies through a shady forest,
which none can pass unless he receive a guide from the Lord." I was in
the spirit, and prepared myself for the journey; and we turned our faces
towards the east; and as we advanced I saw a mountain, whose height
extended beyond the region of the clouds. We passed a great wilderness,
and came to the forest planted with various kinds of trees and rendered
shady by their thickness, of which the angel had advertised me. The
forest was divided by several narrow paths; and the angel said, that
according to the number of those paths are the windings and intricacies
of error: and that unless his eyes were opened by the Lord, so as to see
olives entwined with vine tendrils, and his steps were directed from
olive to olive, the traveller would miss his way, and fall into the
abodes of Tartarus, which are round about at the sides. This forest is
of such a nature, to the end that the passage may be guarded; for none
but a primeval nation dwells upon that mountain. After we had entered
the forest, our eyes were opened, and we saw here and there olives
entwined with vines, from which hung bunches of grapes of a blue or
azure color, and the olives were ranged in continual wreaths; we
therefore made various circuits as they presented themselves to our
view; and at length we saw a grove of tall cedars and some eagles
perched on their branches; on seeing which the angel said, "We are now
on the mountain not far from its summit:" so we went forward, and lo!
behind the grove was a circular plain, where there were feeding he and
she-lambs, which were representative forms of the state of innocence and
peace of the inhabitants of the mountain. We passed over this plain, and
lo! we saw tabernacles, to the number of several thousands in front on
each side in every direction as far as the eye could reach. And the
angel said, "We are now in the camp, where are the armies of the Lord
Jehovah; for so they call themselves and their habitations. These most
ancient people, while they were in the world, dwelt in tabernacles;
therefore now also they dwell in the same. But let us bend our way to
the south, where the wiser of them live, that we may meet some one to
converse with." In going along I saw at a distance three boys and three
girls sitting at a door of a certain tent; but as we approached, the
boys and girls appeared like men and women of a middle stature. The
angel then said, "All the inhabitants of this mountain appear at a
distance like infants, because they are in a state of innocence; and
infancy is the appearance of innocence." The men on seeing us hastened
towards us and said, "Whence are you; and how came you here? Your faces
are not like those of our mountain." But the angel in reply told them
how, by permission, we had had access through the forest, and what was
the cause of our coming. On hearing this, one of the three men invited
and introduced us into his tabernacle. The man was dressed in a blue
robe and a tunic of white wool: and his wife had on a purple gown, with
a stomacher under it of fine linen wrought in needle-work. And as my
thought was influenced by a desire of knowing the state of marriages
among the most ancient people, I looked by turns on the husband and the
wife, and observed as it were a unity of their souls in their faces; and
I said, "You are one:" and the man answered, "We are one; her life is in
me, and mine in her; we are two bodies, but one soul: the union between
us is like that of the two viscera in the breast, which are called the
heart and the lungs; she is my heart and I am her lungs; but as by the
heart we here mean love, and by the lungs wisdom, she is the love of my
wisdom, and I am the wisdom of her love; therefore her love from without
veils my wisdom, and my wisdom from within enters into her love: hence,
as you said, there is an appearance of the unity of our souls in our
faces." I then asked, "If such a union exists, is it possible for you to
look at any other woman than your own?" He replied, "It is possible but
as my wife is united to my soul, we both look together, and in this case
nothing of lust can enter; for while I behold the wives of others, I
behold them by my own wife, whom alone I love: and as my own wife has a
perception of all my inclinations, she, as an intermediate, directs my
thoughts and removes every thing discordant, and therewith impresses
cold and horror at every thing unchaste; therefore it is as impossible
for us to look unchastely at the wife of any other of our society, as it
is to look from the shades of Tartarus to the light of our heaven
therefore neither have we any idea of thought, and still less any
expression of speech, to denote the allurements of libidinous love." He
could not pronounce the word whoredom, because the chastity of their
heaven forbade it. Hereupon my conducting angel said to me, "You hear
now that the speech of the angels of this heaven is the speech of
wisdom, because they speak from causes." After this, as I looked around,
I saw their tabernacle as it were overlaid with gold; and I asked,
"Whence is this?" He replied, "It is in consequence of a flaming light,
which, like gold, glitters, irradiates, and glances on the curtains of
our tabernacle while we are conversing about conjugial love; for the
heat from our sun, which in its essence is love, on such occasions bares
itself, and tinges the light, which in its essence is wisdom, with its
golden color; and this happens because conjugial love in its origin is
the sport of wisdom and love; for the man was born to be wisdom, and the
woman to be the love of the man's wisdom: hence spring the delights of
that sport, in and derived from conjugial love between us and our wives.
We have seen clearly for thousands of years in our heaven, that those
delights, as to quantity, degree, and intensity, are excellent and
eminent according to our worship of the Lord Jehovah, from whom flows
that heavenly union or marriage, which is the union and marriage of love
and wisdom." As he said this, I saw a great light upon the hill in the
middle of the tabernacles; and I inquired, "Whence is that light?" And
he said, "It is from the sanctuary of the tabernacle of our worship." I
asked whether I might approach it; to which he assented. I approached
therefore, and saw the tabernacle without and within, answering exactly
to the description of the tabernacle which was built for the sons of
Israel in the wilderness; the form of which was shewed to Moses on Mount
Sinai, Exod. xxv. 40; chap. xxvi. 30. I then asked, "What is within in
that sanctuary, from which so great a light proceeds?" He replied, "It
is a tablet with this inscription, THE COVENANT BETWEEN JEHOVAH AND THE
HEAVENS:" he said no more. And as by this time we were ready to depart,
I asked, "Did any of you, during your abode in the natural world, live
with more than one wife?" He replied, "I know not one; for we could not
think of more. We have been told by those who had thought of more, that
instantly the heavenly blessedness of their souls withdrew from their
inmost principles to the extreme parts of their bodies, even to the
nails, and together therewith the honorable badges of manhood; when this
was perceived they were banished the land." On saying this, the man ran
to his tabernacle, and returned with a pomegranate, in which there was
abundance of seeds of gold: and he gave it me, and I brought it away
with me, as a sign that we had been with those who had lived in the
golden age. And then, after a salutation of peace, we took our leave,
and returned home.

76. THE SECOND MEMORABLE RELATION. The next day the same angel came to
me, and said, "Do you wish me to lead and attend you to the people who
lived in the SILVER AGE OR PERIOD, that we may hear from them concerning
the marriages of their time?" And he added, "Access to these also can
only be obtained by the Lord's favor and protection." I was in the
spirit as before, and accompanied my conductor. We first came to a hill
on the confines between the east and the south; and while we were
ascending it, he shewed me a great extent of country: we saw at a
distance an eminence like a mountain, between which and the hill on
which we stood was a valley, and behind the valley a plain, and from the
plain a rising ground of easy ascent. We descended the hill intending to
pass through the valley, and we saw here and there on each side pieces
of wood and stone, carved into the figures of men, and of various
beasts, birds, and fishes; and I asked the angel what they meant, and
whether they were idols? He replied, "By no means: they are
representative forms of various moral virtues and spiritual truths. The
people of that age were acquainted with the science of correspondences;
and as every man, beast, bird, and fish, corresponds to some quality,
therefore each particular carved figure represents partially some virtue
or truth, and several together represent virtue itself, or truth, in a
common extended form. These are what in Egypt were called
hieroglyphics." We proceeded through the valley, and as we entered the
plain, lo! we saw horses and chariots; horses variously harnessed and
caparisoned, and chariots of different forms; some carved in the shape
of eagles, some like whales, and some like stags with horns, and like
unicorns; and likewise beyond them some carts, and stables round about
at the sides; and as we approached, both horses and chariots
disappeared, and instead thereof we saw men (_homines_), in pairs,
walking, talking, and reasoning. And the angel said to me, "The
different species of horses, chariots, and stables, seen at a distance,
are appearances of the rational intelligence of the men of that period;
for a horse, by correspondence, signifies the understanding of truth, a
chariot, its doctrine, and stables, instructions: you know that in this
world all things appear according to correspondences." But we passed by
these things, and ascended by a long acclivity, and at length saw a
city, which we entered; and in walking through the streets and places of
public resort, we viewed the houses: they were so many palaces built of
marble, having steps of alabaster in front, and at the sides of the
steps pillars of jasper: we saw also temples of precious stone of a
sapphire and lazure color. And the angel said to me, "Their houses are
of stone, because stones signify natural truths, and precious stones
spiritual truths; and all those who lived in the silver age had
intelligence grounded in spiritual truths, and thence in natural truths:
silver also has a similar signification." In taking a view of the city,
we saw here and there consorts in pairs: and as they were husbands and
wives, we expected that some of them would invite us to their houses;
and while we were in this expectation, as we were passing by, we were
invited by two into their house, and we ascended the steps and entered;
and the angel, taking upon him the part of speaker, explained to them
the occasion of our coming to this heaven; informing them that it was
for the sake of instruction concerning marriages among the ancients, "of
whom," says he, "you in this heaven are a part." They said, "We were
from a people in Asia; and the chief pursuit of our age was the truths
whereby we had intelligence. This was the occupation of our souls and
minds; but our bodily senses were engaged in representations of truths
in form; and the science of correspondences conjoined the sensual things
of our bodies with the perceptions of our minds, and procured us
intelligence." On hearing this, the angel asked them to give some
account of their marriages: and the husband said, "There is a
correspondence between spiritual marriage, which is that of truth with
good, and natural marriage, which is that of a man with one wife; and as
we have studied correspondences, we have seen that the church, with its
truths and goods, cannot at all exist but with those who live in love
truly conjugial with one wife: for the marriage of good and truth
constitutes the church with man: therefore all we in this heaven say,
that the husband is truth, and the wife the good thereof; and that good
cannot love any truth but its own, neither can truth in return love any
good but its own: if any other were loved, internal marriage, which
constitutes the church, would perish, and there would remain only
external marriage, to which idolatry, and not the church, corresponds;
therefore marriage with one wife we call sacrimony; but if it should
have place with more than one among us, we should call it sacrilege." As
he said this, we were introduced into an ante-chamber, where there were
several devices on the walls, and little images as it were of molten
silver; and I inquired, "What are these?" They said, "They are pictures
and forms representative of several qualities, characters, and delights,
relating to conjugial love. These represent unity of souls, these
conjunction of minds, these harmony of bosoms, these the delights thence
arising." While we were viewing these things, we saw as it were a
rainbow on the wall, consisting of three colors, purple (or red), blue
and white; and we observed how the purple passed the blue, and tinged
the white with an azure color, and that the latter color flowed back
through the blue into the purple, and elevated the purple into a kind of
flaming lustre: and the husband said to me, "Do you understand all
this?" I replied, "Instruct me:" and he said, "The purple color, from
its correspondence, signifies the conjugial love of the wife, the white
the intelligence of the husband, the blue the beginning of conjugial
love in the husband's perception from the wife, and the azure, with
which the white was tinged, signifies conjugial love in this case in the
husband; and this latter color flowing back through the blue into the
purple, and elevating the purple into a kind of flaming lustre,
signifies the conjugial love of the husband flowing back to the wife.
Such things are represented on these walls, while from meditating on
conjugial love, its mutual, successive, and simultaneous union, we view
with eager attention the rainbows which are there painted." Hereupon I
observed, "These things are more than mystical at this day; for they are
appearances representative of the arcana of the conjugial love of one
man with one wife." He replied, "They are so; yet to us in our heaven
they are not arcana, and consequently neither are they mystical." As he
said this, there appeared at a distance a chariot drawn by small white
horses; on seeing which the angel said, "That chariot is a sign for us
to take our leave;" and then, as we were descending the steps, our host
gave us a bunch of white grapes hanging to the vine leaves: and lo! the
leaves became silver; and we brought them down with us for a sign that
we had conversed with the people of the silver age.

77. THE THIRD MEMORABLE RELATION. The next day, my conducting and
attendant angel came to me and said, "Make ready, and let us go to the
heavenly inhabitants in the west, who are from the men that lived in the
third period, or in the copper age. Their dwellings are from the south
by the west towards the north; but they do not reach into the north."
Having made myself ready, I attended him, and we entered their heaven on
the southern quarter. There was a magnificent grove of palm trees and
laurels. We passed through this, and immediately on the confines of the
west we saw giants, double the size of ordinary men. They asked us, "Who
let you in through the grove?" The angel said, "The God of heaven." They
replied, "We are guards to the ancient western heaven; but pass on." We
passed on, and from a rising ground we saw a mountain rising to the
clouds, and between us and the mountain a number of villages, with
gardens, groves, and plains intermixed. We passed through the villages
and came to the mountain, which we ascended; and lo! its summit was not
a point but a plain, on which was a spacious and extensive city. All the
houses of the city were built of the wood of the pine-tree, and their
roofs consisted of joists or rafters; and I asked, "Why are the houses
here built of wood?" The angel replied, "Because wood signifies natural
good; and the men of the third age of the earth were principled in this
good; and as copper also signifies natural good, therefore the age in
which they lived the ancients named from copper. Here are also sacred
buildings constructed of the wood of the olive, and in the middle of
them is the sanctuary, where is deposited in an ark the Word that was
given to the inhabitants of Asia before the Israelitish Word; the
historical books of which are called the WARS OF JEHOVAH, and the
prophetic books, ENUNCIATIONS; both mentioned by Moses, Numb. xxi.
verses 14, 15, and 27-30. This Word at this day is lost in the kingdoms
of Asia, and is only preserved in Great Tartary." Then the angel led me
to one of the sacred buildings, which we looked into, and saw in the
middle of it the sanctuary, the whole in the brightest light; and the
angel said, "This light is from that ancient Asiatic Word: for all
divine truth in the heavens gives forth light." As we were leaving the
sacred building, we were informed that it had been reported in the city
that two strangers had arrived there; and that they were to be examined
as to whence they came, and what was their business; and immediately one
of the public officers came running towards us, and took us for
examination before the judges: and on being asked whence we came, and
what was our business, we replied, "We have passed the grove of
palm-trees, and also the abodes of the giants, the guards of your
heaven, and afterwards the region of villages; from which circumstances
you may conclude, that we have not come here of ourselves, but by
direction of the God of heaven. The business on which we are come is, to
be instructed concerning your marriages, whether they are monogamical or
polygamical." and they said, "What are polygamical marriages? Are not
they adulterous?" And immediately the bench of judges deputed an
intelligent person to instruct us in his own house on this point: and
when we were come to his house, he set his wife by his side, and spoke
as follows: "We are in possession of precepts concerning marriages,
which have been handed down to us from the primeval or most ancient
people, who were principled in love truly conjugial, and thereby
excelled all others in the virtue and potency of that love while they
were in the world, and who are now in a most blessed state in their
heaven, which is in the east. We are their posterity, and they, as
fathers, have given us, their sons, rules of life, among which is the
following concerning marriages: 'Sons, if you are desirous to love God
and your neighbour, and to become wise and happy to eternity, we counsel
you to live married to one wife; if you depart from this precept, all
heavenly love will depart from you, and therewith internal wisdom; and
you will be banished.' This precept of our Fathers we have obeyed as
sons, and have perceived its truth, which is, that so far as any one
loves his conjugial partner alone, so far he becomes celestial and
internal, and that so far as any one does not love his married partner
alone, so far he becomes natural and external; and in this case he loves
only himself and the images of his own mind, and is doating and foolish.
From these considerations, all of us in this heaven live married to one
wife; and this being the case, all the borders of our heaven are guarded
against polygamists, adulterers, and whoremongers; if polygamists invade
us, they are cast out into the darkness of the north; if adulterers,
they are cast out into fires of the west; and if whoremongers, they are
cast out into the delusive lights of the south." On hearing this, I
asked, "What he meant by the darkness of the north, the fires of the
west, and the delusive lights of the south?" He answered, "The darkness
of the north is dulness of mind and ignorance of truths; the fires of
the west are the loves of evil; and the delusive lights of the south are
the falsifications of truth, which are spiritual whoredoms." After this,
he said, "Follow me to our repository of curiosities:" so we followed
him, and he shewed us the writings of the most ancient people, which
were on the tables of wood and stone, and afterwards on smooth blocks of
wood; the writings of the second age were on sheets of parchment; of
these he brought me a sheet, on which were copied the rules of the
people of the first age from their tables of stone, among which also was
the precept concerning marriages. Having seen these and other ancient
curiosities, the angel said, "It is now time for us to take our leave;"
and immediately our host went into the garden, and plucked some twigs
off a tree, and bound them into a little bunch, and gave them to us,
saying, "These twigs are from a tree, which is native of or peculiar to
our heaven, and whose juice has a balsamic fragrance." We brought the
bunch down with us, and descended by the eastern way, which was not
guarded; and lo! the twigs were changed into shining brass, and the
upper ends of them into gold, as a sign that we had been with the people
of the third age, which is named from copper or brass.

78. THE FOURTH MEMORABLE RELATIONS. After two days the angel again
addressed me, saying, "Let us complete the period of the ages; the last
still remains, which is named from IRON. The people of this age dwell in
the north on the side of the west, in the inner parts or breadth-ways:
they are all from the old inhabitants of Asia, who were in possession of
the ancient Word, and thence derived their worship; consequently they
were before the time of our Lord's coming into the world. This is
evident from the writings of the ancients, in which those times are so
named. These same periods are meant by the statue seen by
Nebuchadnezzar, whose head was of gold, the breast and arms of silver,
the belly and thighs of brass, the legs of iron, and the feet of iron
and of clay, Dan. ii. 32, 33." These particulars the angel related to me
in the way, which was contracted and anticipated by changes of state
induced in our minds according to the genius or disposition of the
inhabitants whom we passed; for spaces and consequent distances in the
spiritual world are appearances according to the state of their minds.
When we raised our eyes, lo! we were in a forest consisting of beeches,
chestnut-trees and oaks: and on looking around us, there appeared bears
to the left, and leopards to the right: and when I wondered at this, the
angel said, "They are neither bears nor leopards, but men, who guard
these inhabitants of the north; by their nostrils they have a scent of
the sphere of life of those who pass by, and they rush violently on all
who are spiritual, because the inhabitants are natural. Those who only
read the Word, and imbibe thence nothing of doctrine, appear at a
distance like bears; and those who confirm false principles thence
derived, appear like leopards." On seeing us, they turned away, and we
proceeded. Beyond the forest there appeared thickets, and afterwards
fields of grass divided into areas, bordered with box: this was
succeeded by a declivity which led to a valley, wherein were several
cities. We passed some of them, and entered into one of a considerable
size: its streets were irregular, and so were the houses, which were
built of brick, with beams between, and plastered. In the places of
public resort were consecrated buildings of hewn lime-stone; the
under-structure of which was below the ground, and the super-structure
above. We went down into one of them by three steps, and saw on the
walls idols of various forms, and a crowd on their knees paying
adoration to them: in the middle of the building was a company, above
whom might be seen the head of the tutelary god of that city. As we went
out, the angel said to me, "Those idols, with the ancients who lived in
the silver age, as above described, were images representative of
spiritual truths and moral virtues; and when the science of
correspondence was forgotten and extinct, they first became objects of
worship, and afterwards were adored as deities: hence came idolatry."
When we were come out of the consecrated building, we made our
observations on the men and their dress. Their faces were like steel, of
a grayish color, and they were dressed like comedians, with napkins
about their loins hanging from a tunic buttoned close at the breast; and
on their heads they wore curled caps like sailors. But the angel said,
"Enough of this; let us seek some instruction concerning the marriages
of the people of this age." We then entered into the house of one of the
grandees, who wore on his head a high cap. He received us kindly, and
said, "Come in and let us converse together." We entered into the
vestibule, and there seated ourselves; and I asked him about the
marriages of his city and country. He said, "We do not here live with
one wife, but some with two or three, and some with more, because we are
delighted with variety, obedience, and honor, as marks of dignity; and
these we receive from our wives according to their number. With one wife
there would be no delight arising from variety; but disgust from
sameness: neither would there be any flattering courteousness arising
from obedience, but a troublesome disquietude from equality; neither
would there be any satisfaction arising from dominion and the honor
thence derived, but vexation from wrangling about superiority. And what
is a woman? Is she not born subject to man's will; to serve, and not to
domineer? Wherefore in this place every husband in his own house enjoys
as it were royal dignity; and as this is suited to our love, it
constitutes also the blessedness of our life." But I asked, "In such
case, what becomes of conjugial love, which from two souls makes one,
and joins minds together, and renders a man (_homo_) blessed? This love
cannot be divided; for if it be it becomes a heat which effervesces and
passes away." To this he replied, "I do not understand what you say;
what else renders a man (_homo_) blessed, but the emulation of wives
contending for the honor of the first place in the husband's favor?" As
he said this, a man entered into the women's apartment and opened the
two doors; whence there issued a libidinous effluvium, which had a
stench like mire; this arose from polygamical love, which is connubial,
and at the same time adulterous; so I rose and shut the doors.
Afterwards I said, "How can you subsist upon this earth, when you are
void of any love truly conjugial, and also when you worship idols?" He
replied, "As to connubial love, we are so jealous of our wives, that we
do not suffer any one to enter further within our houses than the
vestibule; and where there is jealousy, there must also be love. In
respect to idols, we do not worship them; but we are not able to think
of the God of the universe, except by means of such forms presented to
our eyes; for we cannot elevate our thoughts above the sensual things of
the body, nor think of God above the objects of bodily vision." I then
asked him again, "Are not your idols of different forms? How then can
they excite the idea of one God?" He replied, "This is a mystery to us;
somewhat of the worship of God lies concealed in each form." I then
said, "You are merely sensual corporeal spirits; you have neither the
love of God nor the love of a married partner grounded in any spiritual
principle; and these loves together form a man (_homo_) and from sensual
make him celestial." As I said this, there appeared through the gate as
it were lightning: and on my asking what it meant, he said, "Such
lightning is a sign to us that there will come the ancient one from the
east, who teaches us concerning God, that He is one, the alone
omnipotent, who is the first and the last; he also admonishes us not to
worship idols, but only to look at them as images representative of the
virtues proceeding from the one God, which also together form his
worship. This ancient one is our angel, whom we revere and obey. He
comes to us, and raises us, when we are falling into obscure worship of
God from mere fancies respecting images." On hearing this, we left the
house and went out of the city; and in the way, from what we had seen in
the heavens, we drew some conclusions respecting the circuit and the
progression of conjugial love; of the circuit that it had passed from
the east to the south, from the south to the west, and from the west to
the north; and of the progression, that it had decreased according to
its circulation, namely, that in the east it was celestial, in the south
spiritual, in the west natural, and in the north sensual; and also that
it had decreased in a similar degree with the love and the worship of
God: from which considerations we further concluded, that this love in
the first age was like gold, in the second like silver, in the third
like brass, and in the fourth like iron, and that at length it ceased.
On this occasion the angel, my guide and companion, said, "Nevertheless
I entertain a hope that this love will be revived by the God of heaven,
who is the Lord, because it is capable of being so revived."

79. THE FIFTH MEMORABLE RELATION, The angel that had been my guide and
companion to the ancients who had lived in the four ages, the golden,
the silver, the copper, and the iron, again presented himself to me, and
said, "Are you desirous of seeing the age which succeeded those ancient
ones, and to know what its quality formerly was, and still is? Follow
me, and you shall see. They are those concerning whom Daniel thus
prophesied: '_A kingdom shall arise after those four in which iron shall
be mixed with miry clay: they shall mingle themselves together by the
seed of man: but they shall not cohere one with the other, as iron is
not mixed with clay_, Dan. ii. 41-43:'" and he said, "By the seed of
man, whereby iron shall be mixed with clay, and still they shall not
cohere, is meant the truth of the Word falsified." After he had said
this, I followed him, and in the way, he related to me these
particulars. "They dwell in the borders between the south and the west,
but at a great distance beyond those who lived in the four former ages,
and also at a greater depth." We then proceeded through the south to the
region bordering on the west, and passed though a formidable forest; for
in it there were lakes, out of which crocodiles raised their heads, and
opened at us their wide jaws beset with teeth; and between the lakes
were terrible dogs, some of which were three-headed like Cerberus, some
two-headed, all looking at us as we passed with a horrible hungry snarl
and fierce eyes. We entered the western tract of this region, and saw
dragons and leopards, such as are described in the Revelation, chap.
xii. 3; chap. xiii. 2. Then the angel said to me, "All these wild beasts
which you have seen, are not wild beasts but correspondences, and
thereby representative forms of the lusts of the inhabitants whom we
shall visit. The lusts themselves are represented by those horrible
dogs; their deceit and cunning by crocodiles; their falsities and
depraved inclinations to the things which relate to worship, by dragons
and leopards: nevertheless the inhabitants represented do not live close
behind the forest, but behind a great wilderness which lies
intermediate, that they may be fully withheld and separated from the
inhabitants of the foregoing ages, being of an entirely different genius
and quality from them: they have indeed heads above their breasts, and
breasts above their loins, and loins above their feet, like the primeval
men; but in their heads there is not any thing of gold, nor in their
breasts any thing of silver, nor in their loins any thing of brass, no,
nor in their feet any thing of pure iron; but in their heads is iron
mixed with clay, in their breasts is each mixed with brass, in their
loins is also each mixed with silver, and in their feet is each mixed
with gold: by this inversion they are changed from men (_homines_) into
graven images of men, in which inwardly nothing coheres; for what was
highest, is made lowest, thus what was the head is become the heel, and
_vice versa_. They appear to us from heaven like stage-players, who lie
upon their elbows with the body inverted, and put themselves in a
walking motion; or like beasts, which lie on their backs, and lift the
feet upwards, and from the head, which they plunge in the earth, look
towards heaven." We passed through the forest, and entered the
wilderness, which was not less terrible: it consisted of heaps of
stones, and ditches between them, out of which crept hydras and vipers,
and there flew forth venomous flying serpents. This whole wilderness was
on a continual declivity: we descended by a long steep descent, and at
length came into the valley inhabited by the people of that region and
age. There were here and there cottages, which appeared at length to
meet, and to be joined together in the form of a city: this we entered,
and lo! the houses were built of the scorched branches of trees,
cemented together with mud and covered with black slates. The streets
were irregular; all of them at the entrance narrow, but wider as they
extended, and at the end spacious, where there were places of public
resort: here there were as many places of public resort as there were
streets. As we entered the city, it became dark, because the sky did not
appear; we therefore looked up and light was given us, and we saw: and
then I asked those we met, "Are you able to see because the sky does not
appear above you?" They replied "What a question is this! we see
clearly; we walk in full light." On hearing this, the angel said to me,
"Darkness to them is light, and light darkness, as is the case with
birds of night; as they look downwards and not upwards." We entered into
some of the cottages, and saw in each a man with his woman, and we asked
them, "Do all live here in their respective houses with one wife only?"
And they replied with a hissing, "What do you mean by one wife only? Why
do not you ask, whether we live with one harlot? What is a wife but a
harlot? By our laws it is not allowable to commit fornication with more
than one woman; but still we do not hold it dishonorable or unbecoming
to do so with more; yet out of our own houses we glory in the one among
another: thus we rejoice in the license we take, and the pleasure
attending it, more than polygamists. Why is a plurality of wives denied
us, when yet it has been granted, and at this day is granted in the
whole world about us? What is life with one woman only, but captivity
and imprisonment? We however in this place have broken the bolt of this
prison, and have rescued ourselves from slavery, and made ourselves
free, and who is angry with a prisoner for asserting his freedom when it
is in his power?" to this we replied, "You speak, friend, as if without
any sense of religion. What rational person does not know that
adulteries are profane and infernal, and that marriages are holy and
heavenly. Do not adulteries take place with devils in hell, and
marriages with angels in heaven? Did you never read the sixth
commandment [Footnote: According to the division of the commandments
adopted by the Church of England, it is the _seventh_ that is here
referred to.] of the decalogue? and in Paul, that adulterers can by no
means enter heaven?" Hereupon our host laughed heartily, and regarded me
as a simpleton, and almost as out of my senses. But just then there came
running a messenger from the chief of the city, and said, "Bring the two
strangers into the town-hall; and if they refuse to come, drag them
there: we have seen them in a shade of light; they have entered
privately; they are spies." Hereupon the angel said to me, "The reason
why we were seen in a shade, is, because the light of heaven in which we
have been, is to them a shade, and the shade of hell is to them light;
and this is because they regard nothing as sin, not even adultery: hence
they see what is false altogether as what is true; and what is false is
lucid in hell before satans, and what is true darkens their eyes like
the shade of night." We said to the messenger, "We will not be pressed,
still less will we be dragged into the town-hall; but we will go with
you of our own accord." So we went: and lo! there was a great crowd
assembled, out of which came some lawyers, and whispered to us, saying,
"Take heed to yourselves how you speak any thing against religion, the
form of our government, and good manners:" and we replied, "We will not
speak against them, but for them and from them." Then we asked, "What
are your religious notions respecting marriages?" At this the crowd
murmured, and said, "What have you to do here with marriages? Marriages
are marriages." Again we asked, "What are your religious notions
respecting whoredoms?" At this also they murmured, saying, "What have
you to do here with whoredoms? Whoredoms are whoredoms: let him that is
guiltless cast the first stone." And we asked thirdly, "Does your
religion teach that marriages are holy and heavenly, and that adulteries
are profane and infernal?" Hereupon several in the crowd laughed aloud,
jested, and bantered, saying, "Inquire of our priests, and not of us, as
to what concerns religion. We acquiesce entirely in what they declare;
because no point of religion is an object of decision in the
understanding. Have you never heard that the understanding is without
any sense or discernment in mysteries, which constitute the whole of
religion? And what have actions to do with religion? Is not the soul
made blessed by the muttering of words from a devout heart concerning
expiation, satisfaction, and imputation, and not by works?" But at this
instant there came some of the wise ones of the city, so called, and
said, "Retire hence; the crowd grows angry; a storm is gathering: let us
talk in private on this subject; there is a retired walk behind the
town-hall; come with us there." We followed them; and they asked us
whence we came, and what was our business there? And we said, "to be
instructed concerning marriages, whether they are holy with you, as they
were with the ancients who lived in the golden, silver, and copper ages;
or whether they are not holy." And they replied, "What do you mean by
holiness? Are not marriages works of the flesh and of the night?" And we
answered, "Are they not also works of the spirit? and what the flesh
does from the spirit, is not that spiritual? and all that the spirit
does, it does from the marriage of good and truth. Is not this marriage
spiritual, which enters the natural marriage of husband and wife?" To
this the wise ones, so called, made answer, "There is too much subtlety
and sublimity in what you say on this subject; you ascend far above
rational principles to spiritual: and who, beginning at such an
elevation, can descend thence, and thus form any decision?" To this they
added with a smile of ridicule, "Perhaps you have the wings of an eagle,
and can fly in the highest region of heaven, and make these discoveries:
this we cannot do." We then asked them to tell us, from the altitude or
region in which the winged ideas of their minds fly, whether they knew,
or were able to know, that the love of one man with one wife is
conjugial love, into which are collected all the beatitudes,
satisfactions, delights, pleasantnesses, and pleasures of heaven; and
that this love is from the Lord according to the reception of good and
truth from him; thus according to the state of the church? On hearing
this, they turned away, and said, "These men are out of their senses;
they enter the ether with their judgement, and scatter about vain
conjectures like nuts and almonds." After this they turned to us,
saying, "We will give a direct answer to your windy conjectures and
dreams;" and they said, "What has conjugial love in common with religion
and inspiration from God? Is not this love with every one according to
the state of his potency? Is it not the same with those who are out of
the church as with those who are in it, with Gentiles as with
Christians, yea, with the impious as with the pious? Has not every one
the strength of this love either hereditarily, or from bodily health, or
from temperance of life, or from warmth of climate? By medicines also it
may be strengthened and stimulated. Is not the case similar with the
brute creation, especially with birds which unite in pairs? Moreover, is
not this love carnal? and what has a carnal principle in common with the
spiritual state of the church? Does this love, as to its ultimate effect
with a wife, differ at all from love as to its effect with a harlot? Is
not the lust similar, and the delight similar? Wherefore it is injurious
to deduce the origin of conjugial love from the holy things of the
church." On hearing this, we said to them, "You reason from the stimulus
of lasciviousness, and not from conjugial love; you are altogether
ignorant what conjugial love is, because it is cold with you; from what
you have said we are convinced that you are of the age which has its
name from and consists of iron and clay, which do not cohere, according
to the prophecy in Daniel, chap. ii. 43; for you make conjugial love and
adulterous love the same thing; and do these two cohere any more than
iron and clay? You are believed and called wise, and yet you have not
the smallest pretensions to that character." On hearing this, they were
inflamed with rage and made a loud cry, and called the crowd together to
cast us out; but at that instant, by virtue of power given us by the
Lord, we stretched out our hands, and lo! the flying serpents, vipers,
and hydras, and also the dragons from the wilderness, presented
themselves, and entered and filled the city; at which the inhabitants
being terrified fled away. The angel then said to me, "Into this region
new comers from the earth daily enter, and the former inhabitants are by
turns separated and cast down into the gulphs of the west, which appear
at a distance like lakes of fire and brimstone. All in those gulphs are
spiritual and natural adulterers."

80. THE SIXTH MEMORABLE RELATION. As the angel said this, I looked to
the western boundary, and lo! there appeared as it were lakes of fire
and brimstone; and I asked him, why the hells in that quarter had such
an appearance? He replied, "They appear as lakes in consequence of the
falsifications of truth; because water in the spiritual sense signifies
truth; and there is an appearance as it were of fire round about them,
and in them, in consequence of the love of evil, and as it were of
brimstone in consequence of the love of what is false. Those three
things, the lake, the fire, and the brimstone, are appearances, because
they are correspondences of the evil loves of the inhabitants. All in
that quarter are shut up in eternal work-houses, where they labor for
food, for clothing, and for a bed to lie on; and when they do evil, they
are grievously and miserably punished." I further asked the angel, why
he said that in that quarter are spiritual and natural adulterers, and
why he had not rather said, that they were evil doers and impious? He
replied, "Because all those who make light of adulteries, that is, who
commit them from a confirmed persuasion that they are not sins, and thus
are in the purpose of committing them from a belief of their being
harmless, are in their hearts evil doers and impious; for the conjugial
human principle ever goes hand in hand with religion; and every step and
movement made under the influence of religion, and leading to it, is
also a step and movement made under the influence of the conjugial
principle, and leading to it, which is peculiar and proper to the
Christian." On asking what that conjugial principle was, he said, "It is
the desire of living with one wife; and every Christian has this desire
according to his religion." I was afterwards grieved in spirit to think
that marriages, which in the most ancient times had been most holy, were
so wretchedly changed into adulteries. The angel said, "The case is the
same at this day with religion; for the Lord says '_In the consummation
of the age there will be the abomination of desolation foretold by
Daniel. And there will be great affliction, such as there has not been
from the beginning of the world_,' Matt. xxiv. 15, 21. The abomination
of desolation signifies the falsification and deprivation of all truth;
affliction signifies the state of the church infested by evils and
falses; and the consummation of the age, concerning which those things
are spoken, signifies the last time or end of the church. The end is
now, because there does not remain a truth which is not falsified; and
the falsification of truth is spiritual whoredom, which acts in unity
with natural whoredom, because they cohere."

81. As we were conversing and lamenting together on this occasion, there
suddenly appeared a beam of light, which, darting powerfully upon my
eyes, caused me to look up: and lo! the whole heaven above us appeared
luminous; and from the east to the west in an extended series we heard a
GLORIFICATION: and the angel said to me, "That is a glorification of the
Lord on account of his coming, and is made by the angels of the eastern
and western heavens." From the northern and southern heavens nothing was
heard but a soft and pleasing murmur. As the angel understood
everything, he told me first, that glorifications and celebrations of
the Lord are made from the Word, because then they are made from the
Lord; for the Lord is the Word, that is, the essential divine truth
therein; and he said, "Now in particular they glorify and celebrate the
Lord by these words, which were spoken by Daniel the prophet, '_Thou
sawest iron mixed with miry clay; they shall mingle themselves together
by the seed of man; but they shall not cohere. Nevertheless in those
days the God of the heavens shall cause a kingdom to arise, which shall
not perish for ages. It shall bruise and consume those kingdoms; but
itself shall stand for ages_.' Dan. ii. 43, 44." After this, I heard as
it were the voice of singing, and further in the east I saw a glittering
of light more resplendent than the former; and I asked the angel what
was the subject of their glorification? He said, "These words in Daniel;
'_I saw in the visions of the night, and lo! with the clouds of heaven
there came as it were the SON OF MAN: and to him was given dominion and
a kingdom; and all people and nations shall worship him. His dominion is
the dominion of an age, which shall not pass away; and his kingdom that
which shall not perish_,' Dan. vii. 13, 14. They are further celebrating
the Lord from these words in the Revelation: '_To JESUS CHRIST be glory
and strength: behold he cometh with clouds. He is alpha and omega, the
beginning and the end, the first and the last; who is, who was, and who
is to come, the almighty. I, John, heard this from the SON OF MAN, out
of the midst of the seven candlesticks_,' Rev. i. 5-7, 10-13; chap.
xxii. 13; Matt. xxiv. 30, 31." I looked again into the eastern heaven:
it was enlightened on the right side, and the light entered the southern
expanse. I heard a sweet sound; and I asked the angel, what was the
subject of their glorification in that quarter respecting the Lord? He
said, "These words in the Revelation: '_I saw a new heaven and a new
earth; and I saw the holy city, New Jerusalem, coming down from God out
of heaven, prepared as a BRIDE for her HUSBAND: and the angel spake with
me, and said, Come, I will shew thee the BRIDE, THE LAMB'S WIFE: and he
carried me away in the spirit to a great and high mountain, and shewed
me the holy city, Jerusalem_,' Rev. xxi. 1, 2, 9, 10: also these words,
'I JESUS _am the bright and morning star; and the spirit and the bride
say, COME; AND HE SAID, EVEN I COME QUICKLY; Amen: even COME, LORD
JESUS_,' Rev. xxii. 16, 17, 20." After these and several other subjects
of glorification, there was heard a common glorification from the east
to the west of heaven, and also from the south to the north; and I asked
the angel, "What now is the subject?" He said, "These words from the
prophets; '_Let all flesh know that I, JEHOVAH, AM THY SAVIOUR AND THY
REDEEMER_,' Isaiah xlix. 26. '_Thus saith JEHOVAH, the King of Israel,
and HIS REDEEMER, JEHOVAH ZEBAOTH, I am the first and the last, and
BESIDE ME THERE IS NO GOD_,' Isaiah xliv. 6. '_It shall be said in that
day, LO! THIS IS OUR GOD, whom we have expected to deliver us; THIS is
JEHOVAH WHOM WE HAVE EXPECTED_.' Isaiah xxv. 9. '_The voice of him that
crieth in the wilderness, Prepare a way for JEHOVAH. Behold the LORD
JEHOVAH cometh in strength. He shall feed his flock like a SHEPHERD_,'
Isaiah xl. 3, 10, 11. '_Unto us a child is born; unto us a son is given;
whose name is Wonderful Counsellor, GOD, Hero, FATHER OF ETERNITY,
Prince of Peace_,' Isaiah ix. 6. '_Behold the days will come, and I will
raise up to David a righteous branch, who shall reign a King: and this
is his name, JEHOVAH OUR RIGHTEOUSNESS_,' Jeremiah xxiii. 5, 6; chap,
xxxiii. 15, 16. '_JEHOVAH ZEBAOTH is his name, and THY REDEEMER the holy
one of Israel: THE GOD OF THE WHOLE EARTH SHALL HE BE CALLED_,' Isaiah
liv. 5. 'IN THAT DAY THERE SHALL BE ONE JEHOVAH, AND HIS NAME ONE,'
Zech. xiv. 9." On hearing and understanding these words, my heart
exulted, and I went home with joy; and there I returned out of a state
of the spirit into a state of the body; in which latter state I
committed to writing what I had seen and heard: to which I now add the
following particular. That conjugial love, such as it was with the
ancients, will be revived again by the Lord after his coming; because
this love is from the Lord alone, and is the portion of those who from
him, by means of the Word, are made spiritual.

82. After this, a man from the northern quarter came running in great
haste, and looked at me with a threatening countenance, and addressing
me in a passionate tone of voice, said, "Are you the man that wishes to
seduce the world, under the notion of re-establishing a new church,
which you understand by the New Jerusalem coming down out of heaven from
God; and teaching, that the Lord will endow with love truly conjugial
those who embrace the doctrines of that church; the delights and
felicity of which love you exalt to the very heaven? Is not this a mere
fiction? and do you not hold it forth as a bait and enticement to accede
to your new opinions? But tell me briefly, what are the doctrinals of
the New Church, and I will see whether they agree or disagree." I
replied, "The doctrines of the church, which is meant by the New
Jerusalem, are as follow: I. That there is one God, in whom there is a
divine trinity; and that he is the LORD JESUS CHRIST. II. That a saving
faith is to believe on him. III. That evils are to be shunned, because
they are of the devil and from the devil. IV. That goods are to be done,
because they are of God and from God. V. That these are to be done by a
man as from himself; but that it ought to be believed, that they are
done from the Lord with him and by him." On hearing these doctrines, his
fury for some moments abated; but after some deliberation he again
looked at me sternly, and said, "Are these five precepts the doctrines
of faith and charity of the New Church?" I replied, "They are." He then
asked sharply, "How can you demonstrate the FIRST, 'that there is one
God in whom there is a divine trinity; and that he is the Lord Jesus
Christ?" I said, "I demonstrate it thus: Is not God one and individual?
Is not there a trinity? If God be one and individual, is not he one
person? If he be one person, is not the trinity in that person? That
this God is the LORD JESUS CHRIST, is evident from these considerations,
that he was conceived from God the Father, Luke i. 34, 35; and thus that
as to his soul he is God; and hence, as he himself saith, that the
Father and himself are one, John x. 30; that he is in the Father, and
the Father in him, John xix. 10, 11; that he that seeth him and knoweth
him, seeth and knoweth the Father, John xiv. 7, 9; that no one seeth and
knoweth the Father, except he that is in the bosom of the Father, John
i. 18; that all things of the Father are his, John iii. 35; chap. xvi.
15; that he is the Way, the Truth, and the Life; and that no one cometh
to the Father but by him, John xiv. 6; thus of or from him, because the
Father is in him; and, according to Paul, that all the fulness of the
Godhead dwelleth bodily in him, Coloss. ii. 9; and moreover, that he
hath power over all flesh, John xvii. 2; and that he hath all power in
heaven and in earth, Matt, xxviii. 18: from which declarations it
follows, that he is God of heaven and earth." He afterwards asked how I
proved the SECOND, "that a saving faith is to believe on him?" I said,
"By these words of the Lord, 'This is the will of the Father, that every
one that BELIEVETH ON THE SON should have eternal life, John vi. 40.'
'God so loved the world, that he gave his only-begotten Son, that every
one that BELIEVETH ON HIM should not perish, but should have eternal
life,' John iii. 15, 16. 'HE THAT BELIEVETH ON THE SON, hath eternal
life; but he that believeth not the Son will not see life; but the wrath
of God abideth on him,' John iii. 36." He afterwards said, "Demonstrate
also the THIRD, and the next two doctrines:" I replied, "What need is
there to demonstrate 'that evils ought to be shunned, because they are
of the devil and from the devil; and that goods ought to be done,
because they are of God and from God;' also 'that the latter are to be
done by a man as from himself; but that he ought to believe that they
are from the Lord with him and by him?' That these three doctrines are
true, is confirmed by the whole Sacred Scripture from beginning to end;
for what else is therein principally insisted on, but to shun evils and
do goods, and believe on the Lord God? Moreover, without these three
doctrines there can be no religion: for does not religion relate to
life? and what is life but to shun evils and do goods? and how can a man
do the latter and shun the former but as from himself? Therefore if you
remove these doctrines from the church, you remove from it the Sacred
Scripture, and also religion; and these being removed, the church is no
longer a church." The man on hearing this retired, and mused on what he
had heard; but still he departed in indignation.

       *       *       *       *       *

ON THE ORIGIN OF CONJUGIAL LOVE AS GROUNDED IN THE MARRIAGE OF GOOD AND
TRUTH.

83. There are both internal and external origins of conjugial love, and
several of each; nevertheless there is but one inmost or universal
origin of all. That this origin is the marriage of good and truth, shall
be demonstrated in what now follows. The reason why no one heretofore
has deduced the origin of that love from this ground, is, because it has
never yet been discovered that there is any union between good and
truth; and the reason why this discovery has not been made, is, because
good does not appear in the light of the understanding, as truth does,
and hence the knowledge of it conceals itself and evades every inquiry:
and as from this circumstance good is as it were unknown, it was
impossible for any one to conjecture that any marriage subsisted between
it and truth: yea, before the rational natural sight, good appears so
different from truth, that no conjunction between them can be supposed.
That this is the case, may be seen from common discourse whenever they
are mentioned; as when it is said, "This is good," truth is not at all
thought of; and when it is said, "This is true," neither is good at all
thought of; therefore at this day it is believed by many, that truth is
one thing and good another; and by many also, that a man is intelligent
and wise, and thereby a man (_homo_), according to the truths which he
thinks, speaks, writes, and believes, and not at the same time according
to goods. That nevertheless there is no good without truth, nor any
truth without good, consequently that there is an eternal marriage
between them; also that this marriage is the origin of conjugial love,
shall now be shewn and explained in the following order: I. _Good and
truth are the universals of creation, and thence are in all created
things; but they are in created subjects according to the form of each._
II. _There is neither solitary good nor solitary truth, but in all cases
they are conjoined._ III. _There is the truth of good, and from this the
good of truth; or truth grounded in good, and good grounded in that
truth: and in those two principles is implanted from creation an
inclination to join themselves together into a one._ IV. _In the
subjects of the animal kingdom, the truth of good, or truth grounded in
good, is male (or masculine); and the good of that truth, or good
grounded in that truth, is female (or feminine)._ V. _From the influx of
the marriage of good and truth from the Lord, the love of the sex and
conjugial love are derived._ VI. _The love of the sex belongs to the
external or natural man, and hence it is common to every animal._ VII.
_But conjugial love belongs to the internal or spiritual man; and hence
this love is peculiar to man._ VIII. _With man conjugial love is in the
love of the sex as a gem in its matrix._ IX. _The love of the sex with
man is not the origin of conjugial love, but its first rudiment; thus it
is like an external natural principle, in which an internal spiritual
principle is implanted._ X. _During the implantation of conjugial love,
the love of the sex inverts itself and becomes the chaste love of the
sex._ XI. _The male and the female were created to be the essential form
of the marriage of good and truth._ XII. _They are that form in their
inmost principles, and thence in what is derived from those principles,
in proportion as the interiors of their minds are opened._ We will now
proceed to the explanation.

84. I. GOOD AND TRUTH ARE THE UNIVERSALS OF CREATION, AND THENCE ARE IN
ALL CREATED THINGS; BUT THEY ARE IN CREATED SUBJECTS ACCORDING TO THE
FORM OF EACH. The reason why good and truth are the universals of
creation, is, because these two are in the Lord God the Creator; yea,
they are himself; for he is essential divine good and essential divine
truth. But this enters more clearly into the perception of the
understanding, and thereby into the ideas of thought, if instead of good
we say love, and instead of truth we say wisdom: consequently that in
the Lord God the Creator there are divine love and divine wisdom, and
that they are himself; that is, that he is essential love and essential
wisdom; for those two are the same as good and truth. The reason of this
is, because good has relation to love, and truth to wisdom; for love
consists of goods, and wisdom truths. As the two latter and the two
former are one and the same, in the following pages we shall sometimes
speak of the latter and sometimes of the former, while by both the same
is understood. This preliminary observation is here made, lest different
meanings should be attached to the expressions when they occur in the
following pages.

85. Since therefore the Lord God the Creator is essential love and
essential wisdom, and from him was created the universe, which thence is
as a work proceeding from him, it must needs be, that in all created
things there is somewhat of good and of truth from him; for whatever is
done and proceeds from any one, derives from him a certain similarity to
him. That this is the case, reason also may see from the order in which
all things in the universe were created; which order is, that one exists
for the sake of another, and that thence one depends upon another, like
the links of a chain: for all things are for the sake of the human race,
that from it the angelic heaven may exist, through which creation
returns to the Creator himself, in whom it originated: hence there is a
conjunction of the created universe with its Creator, and by conjunction
everlasting conservation. Hence it is that good and truth are called the
universals of creation. That this is the case, is manifested to every
one who takes a rational view of the subject: he sees in every created
thing something which relates to good, and something which relates to
truth.

86. The reason why good and truth in created subjects are according to
the form of each, is, because every subject receives influx according to
its form. The conservation of the whole consists in the perpetual influx
of divine good and divine truth into forms created from those
principles; for thereby subsistence or conservation is perpetual
existence or creation. That every subject receives influx according to
its form, may be illustrated variously; as by the influx of heat and
light from the sun into vegetables of every kind; each of which receives
influx according to its form; thus every tree and shrub according to its
form, every herb and every blade of grass according to its form: the
influx is alike into all; but the reception, which is according to the
form, causes every species to continue a peculiar species. The same
thing may also be illustrated by the influx into animals of every kind
according to the form of each. That the influx is according to the form
of every particular thing, may also be seen by the most unlettered
person, if he attends to the various instruments of sound, as pipes,
flutes, trumpets, horns, and organs which give forth a sound from being
blown alike, or from a like influx of air, according to their respective
forms.

87. II. THERE IS NEITHER SOLITARY GOOD NOR SOLITARY TRUTH. BUT IN ALL
CASES THEY ARE CONJOINED. Whoever is desirous from any of the senses to
acquire an idea respecting good, cannot possibly find it without the
addition of something which exhibits and manifests it: good without this
is a nameless entity; and this something, by which it is exhibited and
manifested, has relation to truth. Pronounce the term _good_ only, and
say nothing at the same time of this or that thing with which it is
conjoined; or define it abstractedly, or without the addition of
anything connected with it; and you will see that it is a mere nothing,
and that it becomes something with its addition; and if you examine the
subject with discernment, you will perceive that good, without some
addition, is a term of no predication, and thence of no relation, of no
affection, and of no state; in a word, of no quality. The case is
similar in regard to truth, if it be pronounced and heard without what
it is joined with: that what it is joined with relates to good, may be
seen by refined reason. But since goods are innumerable, and each
ascends to its greatest, and descends to its least, as by the steps of a
ladder, and also, according to its progression and quality, varies its
name, it is difficult for any but the wise to see the relation of good
and truth to their objects, and their conjunction in them. That
nevertheless there is not any good without truth, nor any truth without
good, is manifest from common perception, provided it be first
acknowledged that every thing in the universe has relation to good and
truth; as was shewn in the foregoing article, n. 84, 85. That there is
neither solitary good nor solitary truth, may be illustrated and at the
same time confirmed by various considerations; as by the following: that
there is no essence without a form, nor any form without an essence; for
good is an essence or _esse_; and truth is that by which the essence is
formed and the _esse_ exists. Again in a man (_homo_) there are the will
and the understanding. Good is of the will, and truth is of the
understanding; and the will alone does nothing but by the understanding;
nor does the understanding alone do anything but from the will. Again,
in a man there are two fountains of bodily life, the heart and the
lungs. The heart cannot produce any sensitive and moving life without
the respiring lungs; neither can the lungs without the heart. The heart
has relation to good, and the respiration of the lungs to truth: there
is also a correspondence between them. The case is similar in all the
things of the mind and of the body belonging to him; but we have not
leisure to produce further confirmations in this place; therefore the
reader is referred to the ANGELIC WISDOM CONCERNING THE DIVINE
PROVIDENCE, n. 3-16, where this subject is more fully confirmed and
explained in the following order: I. That the universe with all its
created subjects, is from the divine love by the divine wisdom; or, what
is the same thing, from the divine good by the divine truth. II. That
the divine good and the divine truth proceed as a one from the Lord.
III. That this one, in a certain image, is in every created thing. V.
That good is not good, only so far as it is united with truth; and that
truth is not truth, only so far as it is united with good. VII. That the
Lord doesn't suffer that any thing should be divided; wherefore a man
must either be in good and at the same time in truth, or in evil and at
the same time in falsehood: not to mention several other considerations.

88. III. THERE IS THE TRUTH OF GOOD, AND FROM THIS THE GOOD OF TRUTH; OR
TRUTH GROUNDED IN GOOD, AND GOOD GROUNDED IN THAT TRUTH; AND IN THOSE
TWO PRINCIPLES IS IMPLANTED FROM CREATION AN INCLINATION TO JOIN
THEMSELVES TOGETHER INTO A ONE. It is necessary that some distinct idea
be acquired concerning these principles; because on such idea depends
all knowledge respecting the essential origin of conjugial love: for, as
will be seen presently, the truth of good, or truth grounded on good, is
male (or masculine), and the good of truth, or good grounded in that
truth, is female (or feminine): but this may be comprehended more
distinctly, if instead of good we speak of love, and instead of truth we
speak of wisdom; which are one and the same, as may be seen above, n.
84. Wisdom cannot exist with a man but by means of the love of growing
wise; if this love be taken away, it is altogether impossible for him to
become wise. Wisdom derived from this love is meant by the truth of
good, or by truth grounded in good: but when a man has procured to
himself wisdom from that love, and loves it in himself, or himself for
its sake, he then forms a love which is the love of wisdom, and is meant
by the good of truth, or by good grounded in that truth. There are
therefore two loves belonging to a man, whereof one, which is prior, is
the love of growing wise; and the other, which is posterior, is the love
of wisdom: but this latter love if it remains with man, is an evil love,
and is called self-conceit, or the love of his own intelligence. That it
was provided from creation, that this love should be taken out of the
man, lest it should destroy him, and should be transferred to the woman,
for the effecting of conjugial love, which restores man to integrity,
will be confirmed in the following pages. Something respecting those two
loves, and the transfer of the latter to the woman, may be seen above,
n. 32, 33, and in the preliminary MEMORABLE RELATION, n. 20. If
therefore instead of love is understood good, and instead of wisdom
truth, it is evident, from what has been already said, that there exists
the truth of good, or truth grounded in good, and from this the good of
truth, or good grounded in that truth.

89. The reason why in these two principles there is implanted from
creation an inclination to join themselves together into a one, is
because the one was formed from the other; wisdom being formed from the
love of growing wise, or truth being formed from good; and the love of
wisdom being formed from that wisdom, or the good of truth from that
truth; from which formation it may be seen, that there is a mutual
inclination to re-unite themselves, and to join themselves together into
a one. This effect takes place with men who are in genuine wisdom, and
with women who are in the love of that wisdom in the husband; thus with
those who are in love truly conjugial. But concerning the wisdom which
ought to exist with the man, and which should be loved by the wife, more
will be said in what follows.

90. IV. IN THE SUBJECT OF THE ANIMAL KINGDOM THE TRUTH OF GOOD, OR TRUTH
GROUNDED IN GOOD, IS MALE (OR MASCULINE); AND THE GOOD OF THAT TRUTH, OR
GOOD GROUNDED IN THAT TRUTH, IS FEMALE (OR FEMININE). That from the
Lord, the Creator and Supporter of the universe, there flows a perpetual
union of love and wisdom, or a marriage of good and truth, and that
created subjects receive the influx, each according to its form, was
shewn above, n. 84-86: but that the male from this marriage, or from
that union, receives the truth of wisdom, and that the good of love from
the Lord is conjoined thereto according to reception, and that this
reception takes place in the intellect, and that hence the male is born
to become intellectual, reason, by its own light, may discover from
various particulars respecting him, especially from his affection,
application, manners, and form. It is discoverable from his AFFECTION,
which is the affection of knowing, of understanding, and of growing
wise; the affection of knowing takes place in childhood, the affection
of understanding in youth and in the entrance upon manhood, and the
affection of growing wise takes place from the entrance upon manhood
even to old age; from which it is evident, that his nature or peculiar
temper is inclinable to form the intellect; consequently that he is born
to become intellectual: but as this cannot be effected except by means
of love, therefore the Lord adjoins love to him according to his
reception; that is, according to his intention in desiring to grow wise.
The same is discoverable from his APPLICATION, which is to such things
as respect the intellect, or in which the intellect is predominant;
several of which relate to public offices and regard the public good.
The same is discoverable too from his MANNERS, which are all grounded in
the intellect as a ruling principle; in consequence whereof the actions
of his life, which are meant by manners, are rational; and if not, still
he is desirous they should appear so; masculine rationality is also
discernible in every one of his virtues. Lastly, the same is
discoverable from his FORM, which is different and totally distinct from
the female form; on which subject see also what was said above, n. 33.
Add to this, that the principle of prolification is in him, which is
derived from the intellect alone; for it is from truth grounded in good
in the intellect: that the principle of prolification is from this
source may be seen in the following pages.

91. But that the female is born to be a subject of the will (_ut sit
voluntaria_), yet a subject of the will as grounded in the intellectual
principle of the man, or what is the same, to be the love of the man's
wisdom, because she was formed through his wisdom, (on which subject see
above, n. 88, 89,) may also appear from the female's affection,
application, manners, and form. From her AFFECTION, which is the
affection of loving knowledge, intelligence, and wisdom; nevertheless
not in herself but in the man; and thus of loving the man: for the man
(_vir_) cannot be loved merely on account of his form, in that he
appears as a man (_homo_), but on account of the talent with which he is
gifted, which causes him to be a man. From her APPLICATION; in that it
is to such manual works as knitting, needlework, and the like, serving
for ornament, both to decorate herself and to exalt her beauty: and
moreover from her application to various domestic duties, which connect
themselves with the duties of men, which, as was said, relate to public
offices. They are led to these duties from an inclination to marriage,
that they may become wives, and thereby one with their husbands. That
the same is also discoverable from their MANNERS and FORM, needs no
explanation.

92. V. FROM THE INFLUX OF THE MARRIAGE OF GOOD AND TRUTH FROM THE LORD,
THE LOVE OF THE SEX AND CONJUGIAL LOVE ARE DERIVED. That good and truth
are the universals of creation, and thence are in all created subjects;
and that they are in created subjects according to the form of each; and
that good and truth proceed from the Lord not as two but as one, was
shewn above, n. 84-87: from these considerations it follows, that the
UNIVERSAL CONJUGIAL SPHERE proceeds from the Lord, and pervades the
universe from its primaries to its ultimates; thus from angels even to
worms. The reason why such a sphere of the marriage of good and truth
proceeds from the Lord, is, because it is also the sphere of
propagation, that is, of prolification and fructification; and this
sphere is the same with the divine providence relating to the
preservation of the universe by successive generations. Now since this
universal sphere, which is that of the marriage of good and truth, flows
into its subjects according to the form of each, see n. 86, it follows
that the male receives it according to his form, thus in the intellect,
because he is in an intellectual form; and that the female receives it
according to her form, thus in the will, because she is a form of the
will grounded in the intellect of the man; and since that sphere is also
the sphere of prolification, it follows that hence is the love of the
sex.

93. The reason why conjugial love also is from this same source, is,
because that sphere flows into the form of wisdom with men, and also
with angels; for a man may increase in wisdom to the end of his life in
the world, and afterwards to eternity in heaven; and in proportion as he
increases in wisdom, his form is perfected; and this form receives not
the love of the sex, but the love of one of the sex; for with one of the
sex it may be united to the inmost principles in which heaven with its
felicities consists, and this union is conjugial love.

94. VI. THE LOVE OF THE SEX BELONGS TO THE EXTERNAL OR NATURAL MAN, AND
HENCE IT IS COMMON TO EVERY ANIMAL. Every man is born corporeal, and
becomes more and more interiorly natural, and in proportion as he loves
intelligence he becomes rational, and afterwards, if he loves wisdom, he
becomes spiritual. What the wisdom is by which a man becomes spiritual,
will be shewn in the following pages, n. 130. Now as a man advances from
knowledge into intelligence, and from intelligence into wisdom, so also
his mind changes its form; for it is opened more and more, and conjoins
itself more nearly with heaven, and by heaven with the Lord; hence it
becomes more enamored of truth, and more desirous of the good of life.
If therefore he halts at the threshold in the progression to wisdom, the
form of his natural mind remains; and this receives the influx of the
universal sphere, which is that of the marriage of good and truth, in
the same manner as it is received by the inferior subjects of the animal
kingdom--beasts and birds; and as these are merely natural, the man in
such case becomes like them, and thereby loves the sex just as they do.
This is what is meant by the assertion,--the love of the sex belongs to
the external or natural man, and hence it is common to every animal.

95. VII. BUT CONJUGIAL LOVE BELONGS TO THE INTERNAL OR SPIRITUAL MAN;
AND HENCE THIS LOVE IS PECULIAR TO MAN. The reason why conjugial love
belongs to the internal or spiritual man is, because in proportion as a
man becomes more intelligent and wise, in the same proportion he becomes
more internal and spiritual, and in the same proportion the form of his
mind is more perfected; and this form receives conjugial love: for
therein it perceives and is sensible of a spiritual delight, which is
inwardly blessed, and a natural delight thence arising, which derives
its soul, life, and essence from the spiritual delight.

96. The reason why conjugial love is peculiar to man, is because he only
can become spiritual, he being capable of elevating his intellect above
his natural loves, and from that state of elevation of seeing them
beneath him, and of judging of their quality, and also of amending,
correcting, and removing them. No other animal can do this; for the
loves of other animals are altogether united with their inborn
knowledge; on which account this knowledge cannot be elevated into
intelligence, and still less into wisdom; in consequence of which every
other animal is led by the love implanted in his knowledge, as a blind
person is led through the streets by a dog. This is the reason which
conjugial love is peculiar to man; it may also be called native and near
akin to him; because man has the faculty of growing wise, with which
faculty this love is united.

97. VIII. WITH MAN CONJUGIAL LOVE IS IN THE LOVE OF THE SEX AS A GEM IN
ITS MATRIX. As this however is merely a comparison, we will explain it
in the article which immediately follows: this comparison also
illustrates what was shown just above, n. 94, 95,--that the love of the
sex belongs to the external or natural man, and conjugial love to the
internal or spiritual man.

98. IX. THE LOVE OF THE SEX WITH MAN IS NOT THE ORIGIN OF CONJUGIAL
LOVE, BUT ITS FIRST RUDIMENT; THUS IT IS LIKE AN EXTERNAL NATURAL
PRINCIPLE, IN WHICH AN INTERNAL SPIRITUAL PRINCIPLE IS IMPLANTED. The
subject here treated of is love truly conjugial, and not ordinary love,
which also is called conjugial, and which with some is merely the
limited love of the sex. Love truly conjugial exists only with those who
desire wisdom, and who consequently advance more and more into wisdom.
These the Lord foresees, and provides for them conjugial love; which
love indeed commences with them from the love of the sex, or rather by
it; but still it does not originate in it; for it originates in
proportion to the advancement in wisdom and the dawning of the light
thereof in man; for wisdom and that love are inseparable companions. The
reason why conjugial love commences by the love of the sex is, because
before a suitable consort is found, the sex in general is loved and
regarded with a fond eye, and is treated with civility from a moral
ground: for a young man has to make his choice; and while this is
determining, from an innate inclination to marriage with one, which lies
concealed in the interiors of his mind, his external receives a gentle
warmth. A further reason is, because determinations to marriage are
delayed from various causes even to riper years, and in the mean time
the beginning of that love is as lust; which with some actually goes
astray into the love of the sex; yet with them it is indulged no further
than may be conducive to health. This, however, is to be understood as
spoken of the male sex, because it has enticements which actually
inflame it; but not of the female sex. From these considerations it is
evident that the love of the sex is not the origin of love truly
conjugial; but that it is its first rudiment in respect to time, yet not
in respect to end; for what is first in respect to end, is first in the
mind and its intention, because it is regarded as primary; but to this
first there is no approaching unless successively through mediums, and
these are not first in themselves, but only conducive to what is first
in itself.

99. X. DURING THE IMPLANTATION OF CONJUGIAL LOVE, THE LOVE OF THE SEX
INVERTS ITSELF AND BECOMES THE CHASTE LOVE OF THE SEX. It is said that
in this case the love of the sex inverts itself; because while conjugial
love is coming to its origin, which is in the interiors of the mind, it
sees the love of the sex not before itself but behind, or not above
itself but beneath, and thus as somewhat which it passes by and leaves.
The case herein is similar to that of a person climbing from one office
to another through a great variety, till he reaches one which exceeds
the rest in dignity; when he looks back upon the offices through which
he had passed, as behind or beneath him; or as when a person intends a
journey to the palace of some king, after his arrival at his journey's
end, he inverts his view in regard to the objects which he had seen in
the way. That in this case the love of the sex remains and becomes
chaste, and yet, to those who are principled in love truly conjugial, is
sweeter than it was before, may be seen from the description given of it
by those in the spiritual world, in the two MEMORABLE RELATIONS, n. 44,
and 55.

100. XI. THE MALE AND THE FEMALE WERE CREATED TO BE THE ESSENTIAL FORM
OF THE MARRIAGE OF GOOD AND TRUTH. The reason for this is, because the
male was created to be the understanding of truth, thus truth in form;
and the female was created to be the will of good, thus good in form;
and there is implanted in each, from their inmost principles, an
inclination to conjunction into a one, as may be seen above, n. 88; thus
the two make one form, which emulates the conjugial form of good and
truth. It is said to emulate it, because it is not the same, but is like
it; for the good which joins itself with the truth belonging to the man,
is from the Lord immediately; whereas the good of the wife, which joins
itself with the truth belonging to the man, is from the Lord mediately
through the wife; therefore there are two goods, the one internal, the
other external, which join themselves with the truth belonging to the
husband, and cause him to be constantly in the understanding of truth,
and thence in wisdom, by love truly conjugial: but on this subject more
will be said in the following pages.

101. XII. MARRIED PARTNERS ARE THAT FORM IN THEIR INMOST PRINCIPLES, AND
THENCE IN WHAT IS DERIVED FROM THOSE PRINCIPLES, IN PROPORTION AS THE
INTERIORS OF THEIR MINDS ARE OPENED. There are three things of which
every man consists, and which follow in an orderly connection,--the
soul, the mind, and the body: his inmost is the soul, his middle is the
mind, and his ultimate is the body. Every thing which flows from the
Lord into a man, flows into his inmost principle, which is the soul, and
descends thence into his middle principle, which is the mind, and
through this into his ultimate principle, which is the body. Such is the
nature of the influx of the marriage of good and truth from the Lord
with man: it flows immediately into his soul, and thence proceeds to the
principles next succeeding, and through these to the extreme or
outermost: and thus conjointly all the principles constitute conjugial
love. From an idea of this influx it is manifest, that two married
partners are the form of conjugial love in their inmost principles, and
thence in those derived from the inmost.

102. But the reason why married partners become that form in proportion
as the interiors of their minds are opened, is, because the mind is
successively opened from infancy even to extreme old age: for a man is
born corporeal: and in proportion as the mind is opened proximately
above the body, he becomes rational; and in proportion as his rational
principle is purified, and as it were drained of the fallacies which
flow in from the bodily senses, and of the concupiscences which flow in
from the allurements of the flesh, in the same proportion it is opened;
and this is affected solely by wisdom: and when the interiors of the
rational mind are open, the man becomes a form of wisdom; and this form
is the receptacle of love truly conjugial. "The wisdom which constitutes
this form, and receives this love, is rational, and at the same time
moral, wisdom: rational wisdom regards the truths and goods which appear
inwardly in man, not as its own, but as flowing in from the Lord; and
moral wisdom shuns evils and falses as leprosies, especially the evils
of lasciviousness, which contaminate its conjugial love."

       *       *       *       *       *

103. To the above I shall add two MEMORABLE RELATIONS: the FIRST is
this. One morning before sun-rise I was looking towards the east in the
spiritual world, and I saw four horsemen as it were issuing from a cloud
refulgent with the flame of the dawning day. On their heads they had
crested helmets, on their arms as it were wings, and around their bodies
light orange-colored tunics; thus clad as for expedition, they rose in
their seats, and gave their horses the reins, which thus ran as if they
had had wings to their feet. I kept my eye fixed on their course or
flight, desiring to know where they were going; and lo! three of the
horsemen took their direction towards three different quarters, the
south, the west, and the north; and the fourth in a short space of time
halted in the east. Wondering at all this, I looked up into heaven, and
inquired where those horsemen were going? I received for answer, "To the
wise men in the kingdoms of Europe, who with clear reasoning and acute
discernment discuss the subjects of their investigation, and are
distinguished above the rest for their genius, that they may assemble
together and explain the secret RESPECTING THE ORIGIN OF CONJUGIAL LOVE,
AND RESPECTING ITS VIRTUE OR POTENCY."

It was then said from heaven, "Wait awhile, and you will see
twenty-seven chariots; three, in which are Spaniards; three, in which
are Frenchmen; three, in which are Italians; three, in which are
Germans; three, in which are Dutchmen or Hollanders; three, in which are
Englishmen; three, in which are Swedes; three, in which are Danes; and
three, in which are Poles." In about two hours I saw the chariots, drawn
by horses of a pale-red color, with remarkable trappings: they passed
rapidly along towards a spacious house in the confines of the east and
south, around which all alighted from their several chariots, and
entered in with much confidence. Then it was said to me, "Go, and do you
also enter, and you will hear." I went and entered: and on examining the
house within, I saw that it was square, the sides looking to the four
quarters: in each side there were three high windows of crystalline
glass, the frames of which were of olive-wood; on each side of the
frames were projections from the walls, like chambers vaulted above, in
which there were tables. The walls of these chambers were of cedar, the
roof of the noble almug wood, and the floor of poplar boards. Near the
eastern wall, where no windows were seen, there was set a table overlaid
with gold, on which was placed a TURBAN set with precious stones, which
was to be given as a prize or reward to him who should by investigation
discover the secret about to be proposed. While my attention was
directed to the chamber projections like closets near the windows, I saw
five men in each from every kingdom of Europe, who were prepared and
waiting to know the object for the exercise of their judgements. An
angel then presented himself in the middle of the palace, and said, "The
object for the exercise of your judgements shall be RESPECTING THE
ORIGIN OF CONJUGIAL LOVE, AND RESPECTING ITS VIRTUE OR POTENCY.
Investigate this and decide upon it; and write your decision on a piece
of paper, and put it into the silver urn which you see placed near the
golden table, and subscribe the initial letter of the kingdom from which
you come; as F for French, B for Batavians or Hollanders, I for
Italians, E for English, P for Poles, G for German, H for Spaniards
(_Hispani_), D for Danes, S for Swedes." As he said this, the angel
departed, saying, "I will return." Then the five men, natives of the
same country, in each closet near the windows, took into consideration
the proposed subject, examined it attentively, and came to a decision
according to their respective talents and powers of judgement, which
they wrote on a piece of paper, and placed it in the silver urn, having
first subscribed the initial letter of their kingdom. This business
being accomplished in about three hours, the angel returned and drew the
papers in order from the urn, and read them before the assembly.

104. From the FIRST PAPER which he happened to lay hold of, he read as
follows; "We five, natives of the same country, in one closet have
decreed that the origin of conjugial love is from the most ancient
people in the golden age, and that it was derived to them from the
creation of Adam and his wife; hence is the origin of marriages, and
with marriages the origin of conjugial love. The virtue or potency of
conjugial love we derive from no other source than climate or situation
in regard to the sun, and the consequent heat of the country; and we are
confirmed in this sentiment, not by vain conjectures of reason, but by
evident proofs of experience, as by the case of the people who live
under the line, or the equinoctial, where the heat of the day is
intense, and by the case of those who live nearer to the line, or more
distant from it; and also from the co-operation of the sun's heat with
the vital heat in the living creatures of the earth and the fowls of
heaven, in the time of spring during prolification. Moreover, what is
conjugial love but heat, which becomes virtue or potency, if the heat
supplied from the sun be added to it?" To this decision was subscribed
the letter H, the initial of the kingdom from which they were.

105. After this he put his hand into the urn a SECOND TIME, and took out
a paper from which he read as follows: "We, natives of the same country,
in our lodge have agreed that the origin of conjugial love is the same
with the origin of marriages, which were sanctioned by laws in order to
restrain man's innate concupiscences prompting him to adultery, which
ruins the soul, defiles the reason, pollutes the morals, and infects the
body with disease: for adultery is not human but bestial, not rational
but brutish, and thus not in any respect Christian but barbarous: with a
view to the condemnation of such adultery, marriages originated, and at
the same time conjugial love. The case is the same with the virtue or
potency of this love; for it depends on chastity, which consists in
abstaining from the rovings of whoredom: the reason is, because virtue
or potency, with him who loves his married partner alone, is confined to
one, and is thus collected and as it were concentrated; and then it
becomes refined like a quintessence from which all defilement is
separated, which would otherwise be dispersed and cast away in every
direction. One of us five, who is a priest, has also added
predestination as a cause of that virtue or potency, saying, 'Are not
marriages predestinated? and this being the case, are not the progeny
thence issuing and the means conducive thereto, predestinated also?' He
insisted on adding this cause because he had sworn to it." To this
decision was subscribed the letter B. On hearing it, a certain spirit
observed with a smile, "How fair an apology is predestination for
weakness or impotence!"

106. Presently he drew from the urn a THIRD PAPER, from which he read as
follows: "We, natives of the same country, in our department have
deliberated concerning the causes of the origin of conjugial love, and
have seen this to be the principal, that it is the same with the origin
of marriage, because conjugial love had no existence before marriage;
and the ground of its existence is, that when any one is desperately in
love with a virgin, he desires in heart and soul to possess her as being
lovely above all things; and as soon as she betroths herself to him he
regards her as another self. That this is the origin of conjugial love,
is clearly manifest from the fury of every man against his rivals, and
from the jealousy which takes place in case of violation. We afterwards
considered the origin of the virtue or potency of this love; and the
sentiments of three prevailed against the other two, viz., that virtue
or potency with a married partner arises from some degree of
licentiousness with the sex. They affirmed that they knew from
experience that the potency of the love of the sex is greater than the
potency of conjugial love." To this decision was subscribed the letter
I. On hearing it, there was a cry from the table, "Remove this paper and
take another out of the urn."

107. And instantly he drew out a FOURTH, from which he read as follows:
"We, natives of the same country, under our window have come to this
conclusion, that the origin of conjugial love and of the love of the sex
is the same, the former being derived from the latter; only that the
love of the sex is unlimited, indeterminate, loose, promiscuous, and
roving; whereas conjugial love is limited, determinate, fixed, regular,
and constant; and that this love therefore has been sanctioned and
established by the prudence of human wisdom as necessary to the
existence of every empire, kingdom, commonwealth, and even society; for
without it men would wander like droves of cattle in fields and forests,
with harlots and ravished females, and would fly from one habitation to
another to avoid the bloody murders, violations, and depredations,
whereby the whole human race would be in danger of being extirpated.
This is our opinion concerning the origin of conjugial love. But the
virtue or potency of conjugial love we deduce from an uninterrupted
state of bodily health continuing from infancy to old age; for the man
who always retains a sound constitution and enjoys a continual freedom
from sickness, feels his vigor unabated, while his fibres, nerves,
muscles, and sinews, are neither torpid, relaxed, nor feeble, but retain
the full strength of their powers: farewell." To this decision was
subscribed the letter E.

108. FIFTHLY, he drew a paper out of the urn, from which he read as
follows: "We, natives of the same country, at our table, from the
rationality of our minds, have examined into the origin of conjugial
love and of its virtue or potency; and from all the considerations which
have presented themselves, we have seen and concluded upon no other
origin of conjugial love than this: that every man, from incentives and
consequent incitements which are concealed in the interiors of his mind
and body, after indulging in various desires of his eyes, at length
fixes his mind and inclination on one of the female sex, until his
passion is determined entirely to her: from this moment his warmth is
enkindled more and more, until at length it becomes a flame; in this
state the inordinate love of the sex is banished, and conjugial love
takes its place. A youthful bridegroom under the influence of this
flame, knows no other than that the virtue or potency of this love will
never cease; for he wants experience and therefore knowledge respecting
a state of the failure of his powers, and of the coldness of love which
then succeeds to delights: conjugial love therefore has its origin in
this first ardor before the nuptial ceremony, and from the same source
it derives its virtue or potency; but this virtue or potency changes its
aspect after the nuptial ceremony, and decreases and increases; yet
still it continues with regular changes, or with decrease and increase,
even to old age, by means of prudent moderation, and by restraining the
libidinous desires which burst forth from the lurking places of the mind
not yet thoroughly purified: for libidinous desire precedes wisdom. This
is our judgement concerning the origin and continuance of conjugial
virtue or potency." To this decision was subscribed the letter P.

109. SIXTHLY, he drew out a paper, from which he read as follows: "We,
natives of the same country, from the fellowship subsisting among us,
have attentively considered the causes of the origin of conjugial love,
and have agreed in assigning two; one of which is the right education of
children, and the other the distinct possession of inheritances. We have
assigned these two, because they aim at and regard the same end, which
is the public good: and this end is obtained, because infants conceived
and born from conjugial love become proper and true children; and these
in consequence of the natural love of the parents, exalted by the
consideration of their offspring being legitimate, are educated to be
heirs of all their parents' possessions both spiritual and natural. That
the public good is founded on a right education of children and on a
distinct possession of inheritances, is obvious to reason. Of the love
of the sex and conjugial love, the latter appears as if it were one with
the former, but it is distinctly different; neither is the one love near
to the other, but within it; and what is within is more excellent than
what is without: and we have seen that conjugial love from creation is
within, and lies hid in the love of the sex, just as an almond does in
its shell; therefore when conjugial love comes out of its shell, which
is the love of the sex, it glitters before the angels like a gem, a
beryl, and astroites. The reason of this is, because on conjugial love
is inscribed the safety of the whole human race, which we conceive to be
understood by the public good. This is our judgement respecting the
origin of this love. With respect to the origin of its virtue or
potency, from a consideration of its causes, we have concluded it to be
the development and separation of conjugial love from the love of the
sex, which is effected by wisdom on the man's part, and by the love of
the man's wisdom on the part of the wife: for the love of the sex is
common to man and beast; whereas conjugial love is peculiar to men:
therefore so far as conjugial love is developed and separated from the
love of the sex, so far a man is a man and not a beast; and a man
acquires virtue or potency from his love, as a beast does from his." To
this decision was subscribed the letter G.

110. SEVENTHLY, he drew out a paper from which he read as follows: "We,
natives of the same country, in the chamber under the light of our
window, have found our thoughts and thence our judgements exhilarated by
meditating on conjugial love; for who is not exhilarated by this love,
which, while it prevails in the mind, prevails also through the whole
body? We judge of the origin of this love from its delights; for who in
any case knows or has known the trace of any love except from its
delight and pleasurableness? The delights of conjugial love in their
origins are felt as beatitudes, satisfactions, and happinesses, in their
derivations as pleasantnesses and pleasures, and in their ultimates as
superlative delights. The love of the sex therefore originates when the
interiors of the mind, and thence the interiors of the body, are opened
for the influx of those delights; but conjugial love originated at the
time when, from entering into marriage engagements, the primitive sphere
of that love ideally promoted those delights. The virtue or potency of
this love arises from its passing, with its inmost principles, from the
mind into the body; for the mind, by derivation from the head, is in the
body, while it feels and acts, especially when it is delighted from this
love: hence we judge of the degrees of its potency and the regularity of
its alterations. Moreover we also deduce the virtue of potency from the
stock whence a man is descended: if this be noble on the father's side,
it becomes also by transmission noble with his offspring. That such
nobility is generated, inherited and descends by transmission, is
agreeable to the dictates of reason supported by experience." To this
decision was subscribed the letter F.

111. From the paper which came forth the EIGHTH in order, he read as
follows: "We, natives of the same country, in our place of assembly have
not discovered the real origin of conjugial love, because it lies deeply
concealed in the sacred repositories of the mind. The most consummate
vision cannot, by any intellectual effort, reach that love in its
origin. We have made many conjectures; but after the vain exertion of
subtle inquiry, we have been in doubt whether our conjectures might not
be called rather trifling than judicious; therefore whoever is desirous
to extract the origin of that love from the sacred repositories of his
mind, and to exhibit it clearly before his eyes, let him go to
_Delphos_. We have contemplated that love beneath its origin, and have
seen that in the mind it is spiritual, and as a fountain from which a
sweet stream flows, whence it descends into the breast, where it becomes
delightful, and is called bosom love, which in itself is full of
friendship and confidence, from a full inclination to reciprocality; and
that when it has passed the breast, it becomes genial love. These and
similar considerations, which a young man revolves in his mind while he
is determining his choice to one of the sex, kindle in his heart the
fire of conjugial love; which fire, as it is the primitive of that love
is its origin. In respect to the origin of its virtue or potency, we
acknowledge no other than that love itself, they being inseparable
companions, yet still they are such that sometimes the one precedes and
sometimes the other. When the love precedes and the virtue or potency
follows it, each is noble because in this case potency is the virtue of
conjugial love; but if the potency precedes and the love follows, each
is then ignoble; because in this case the love is subordinate to carnal
potency; we therefore judge of the quality of each from the order in
which the love descends or ascends, and thus proceeds from its origin to
its proposed end." To this decision was subscribed the letter D.

112. Lastly, or NINTHLY, he took up a paper, from which he read as
follows: "We, natives of the same country, in our council-chamber have
exercised our judgement on the two points proposed, viz., the origin of
conjugial love, and the origin of its virtue or potency. In the
subtleties of inquiry respecting the origin of conjugial love, in order
to avoid obscurity in our reasonings, we have distinguished between the
love of the sex as being spiritual, natural, and carnal; and by the
spiritual love of the sex we have understood love truly conjugial,
because this is spiritual; and by the natural love of the sex we have
understood polygamical love, because this is natural; and by the merely
carnal love of the sex we have understood adulterous love because this
is merely carnal. In exercising our judgements to examine into love
truly conjugial, we have clearly seen that this love exists only between
one male and one female, and that from creation it is celestial and
inmost, the soul and father of all good loves, being inspired into the
first parents, and capable of being inspired into Christians; it is also
of such a conjunctive nature that by it two minds may become one mind,
and two men (_homines_) as it were one man (_homo_); which is meant by
becoming one flesh. That this love was inspired at creation, is plain
from these words in the book of creation, '_And a man shall leave father
and mother, and shall cleave to his wife; and they shall be one flesh_,'
Gen. ii. 24. That it can be inspired into Christians, is evident from
these words, '_Jesus said, Have ye not read, that he who made them from
the beginning, made them male and female, and said, For this cause shall
a man leave father and mother, and shall cleave to his wife; and they
two shall be one flesh? Wherefore they are no longer two but one
flesh_,' Matt. xix. 4-6. So far in regard to the origin of conjugial
love: but as to the origin of the virtue or potency of love truly
conjugial, we conceive it to proceed from a similitude of minds and
unanimity; for when two minds are conjugially united, their thoughts
spiritually kiss each other, and these inspire into the body their
virtue or potency." To this decision was subscribed the letter S.

113. There were standing behind an oblong stage in the palace, erected
before the doors, some strangers from Africa, who cried out to the
natives of Europe, "Permit one of us to deliver his sentiments
respecting the origin of conjugial love, and respecting its virtue or
potency." And immediately all the tables gave signs of assent with their
hands. Then one of them entered and stood at the table on which the
turban was placed, and said, "You Christians deduce the origin of
conjugial love from love itself; but we Africans deduce it from the God
of heaven and earth. Is not conjugial love a chaste, pure, and holy
love? Are not the angels of heaven principled therein? Is not the whole
human race, and thence the whole angelic heaven, the seed of that love?
And can such super-eminent principle derive its existence from any other
source than from God himself, the Creator and Preserver of the universe?
You Christians deduce conjugial virtue or potency from various causes
rational and natural; but we Africans deduce it from the state of man's
conjunction with the God of the universe. This state we call a state of
religion; but you call it a state of the church: for when the love is
derived from that state, and is fixed and permanent, it must needs
produce its own virtue, which resembles it, and thus also is fixed and
permanent. Love truly conjugial is known only to those few who live near
to God; consequently the potency of that love is known to none else.
This potency is described by the angels in the heavens as the delight of
a perpetual spring."

114. As he said these word, the whole assembly arose, and lo! behind the
golden table on which lay the turban, there appeared a window that had
not before been seen; and through it was heard a voice, saying, "THE
AFRICAN IS TO HAVE THE TURBAN." The angel then gave it into his hand,
but did not place it upon his head; and he went home with it. The
inhabitants of the kingdoms of Europe then left the assembly and entered
their chariots, in which they returned to their respective societies.

115. THE SECOND MEMORABLE RELATION. Awaking from sleep at midnight, I
saw at some elevation towards the east an angel holding in his right
hand a paper, which appeared extremely bright, being illuminated by the
light flowing from the sun. In the middle of the paper there was written
in golden letters, THE MARRIAGE OF GOOD AND TRUTH. From the writing
there darted forth a splendor which formed a wide circle about the
paper. This circle or encompassing splendor appeared like the early dawn
in spring. After this I saw the angel descending with the paper in his
hand; and as he descended the paper became less and less lucid, and the
writing, which was THE MARRIAGE OF GOOD AND TRUTH, changed from a golden
into a silver color, afterwards into a copper color, next into an iron
color, and at length into the color of iron and copper rust: finally, I
saw the angel enter an obscure mist, and through the mist descend upon
the ground; and here I did not see the paper, although he still held it
in his hand. This happened in the world of spirits, in which all men
first assemble after their decease. The angel then said to me, "Ask
those who come hither whether they see me, or anything in my hand."
There came a great number; one company from the east, another from the
south, another from the west, and another from the north; and I asked
those who came from the east and from the south, who in the world had
applied themselves to literary pursuits, "Do you see any one here with
me, and anything in his hand?" They all said, "No." I then put the same
question to those who came from the west and from the north, who in the
world had believed in the words of the learned; and these gave the same
answer: nevertheless the last of them, who in the world had been
principled in simple faith grounded in charity, or in some degree of
truth grounded in good, when the rest were gone away, said, that they
saw a man with a paper, the man in a graceful dress, and the paper with
letters written upon it: and when they applied their eyes nearer to it,
they said that they could read these words, _The marriage of good and
truth_; and they addressed the angel, intreating him to explain to them
the meaning of the writing. He said, "All things in the whole heaven and
in the whole world, are a marriage of good and truth; for all things
whatever, both those which live and communicate life and those which do
not live and do not communicate life, were created from and into the
marriage of good and truth. There does not exist anything which was
created into truth alone, or any thing which was created into good
alone: solitary good or solitary truth is not any thing; but by marriage
they exist and become something which derives its nature and quality
from that of the marriage. In the Lord the Creator are divine good and
divine truth in their very substance: the _esse_ of his substance is
divine good, and its _existere_ is divine truth: in him also they are in
their very essential union; for in him they infinitely make a one: and
since these two in the Creator himself are a one, therefore also they
are a one in all things created from him; hereby also the Creator is
conjoined in an eternal covenant as of marriage with all things created
from himself." The angel further said, that the Sacred Scripture, which
proceeded immediately from the Lord, is in general and in particular a
marriage of good and truth; and since the church, which is formed by the
truth of doctrine, and religion, which is formed by the good of life
agreeable to the truth of doctrine, are with Christians derived solely
from the Sacred Scripture, therefore it may manifestly appear, that the
church in general and in particular is a marriage of good and truth;
(that this is the case, may be seen in the APOCALYPSE REVEALED, n. 373,
483.) What has just been said concerning the marriage of good and truth,
is applicable also to the MARRIAGE OF CHARITY AND FAITH; for good
relates to charity, and truth to faith. Some of the spirits
above-mentioned who did not see the angel and the writing, being still
near, and hearing these things, said in an under tone, "_Yes, we also
comprehend what has been spoken_;" but the angel then said to them,
"Turn aside a little from me and speak in like manner." They turned
aside, and then said aloud, "_It is not so_." After this the angel spoke
concerning the MARRIAGE OF GOOD AND TRUTH with married pairs, saying,
that if their minds were in that marriage, the husband being truth, and
the wife the good thereof, they would both be in the delights of the
blessedness and innocence, and thence in the happiness which the angels
of heaven enjoy; and in this state the prolific principle of the husband
would be in a continual spring, and thereby in the endeavour and vigor
of propagating its truth, and the wife would be in a continual reception
thereof from a principle of love. The wisdom which husbands derive from
the Lord, is sensible of no greater delight than to propagate its
truths; and the love of wisdom which wives have from the Lord is
sensible of no higher gratification than to receive those truths as it
were in the womb, and thus to conceive them, to carry them in the womb,
and to bring them forth. Spiritual prolifications with the angels of
heaven are of this sort; and if you are disposed to believe it, natural
prolifications are also from the same origin. The angel, after a
salutation of peace, raised himself from the ground, and passing through
the mist ascended into heaven; and then the paper shone as before
according to the degrees of ascent; and behold! the circle, which before
appeared as the dawn of day, descended and dispelled the mist which
caused darkness on the ground, and a bright sunshine succeeded.

ON THE MARRIAGE OF THE LORD AND THE CHURCH, AND ITS CORRESPONDENCE.

116. The reason why the marriage of the Lord and the church, together
with its correspondence, is here also treated of, is, because without
knowledge and intelligence on this subject, scarcely any one can know,
that conjugial love in its origin is holy, spiritual, and celestial, and
that it is from the Lord. It is said indeed by some in the church, that
marriages have relation to the marriage of the Lord with the church; but
the nature and quality of this relationship is unknown, in order
therefore that this relationship may be exhibited to the understanding
so as to be seen in some degree of light, it is necessary to treat
particularly of that holy marriage which has place with and in those who
are the Lord's church. These also, and no others, are principled in love
truly conjugial. But for the better elucidation of this arcanum, it may
be expedient to consider the subject distinctly, as arranged under the
following articles: I. _The Lord in the Word is called the Bridegroom
and Husband, and the church the bride and wife; and the conjunction of
the Lord with the church, and the reciprocal conjunction of the church
with the Lord, is called a marriage._ II. _The Lord is also called a
Father, and the church, a mother._ III. _The offspring derived from the
Lord as a husband and father, and from the church as a wife and mother,
are all spiritual; and in the spiritual sense of the Word are understood
by sons and daughters, brothers and sisters, sons-in-law and
daughters-in-law, and by other names of relations._ IV. _The spiritual
offspring, which are born from the Lord's marriage with the church are
truths and goods; truths, from which are derived understanding,
perception, and all thought; and goods, from which are derived love,
charity, and all affection._ V. _From the marriage of good and truth,
which proceeds from the Lord in the way of influx, man (homo) receives
truth, and the Lord conjoins good thereto; and thus the church is formed
by the Lord with man._ VI. _The husband does not represent the Lord and
the wife the church; because both together, the husband and the wife,
constitute the church._ VII. _Therefore there is not a correspondence of
the husband with the Lord and of the wife with the church, in the
marriages of the angels in the heavens and of men on earth._ VIII. _But
there is a correspondence with conjugial love, semination,
prolification, the love of infants, and similar things which exist in
marriages, and are derived from them._ IX. _The Word is the medium of
conjunction, because it is from the Lord, and therefore is the Lord._ X.
_The church is from the Lord, and exists with those who come to him, and
live according to his precepts._ XI. _Conjugial love is according to the
state of the church, because it is according to the state of wisdom with
man (homo)._ XII. _And as the church is from the Lord, conjugial love is
also from him._ We proceed to the explanation of each article.

117. I. THE LORD IN THE WORD IS CALLED THE BRIDEGROOM AND HUSBAND, AND
THE CHURCH THE BRIDE AND WIFE; AND THE CONJUNCTION OF THE LORD WITH THE
CHURCH, AND THE RECIPROCAL CONJUNCTION OF THE CHURCH WITH THE LORD, IS
CALLED A MARRIAGE. Clodius maintained that the proposal to be submitted
to the people was itself illegal, and ought to be resisted by force.
Fabricius, one of the tribunes, had been selected to introduce it. When
Fabricius presented himself on the Rostra, there was a general rush to
throw him down. The Forum was in theory still a sacred spot, where the
carrying of arms was forbidden; but the new age had forgotten such
obsolete superstitions. The guards issued out of the temples with drawn
swords. The people were desperate and determined. Hundreds were killed
on both sides; Quintus Cicero, who was present for his brother, narrowly
escaping with life. The Tiber, Cicero says--perhaps with some
exaggeration--was covered with floating bodies; the sewers were choked;
the bloody area of the Forum had to be washed with sponges. Such a day
had not been seen in Rome since the fight between Cinna and Octavius.[5]
The mob remained masters of the field, and Cicero's cause had to wait for
better times. Milo had been active in the combat, and Clodius led his
victorious bands to Milo's house to destroy it. Milo brought an action
against him for violence; but Clodius was charmed even against forms
of law. There was no censor as yet chosen, and without a censor the
praetors pretended that they could not entertain the prosecution.
Finding law powerless, Milo imitated his antagonist. He, too, had his
band of gladiators about him; and the streets of the Capital were
entertained daily by fights between the factions of Clodius and
Milo.

The Commonwealth of the Scipios, the laws and institutions of the mistress
of the civilized world, had become the football of ruffians. Time and
reflection brought some repentance at last.
Toward the summer "the cause of order" rallied. The consuls and Pompey
exerted themselves to reconcile the more respectable citizens to Cicero's
return; and, with the ground better prepared, the attempt was renewed
with more success. In July the recall was again proposed in the Senate,
and Clodius was alone in opposing it. When it was laid before the
Assembly, Clodius made another effort; but voters had been brought up
from other parts of Italy who outnumbered the city rabble; Milo and
his gladiators were in force to prevent another burst of violence; and
the great orator and statesman was given back to his country. Sixteen
months he had been lamenting himself in Greece, bewailing his personal
ill-treatment. He was the single object of his own reflections. In his
own most sincere convictions he was the centre on which the destinies
of Rome revolved. He landed at Brindisi on the 5th of August. His
pardon had not yet been decreed, though he knew that it was coming. The
happy news arrived in a day or two, and he set out in triumph for Rome.
The citizens of Brindisi paid him their compliments; deputations
came to congratulate from all parts of Italy.

Outside the city every man of note of all the orders, save a few
of his declared enemies, were waiting to receive him. The roofs and steps
of the temples were thronged with spectators. Crowds attended him
to the Capitol, where he went to pour out his gratitude to the gods,
and welcomed him home with shouts of applause.

Had he been wise he would have seen that the rejoicing was from the lips
outward; that fine words were not gold; that Rome and its factions
were just where he had left them, or had descended one step lower.
But Cicero was credulous of flattery when it echoed his own opinions
about himself.
The citizens, he persuaded himself, were penitent for their ingratitude
to the most illustrious of their countrymen. The acclamations filled him
with the delighted belief that he was to resume his place at the head of
the State; and, as he could not forgive his disgrace, his first object
in the midst of his triumph was to revenge himself on those who had caused
it.
Speeches of acknowledgment he had naturally to make both to the
Senate and the Assembly. In addressing the people he was moderately
prudent; he glanced at the treachery of his friends, but he did not make
too much of it. He praised his own good qualities, but not
extravagantly. He described Pompey as "the wisest, best, and greatest
of all men that had been, were, or ever would be." Himself he compared
to Marius returning also from undeserved exile, and he delicately
spoke in honor of a name most dear to the Roman plebs, But he, he
said, unlike Marius, had no enemies but the enemies of his country.

He had no retaliation to demand for his own wrongs. If he punished bad
citizens, it would be by doing well himself; if he punished false friends,
it would be by never again trusting them. His first and his last
object would be to show his gratitude to his fellow- citizens.[6]
Such language was rational and moderate. He understood his audience, and
he kept his tongue under a bridle. But his heart was burning in him;
and what he could not say in the Forum he thought he might venture on
with impunity in the Senate, which might be called his own dunghill. His
chief wrath was at the late consuls. They were both powerful men. Gabinius
was Pompey's chief supporter. Calpurnius Piso was Caesar's father-in-law.
Both had been named to the government of important provinces; and,
if authority was not to be brought into contempt, they deserved at
least a show of outward respect. Cicero lived to desire their friendship,
to affect a value for them, and to regret his violence; but they had
consented to his exile; and careless of decency, and oblivious of the
chances of the future, he used his opportunity to burst out upon them
in language in which the foulest ruffian in the streets would have
scarcely spoken of the first magistrates of the Republic. Piso
and Gabinius, he said, were thieves, not consuls. They had been friends
of Catiline, and had been enemies to himself, because he had baffled the
conspiracy. Piso could not pardon the death of Cethegus. Gabinius
regretted in Catiline himself the loss of his lover.[7] Gabinius, he
said, had been licentious in his youth; he had ruined his fortune;
he had supplied his extravagance by pimping; and had escaped his
creditors only by becoming tribune.

"Behold him," Cicero said, "as he appeared when consul at a meeting
called by the arch-thief Clodius, full of wine, and sleep, and fornication,
his hair moist, his eyes heavy, his cheeks flaccid, and declaring,
with a voice thick with drink, that he disapproved of putting
citizens to death without trial." [8] As to Piso, his best recommendation
was a cunning gravity of demeanor, concealing mere vacuity. Piso
knew nothing--neither law, nor rhetoric, nor war, nor his fellow-men.
"His face was the face of some half-human brute." "He was like a
negro, a thing [_negotium_] without sense or savor, a Cappadocian
picked out of a drove in the slave-market." [9]
Cicero was not taking the best means to regain his influence in the
Senate by stooping to vulgar brutality. He cannot be excused by the
manners of the age; his violence was the violence of a fluent orator
whose temper ran away with him, and who never resisted the temptation
to insult an opponent. It did not answer with him; he thought he was
to be chief of the Senate, and the most honored person in the State
again; he found that he had been allowed to return only to be surrounded
by mosquitoes whose delight was to sting him, while the Senate listened
with indifference or secret amusement. He had been promised the restoration
of his property; but he had a suit to prosecute before he
could get it.

Clodius had thought to make sure of his Roman palace by dedicating it
to "Liberty." Cicero challenged the consecration. It was referred to
the College of Priests, and the College returned a judgment in Cicero's
favor. The Senate voted for the restoration. They voted sums for the
rebuilding both of the palace on the Palatine Hill and of the other
villas, at the public expense. But the grant in Cicero's opinion was a
stingy one. He saw too painfully that those "who had clipped his wings
did not mean them to grow again." [10] Milo and his gladiators were not
sufficient support, and if he meant to recover his old power he found
that he must look for stronger allies.
Pompey had not used him well; Pompey had promised to defend him from
Clodius, and Pompey had left him to his fate. But by going with Pompey
he could at least gall the Senate. An opportunity offered, and he caught
at it. There was a corn famine in Rome. Clodius had promised the people
cheap bread, but there was no bread to be had. The hungry mob howled
about the senate-house, threatening fire and massacre. The great
capitalists and contractors were believed to be at their old work. There
was a cry, as in the "pirate" days, for some strong man to see to them
and their misdoings.
Pompey was needed again.

He had been too much forgotten, and with Cicero's help a decree was
carried which gave Pompey control over the whole corn trade of the Empire
for five years.

This was something, and Pompey was gratified; but without an army Pompey
could do little against the roughs in the streets, and Cicero's
house became the next battle-ground. The Senate had voted it to its owner
again, and the masons and carpenters were set to work; but the
sovereign people had not been consulted. Clodius was now but a private
citizen; but private citizens might resist sacrilege if the magistrates
forgot their duty. He marched to the Palatine with his gang. He drove
out the workmen, broke down the walls, and wrecked the adjoining house,
which belonged to Cicero's brother Quintus. The next day he set on
Cicero himself in the Via Sacra, and nearly murdered him, and he
afterward tried to burn the house of Milo.

Consuls and tribunes did not interfere. They were, perhaps, frightened.
The Senate professed regret, and it was proposed to prosecute Clodius;
but his friends were too strong, and it could not be done. Could Cicero
have wrung his neck, as he had wrung the necks of Lentulus and Cethegus,
Rome and he would have had a good deliverance. Failing this, he might
wisely have waited for the law, which in time must have helped him.

But he let himself down to Clodius's level. He railed at him in the
Curia as he had railed at Gabinius and Piso. He ran over his history;
he taunted him with incest with his sister, and with filthy relations
with vulgar millionaires. He accused him of having sold himself to
Catiline, of having forged wills, murdered the heirs of estates and
stolen their property, of having murdered officers of the treasury and
seized the public money, of having outraged gods and men, decency,
equity, and law; of having suffered every abomination and committed every
crime of which human nature was capable. So Cicero spoke in Clodius's
own hearing and in the hearing of his friends. It never occurred to him
that if half these crimes could be proved, a commonwealth in which such
a monster could rise to consequence was not a commonwealth at all,
but a frightful mockery which he and every honest man were called on to
abhor. Instead of scolding and flinging impotent filth, he should have
withdrawn out of public life when he could only remain in it among
such companions, or should have attached himself with all his soul
to those who had will and power to mend it.

Clodius was at this moment the popular candidate for the aedileship,
the second step on the road to the consulship. He was the favorite of the
mob.
He was supported by his brother Appius Claudius, the praetor, and the
_clientèle_ of the great Claudian family; and Cicero's denunciations
of him had not affected in the least his chances of success. If Clodius
was to be defeated, other means were needed than a statement in the
Senate that the aspirant to public honors was a wretch unfit to
live. The election was fixed for the 18th of November, and was to be held
in the Campus Martius. Milo and his gladiators took possession of
the polling- place in the night, and the votes could not be taken. The
Assembly met the next day in the Forum, but was broken up by violence,
and Clodius had still to wait. The political witch-dance was at
its height and Cicero was in his glory. "The elections," he wrote to
Atticus, "will not, I think, be held; and Clodius will be prosecuted by
Milo unless he is first killed.
Milo will kill him if he falls in with him. He is not afraid to do it,
and he says openly that he will do it. He is not frightened at the
misfortune which fell on me. He is not the man to listen to traitorous
friends or to trust indolent patricians." [11]
With recovered spirits the Senate began again to attack the
laws of Caesar and Clodius as irregular; but they were met with
the difficulty which Clodius had provided.

Cato had come back from Cyprus, delighted with his exploit and
with himself, and bringing a ship-load of money with him for the public
treasury. If the laws were invalidated by the disregard of Bibulus and
the signs of the sky, then the Cyprus mission had been invalid also,
and Cato's fine performance void. Caesar's grand victories, the news of
which was now coming in, made it inopportune to press the matter
farther; and just then another subject rose, on which the optimates
ran off like hounds upon a fresh scent.

Ptolemy of Cyprus had been disposed of. Ptolemy Auletes had been preserved
on the throne of Egypt by subsidies to the chiefs of the Senate. But
his subjects had been hardly taxed to raise the money. The Cyprus affair
had further exasperated them, and when Ptolemy laid on fresh impositions
the Alexandrians mutinied and drove him out. His misfortunes being
due to his friends at Rome, he came thither to beg the Romans to replace
him. The Senate agreed unanimously that he must be restored to his
throne. But then the question rose, who should be the happy person
who was to be the instrument of his reinstatement? Alexandria was
rich. An enormous fine could be exacted for the rebellion, besides
what might be demanded from Ptolemy's gratitude. No prize so splendid had
yet been offered to Roman avarice, and the patricians quarrelled
over it like jackals over a bone.

Lentulus Spinther, the late consul, was now Governor of Cilicia; Gabinius
was Governor of Syria; and each of these had their advocates. Cicero
and the respectable conservatives were for Spinther; Pompey was for
Gabinius.
Others wished Pompey himself to go; others wished for Crassus.

[Sidenote: B.C. 56.] Meanwhile, the poor Egyptians themselves claimed a
right to be heard in protest against the reimposition upon them of a
sovereign who had made himself abhorred. Why was Ptolemy to be forced
on them? A hundred of the principal Alexandrians came to Italy with a
remonstrance; and had they brought money with them they might have had
a respectful hearing. But they had brought none or not enough, and
Ptolemy, secure of his patrons' support, hired a party of banditti, who
set on the deputation when it landed, and killed the greater part of
its members. Dion, the leader of the embassy, escaped for a time. There
was still a small party among the aristocracy (Cato and Cato's followers)
who had a conscience in such things; and Favonius, one of them, took
up Dion's cause. Envoys and allied sovereigns or provinces, he said,
were continually being murdered. Noble lords received hush-money, and
there had been no inquiry. Such things happened too often, and ought to
be stopped. The Senate voted decently to send for Dion and examine him.
But Favonius was privately laughed at as "Cato's ape;" the unfortunate
Dion was made away with, and Pompey took Ptolemy into his own house
and openly entertained him there. Pompey would himself perhaps have
undertaken the restoration, but the Senate was jealous. His own
future was growing uncertain; and eventually, without asking for a
consent which the Senate would have refused to give, he sent his guest
to Syria with a charge to his friend Gabinius to take him back on his
own responsibility.[12]
The killing of envoys and the taking of hush-money by senators were,
as Favonius had said, too common to attract much notice; but the
affair of Ptolemy, like that of Jugurtha, had obtained an infamous
notoriety.

The Senate was execrated. Pompey himself fell in public esteem. His
overseership of the granaries had as yet brought in no corn. He had
been too busy over the Egyptian matter to attend to it. Clearly
enough there would now have been a revolution in Rome, but for the
physical force of the upper classes with their bands of slaves and
clients.

The year of Milo's tribunate being over, Clodius was chosen aedile without
further trouble; and, instead of being the victim of a prosecution,
he at once impeached Milo for the interruption of the Comitia on the
18th of November. Milo appeared to answer on the 2d of February; but
there was another riot, and the meeting was broken up. On the 6th the
court was again held. The crowd was enormous. Cicero happily has left
a minute account of the scene. The people were starving, the corn question
was pressing. Milo presented himself, and Pompey came forward on the
Rostra to speak. He was received with howls and curses from Clodius's
hired ruffians, and his voice could not be heard for the noise. Pompey
held on undaunted, and commanded occasional silence by the weight of his
presence.
Clodius rose when Pompey had done, and rival yells went up from the
Milonians. Yells were not enough; filthy verses were sung in chorus
about Clodius and Clodia, ribald bestiality, delightful to the ears
of "Tully." Clodius, pale with anger, called out, "Who is murdering the
people with famine?" A thousand throats answered, "Pompey!" "Who wants
to go to Alexandria?" "Pompey!" they shouted again. "And whom do you
want to go?" "Crassus!" they cried. Passion had risen too high for
words.

The Clodians began to spit on the Milonians. The Milonians drew swords and
cut the heads of the Clodians. The working men, being unarmed, got the
worst of the conflict; and Clodius was flung from the Rostra. The Senate
was summoned to call Pompey to account. Cicero went off home, wishing
to defend Pompey, but wishing also not to offend the "good" party, who
were clamorous against him. That evening nothing could be done. Two days
after the Senate met again; Cato abused Pompey, and praised Cicero much
against Cicero's will, who was anxious to stand well with Pompey.
Pompey accused Cato and Crassus of a conspiracy to murder him. In
fact, as Cicero said, Pompey had just then no friend in any party.
The mob was estranged from him, the noble lords hated him, the Senate
did not like him, the patrician youth insulted him, and he was driven
to bring up friends from the country to protect his life. All sides
were mustering their forces in view of an impending fight.[13]
It would be wasted labor to trace minutely the particulars of so miserable
a scene, or the motives of the principal actors in it--Pompey, bound
to Caesar by engagement and conviction, yet jealous of his
growing fame, without political conviction of his own, and only
conscious that his weight in the State no longer corresponded to his
own estimate of his merits--Clodius at the head of the starving mob,
representing mere anarchy, and nourishing an implacable hate against
Cicero--Cicero, anxious for his own safety, knowing now that he
had made enemies of half the Senate, watching how the balance of
factions would go, and dimly conscious that the sword would have to decide
it, clinging, therefore, to Pompey, whose military abilities his
civilian ignorance considered supereminent-- Cato, a virtuous fanatic,
narrow, passionate, with a vein of vanity, regarding all ways as wrong
but his own, and thinking all men who would not walk as he prescribed
wicked as well as mistaken--the rest of the aristocracy scuffling for
the plunder of Egypt, or engaged in other enterprises not more creditable--the
streets given over to the factions-- the elections the alternate prize
of bribery or violence, and consulates and praetorships falling to men
more than half of whom, if Cicero can be but moderately believed,
deserved to be crucified. Cicero's main affection was for Titus Annius
Milo, to whom he clung as a woman will cling to a man whose strength
she hopes will support her weakness. Milo, at least, would revenge
his wrongs upon Clodius. Clodius, Cicero said even in the Senate,
was Milo's predestined victim.[14] Titus Annius knew how an armed
citizen who burnt temples and honest men's houses ought to be dealt
with.The
reason why the things relating to science, to experience, and to art,
which are called natural, constitute their seat or basis, is, because
they conjoin themselves closely with the five bodily senses; and these
senses are the ultimates on which the interior principles of the mind
and the inmost principles of the soul, as it were sit or rest. Now as
the things relating to the church, which are called spiritual, reside in
the inmost principles, and as the things residing in the inmost
principles constitute the head, and the succeeding things beneath them,
which are called things of a civil nature, constitute the body, and the
ultimate things, which are called natural, constitute the feet; it is
evident, that while these three kinds of things follow in their order, a
man is a perfect man; for in such case there is an influx like that of
the things of the head into those of the body, and through the body into
the feet; thus spiritual things flow into things of a civil nature, and
through them into natural things. Now as spiritual things are in the
light of heaven, it is evident that by their light they illustrate the
things which succeed in order, and by their heat, which is love, animate
them; and when this is the case the man has wisdom. As wisdom is a
principle of life, and thence of reason, as was said above, it may be
asked, What is wisdom as a principle of life? In a summary view, it is
to shun evils, because they are hurtful to the soul, to the public weal,
and to the body; and it is to do goods, because they are profitable to
the soul, to the public weal, and to the body. This is the wisdom which
is meant by the wisdom to which conjugial love binds itself; for it
binds itself thereto by shunning the evil of adultery as the pest of the
soul, of the public weal, and of the body: and as this wisdom originates
in spiritual things relating to the church, it follows, that conjugial
love is according to the state of the church; because it is according to
the state of wisdom with men. Hereby also is understood what has been
frequently said above, that so far as a man becomes spiritual, so far he
is principled in love truly conjugial; for a man becomes spiritual by
means of the spiritual things of the church." More observations
respecting the wisdom with which conjugial love conjoins itself, may be
seen below, n. 163-165.

131. XII. AND AS THE CHURCH IS FROM THE LORD, CONJUGIAL LOVE IS ALSO
FROM HIM. As this follows as a consequence from what has been said
above, it is needless to dwell upon the confirmation of it. Moreover,
that love truly conjugial is from the Lord, all the angels of heaven
testify; and also that this love is according to their state of wisdom,
and that their state of wisdom is according to the state of the church
with them. That the angels of heaven thus testify, is evident from the
MEMORABLE RELATIONS annexed to the chapters, containing an account of
what was seen and heard in the spiritual world.

       *       *       *       *       *

132. To the above I shall add TWO MEMORABLE RELATIONS. FIRST. I was
conversing on a time with two angels, one from the eastern heaven and
the other from the southern; who perceiving me engaged in meditation on
the arcana of wisdom relating to conjugial love, said, "Are you at all
acquainted with the SCHOOLS OF WISDOM in our world?" I replied, "Not as
yet." And they said, "There are several; and those who love truths from
spiritual affection, or because they are truths, and because they are
the means of attaining wisdom, meet together on a given signal, and
investigate and decide upon such questions as require deeper
consideration than common." They then took me by the hand, saying,
"Follow us; and you shall see and hear: to-day the signal for meeting is
given." I was led across a plain to a hill; and lo! at the foot of the
hill was an avenue of palms continued even to its summit, which we
entered and ascended: on the summit or top of the hill was a grove, the
trees of which, on an elevated plot of ground, formed as it were a
theatre, within which was a court paved with various colored stones:
around it in a square form were placed seats, on which the lovers of
wisdom were seated; and in the middle of the theatre was a table, on
which was laid a sealed paper. Those who sat on the seats invited us to
sit down where there was room: and I replied, "I was led here by two
angels to see and hear, and not to sit down." Then those two angels went
into the middle of the court to the table, and broke the seal of the
paper, and read in the presence of those who were seated the arcana of
wisdom written on the paper, which were now to be investigated and
explained. They were written by angels of the third heaven, and let down
upon the table. There were three arcana, FIRST, What is the image of
God, and what the likeness of God, into which man (_homo_) was created?
SECOND, Why is not a man born into the knowledge of any love, when yet
beasts and birds, from the highest to the lowest, are born into the
knowledge of all their loves? THIRD, What is signified by the tree of
life, and what by the tree of the knowledge of good and evil, and what
by eating thereof? Underneath was written, Collect your opinions on
these three questions into one decision, and write it on a new piece of
paper, and lay it on this table, and we shall see it: if the decision,
on examination, appear just and reasonable, each of you shall receive a
prize of wisdom. Having read the contents of the paper, the two angels
withdrew, and were carried up into their respective heavens.

Then those who sat on the seats began to investigate and explain the
arcana proposed to them, and delivered their sentiments in order; first
those who sat on the north, next those on the west, afterwards those on
the south, and lastly those on the east. They began with the first
subject of inquiry, WHAT IS THE IMAGE OF GOD, AND WHAT THE LIKENESS OF
GOD, INTO WHICH MAN WAS CREATED? But before they proceeded, these words
were read in the presence of them all out of the book of creation, "_God
said, Let us make man into OUR IMAGE, according to OUR LIKENESS: and God
created man into HIS IMAGE; into the IMAGE OF GOD created he him_," Gen.
i. 26, 27. "_In the day that God created man, into the LIKENESS OF GOD
made he him_," Gen. v. 1. Those who sat on the north spoke first,
saying, "The image of God and the likeness of God are the two lives
breathed into man by God, which are the life of the understanding; for
it is written, '_Jehovah God breathed into Adam's nostril the soul of
LIVES; and man became a living soul_,' Gen. ii. 7; into the nostrils
denotes into the perception, that the will of good and the understanding
of truth, and thereby the soul of lives, was in him; and since life from
God was breathed into him, the image and likeness of God signify
integrity derived from wisdom and love, and from justice and judgment in
him." These sentiments were favored by those who sat to the west; only
they added, that the state of integrity then breathed in from God is
continually breathed into every man since; but that it is a man as in a
receptacle; and a man, as he is a receptacle, is an image and likeness
of God. After this, the third in order, who were those who were seated
on the south, delivered their sentiments as follows: "An image of God
and a likeness of God are two distinct things; but in man they are
united from creation; and we see, as from an interior light, that the
image of God maybe destroyed by man, but not the likeness of God. This
appears as clear as the day from this consideration, that Adam retained
the likeness of God after that he had lost the image of God; for it is
written after the curse, '_Behold the man is as one of us, knowing good
and evil_,' Gen. iii. 22; and afterwards he is called a likeness of God,
and not an image of God, Gen. v. 1. But we will leave to our associates
who sit on the east, and are thence in superior light, to say what is
properly meant by an image of God, and what by a likeness of God." And
then, after silence was obtained, those who sat on the east arose from
their seats, and looked up to the Lord, and afterwards sat down again,
and thus began: "An image of God is a receptacle of God; and since God
is love itself and wisdom itself, an image of God is a receptacle of
love and wisdom from God in it; but a likeness of God is a perfect
likeness and full appearance, as if love and wisdom are in a man, and
thence altogether as his; for a man has no other sensation than that he
loves and is wise from himself, or that he wills good and understands
truth from himself; when nevertheless nothing of all this is from
himself, but from God. God alone loves from himself and is wise from
himself; because God is love itself and wisdom itself. The likeness or
appearance that love and wisdom, or good and truth, are in a man as his,
causes a man to be a man, and makes him capable of being conjoined to
God, and thereby of living to eternity: from which consideration it
follows, that a man is a man from this circumstance, that he can will
good and understand truth altogether as from himself, and yet know and
believe that it is from God; for as he knows and believes this, God
places his image in him, which could not be if he believed it was from
himself and not from God." As they said this, being overpowered with
zeal derived from the love of truth, they thus continued: "How can a man
receive any thing of love and wisdom, and retain it, and reproduce it,
unless he feel it as his own? And how can there be conjunction with God
by love and wisdom, unless a man have some reciprocity of conjunction?
For without such a reciprocity conjunction is impossible; and the
reciprocity of conjunction is, that a man should love God, and enjoy the
things which are of God, as from himself, and yet believe that it is
from God. Also, how can a man live eternally, unless he be conjoined to
an eternal God? Consequently how can a man be a man without such a
likeness of God in him?" These words met with the approbation of the
whole assembly; and they said, Let this conclusive decision be made from
them, "A man is a recipient of God, and a recipient of God is an image
of God; and since God is love itself and wisdom itself, a man is a
recipient of those principles; and a recipient becomes an image of God
in proportion to reception; and a man is a likeness of God from this
circumstance, that he feels in himself that the things which are of God
are in him as his own; but still from that likeness he is only so far an
image of God, as he acknowledges that love and wisdom, or good and
truth, are not his own in him, and consequently are not from him, but
are only in God, and consequently from God."

133. After this, they entered upon the next subject of discussion, WHY
IS NOT A MAN BORN INTO THE KNOWLEDGE OF ANY LOVE, WHEN YET BEASTS AND
BIRDS, FROM THE HIGHEST TO THE LOWEST, ARE BORN INTO THE KNOWLEDGE OF
ALL THEIR LOVES? They first confirmed the truth of the proposition by
various considerations; as in regard to a man, that he is born into no
knowledge, not even into the knowledge of conjugial love; and they
inquired, and were informed by attentive examiners, that an infant from
connate knowledge cannot even move itself to the mother's breast, but
must be moved thereto by the mother or nurse; and that it knows only how
to suck, and this in consequence of habit acquired by continual suction
in the womb; and that afterwards it does not know how to walk, or to
articulate any human expression; no, nor even to express by its tone of
voice the affection of its love, as the beasts do: and further, that it
does not know what is salutary for it in the way of food, as all the
beasts do, but catches at whatever falls in its way, whether it be clean
or unclean, and puts it into its mouth. The examiners further declared,
that a man without instruction is an utter stranger to every thing
relating to the sexes and their connection; and that neither virgins nor
young men have any knowledge thereof without instruction from others,
notwithstanding their being educated in various sciences: in a word, a
man is born corporeal as a worm; and he remains such, unless he learns
to know, to understand, and to be wise, from others. After this, they
gave abundant proofs that beasts, from the highest to the lowest, as the
animals of the earth, the fowls of the air, reptiles, fishes, the small
creatures called insects, are born into all the knowledges of the loves
of their life, as into the knowledge of all things relating to
nourishment, to habitation, to the love of the sex and prolification,
and to the rearing of their young. This they continued by many wonderful
things which they recollected to have seen, heard, and read, in the
natural world, (so they called our world, in which they had formerly
lived), in which not representative but real beasts exist. When the
truth of the proposition was thus fully proved they applied all the
powers of their minds to search out and discover the ends and causes
which might serve to unfold and explain this arcanum; and they all said,
that the divine wisdom must needs have ordained these things, to the end
that a man, may be a man, and a beast a beast; and thus, that the
imperfection of a man at his birth becomes his perfection, and the
perfection of a beast at his birth is his imperfection.

134. Those on the NORTH then began to declare their sentiments, and
said, "A man is born without knowledges, to the end that he may receive
them all; whereas supposing him to be born into knowledges, he could not
receive any but those into which he was born, and in this case neither
could he appropriate any to himself; which they illustrated by this
comparison: a man at his first birth is like ground in which no seeds
are implanted, but which nevertheless is capable of receiving all seeds,
and of bringing them forth and fructifying them; whereas a beast is like
ground already sown, and tilled with grasses and herbs, which receives
no other seeds than what are sown in it, or if it received any it would
choke them. Hence it is, that a man requires many years to bring him to
maturity of growth; during which time he is capable of being cultivated
like ground, and of bringing forth as it were grain, flowers, and trees
of every kind; whereas a beast arrives at maturity in a few years,
during which no cultivation can produce any thing in him but what is
born with him." Afterwards, those on the WEST delivered their
sentiments, and said, "A man is not born knowledge, as a beast is; but
he is born faculty and inclination; faculty to know, and inclination to
love; and he is born faculty not only to know but also to understand and
be wise; he is likewise born the most perfect inclination to love not
only the things relating to self and the world, but also those relating
to God and heaven; consequently a man, by birth from his parents, is an
organ which lives merely by the external senses, and at first by no
internal senses, to the end that he may successively become a man, first
natural, afterwards rational, and lastly spiritual; which could not be
the case if he was born into knowledges and loves, as the beasts are:
for connate knowledges and affections set bounds to that progression;
whereas connate faculty and inclination set no such bounds; therefore a
man is capable of being perfected, in knowledge, intelligence, and
wisdom to eternity." Those on the SOUTH next took up the debate, and
expressed their sentiments as follows: "It is impossible for a man to
take any knowledge from himself, since he has no connate knowledge; but
he may take it from others; and as he cannot take any knowledge from
himself, so neither can he take any love; for where there is no
knowledge there is no love; knowledge and love being undivided
companions, and no more capable of separation than will and
understanding, or affection and thought; yea, no more than essence and
form: therefore in proportion as a man takes knowledge from others, so
love joins itself thereto as its companion. The universal love which
joins itself is the love of knowing, of understanding, and of growing
wise; this love is peculiar to man alone, and not to any beast, and
flows in from God. We agree with our companions from the west, that a
man is not born into any love, and consequently not into any knowledge;
but that he is only born into an inclination to love, and thence into a
faculty to receive knowledges, not from himself but from others, that
is, by others: we say, by others, because neither have these received
any thing of knowledge from themselves, but from God. We agree also with
our companions to the north, that a man is first born as ground, in
which no seeds are sown, but which is capable of receiving all seeds,
both useful and hurtful. To these considerations we add, that beasts are
born into natural loves, and thereby into knowledges corresponding to
them; and that still they do not know, think, understand, and enjoy any
knowledges, but are led through them by their loves, almost as blind
persons are led through the streets by dogs, for as to understanding
they are blind; or rather like people walking in their sleep, who act
from the impulse of blind knowledge, the understanding being asleep."
Lastly, those on the EAST declared their sentiments, and said, "We agree
with our brethren in the opinions they have delivered, that a man knows
nothing from himself, but from and by others, to the end that he may
know and acknowledge that all knowledge, understanding, and wisdom, is
from God; and that a man cannot otherwise be conceived, born, and
generated of the Lord, and become an image and likeness of him; for he
becomes an image of the Lord by acknowledging and believing, that he has
received and does receive from the Lord all the good of love and
charity, and all the truth of wisdom and faith, and not the least
portion thereof from himself; and he becomes a likeness of the Lord by
his being sensible of those principles in himself, as if they were from
himself. This he is sensible of, because he is not born into knowledges,
but receives them; and what he receives, appears to him as if it was
from himself. This sensation is given him by the Lord, to the end that
he may be a man and not a beast; since by willing, thinking, loving,
knowing, understanding, and growing wise, as from himself, he receives
knowledges, and exalts them into intelligence, and by the use thereof
into wisdom; thus the Lord conjoins man to himself, and man conjoins
himself to the Lord. This could not have been the case, unless it had
been provided by the Lord, that man should be born in total ignorance."
When they had finished speaking, it was the desire of all present, that
a conclusion should be formed from the sentiments which had been
expressed; and they agreed upon the following: "That a man is born into
no knowledge, to the end that he may come into all knowledge, and may
advance into intelligence, and thereby into wisdom, and that he is born
into no love, to the intent that he may come into all love, by
application of the knowledges from intelligence, and into love to the
Lord by love towards his neighbour, and may thereby be conjoined to the
Lord, and by such conjunction be made a man, and live for ever."

135. After this they took the paper, and read the third subject of
investigation, which was, WHAT IS DIGNIFIED BY THE TREE OF LIFE, WHAT BY
THE TREE OF THE KNOWLEDGE OF GOOD AND EVIL, AND WHAT BY EATING THEREOF?
and all the others intreated as a favor, that those who were from the
east would unfold this arcanum, because it required a more than ordinary
depth of understanding, and because those who were from the east are in
flaming light, that is, in the wisdom of love, this wisdom being
understood by the garden of Eden, in which those two trees were placed.
They said, "We will declare our sentiments; but as man does not take any
thing from himself, but from the Lord, therefore we will speak from him;
but yet from ourselves as of ourselves:" and then they continued, "A
tree signifies a man, and the fruit thereof the good of life; hence the
tree of life signifies a man living from God, or God living in man; and
since love and wisdom, and charity and faith, or good and truth,
constitute the life of God in man, therefore these are signified by the
tree of life, and hence man has eternal life: the like is signified by
the tree of life, of which it will be given to eat, Rev. ii. 7; chap
xxii. 2, 14. The tree of the knowledge of good and evil signifies a man
believing that he lives from himself and not from God; thus that in man
love and wisdom, charity and faith, that is, good and truth, are his and
not God's; believing this, because he thinks and wills, and speaks and
acts to all appearance, as from himself: and as a man from this faith
persuades himself, that God has implanted himself, or infused his divine
into him, therefore the serpent said, '_God doth know, in the day that
ye eat of the fruit of that tree, your eyes will be opened, and ye will
be as God, knowing good and evil_,' Gen. iii. 5. Eating of those trees
signifies reception and appropriation; eating of the tree of life, the
reception of life eternal, and eating of the tree of the knowledge of
good and evil, the reception of damnation; therefore also both Adam and
his wife, together with the serpent, were cursed: the serpent means the
devil as to self-love and the conceit of his own intelligence. This love
is the possessor of that tree; and the men who are in conceit, grounded
in that love, are those trees. Those persons, therefore, are grievously
mistaken who believe that Adam was wise and did good from himself, and
that this was his state of integrity; when yet Adam himself was cursed
by reason of that belief; for this is signified by eating of the tree of
the knowledge of good and evil; therefore he then fell from the state of
integrity in which he had been, in consequence of believing that he was
wise and did good from God and not at all from himself; for this is
meant by eating of the tree of life. The Lord alone, when he was in the
world, was wise and did good from himself; because the essential divine
from birth was in him and was his; therefore also from his own ability
he was made the Redeemer and Saviour." From all these considerations
they came to this conclusion, "That by the tree of life, and the tree of
the knowledge of good and evil, and eating thereof, is signified that
life for man is God in him, and that in this case he has heaven and
eternal life; but that death for man is the persuasion and belief, that
life for him is not God but self; whence he has hell and eternal death,
which is condemnation."

136. After this they looked into the paper left by the angels upon the
table, and saw written underneath, COLLECT YOUR OPINIONS ON THESE THREE
QUESTIONS INTO ONE DECISION. Then they collected them, and saw that they
cohered in one series, and that the series or decision was this, "That
man is created to receive love and wisdom from God, and yet to all
appearance as from himself; and this for the sake of reception and
conjunction: and that therefore a man is not born into any love, or into
any knowledge, and also not into any ability of loving and growing wise
from himself; therefore if he ascribes all the good of love and truth of
wisdom to God, he becomes a living man; but if he ascribes them to
himself, he becomes a dead man." These words they wrote on a new piece
of paper, and placed it on the table: and lo! on a sudden the angels
appeared in bright light, and carried the paper away into heaven; and
after it was read there, those who sat on the seats heard these words
from thence, "Well, well;" and instantly there appeared a single angel
as it were flying from heaven, with two wings about his feet, and two
about his temples, having in his hand prizes, consisting of robes, caps,
and wreaths of laurel; and he alighted on the ground, and gave those who
sat on the north robes of an opaline color; those who sat on the west
robes of scarlet color; those who sat on the south caps whose borders
were ornamented with bindings of gold and pearls, and which on the left
side upwards were set with diamonds cut in the form of flowers; but to
those who sat to the east he gave wreaths of laurel, intermixed with
rubies and sapphires. Then all of them, adorned with their respective
prizes, went home from the school of wisdom; and when they shewed
themselves to their wives, their wives came to meet them, being
distinguished also with ornaments presented to them from heaven; at
which the husbands wondered.

137. THE SECOND MEMORABLE RELATION. On a time when I was meditating on
conjugial love, lo! there appeared at a distance two naked infants with
baskets in their hands, and turtledoves flying around them; and on a
nearer view, they seemed as if they were naked, handsomely ornamented
with garlands; chaplets of flowers decorated their heads, and wreaths of
lilies and roses of a hyacinthine blue, hanging obliquely from the
shoulders to the loins, adorned their bosoms; and round about both of
them there was as it were a common band woven of small leaves
interspersed with olives. But when they came nearer, they did not appear
as infants, or naked, but as two persons in the prime of their age,
wearing cloaks and tunics of shining silk, embroidered with the most
beautiful flowers: and when they were near me, there breathed forth from
heaven through them a vernal warmth, attended with an odoriferous
fragrance, like what arises from gardens and fields in the time of
spring. They were two married partners from heaven, and they accosted
me; and because I was musing on what I had just seen, they inquired,
"What did you see?" And when I told them that at first they appeared to
me as naked infants, afterwards as infants decorated with garlands, and
lastly as grown up persons in embroidered garments, and that instantly I
experienced a vernal warmth with its delights, they smiled pleasantly,
and said, "In the way we did not seem to ourselves as infants, or naked,
or adorned with garlands, but constantly in the same appearance which we
now have: thus at a distance was represented our conjugial love; its
state of innocence by our seeming like naked infants, its delights by
garlands, and the same delights now by our cloaks and tunics being
embroidered with flowers; and as you said that, as we approached, a
vernal warmth breathed on you, attended with its pleasant fragrance as
from a garden, we will explain to you the reason of all this." They
said, "We have now been married partners for ages, and constantly in the
prime of our age in which you now see us: our first state was like the
first state of a virgin and a youth, when they enter into consociation
by marriage; and we then believed, that this state was the very
essential blessedness of our life; but we were informed by others in our
heaven, and have since perceived ourselves, that this was a state of
heat not tempered by light; and that it is successively tempered, in
proportion as the husband is perfected in wisdom, and the wife loves
that wisdom in the husband; and that this is effected by and according
to the uses which each, by mutual aid, affords to society; also that
delights succeed according to the temperature of heat and light; or of
wisdom and its love. The reason why on our approach there breathed on
you as it were a vernal warmth, is, because conjugial love and that
warmth in our heaven act in unity; for warmth with us is love; and the
light, wherewith warmth is united, is wisdom; and use is as it were the
atmosphere which contains each in its bosom. What are heat and light
without that which contains them? In like manner, what are love and
wisdom without their use? In such case there is nothing conjugial in
them, because the subject is wanting in which they should exist to
produce it. In heaven where there is vernal warmth, there is love truly
conjugial; because the vernal principle exists only where warmth is
equally united to light, or where warmth and light are in equal
proportions; and it is our opinion, that as warmth is delighted with
light, and _vice versa_, so love is delighted with wisdom, and wisdom in
its turn with love." He further added, "With us in heaven there is
perpetual light, and on no occasion do the shades of evening prevail,
still less is there darkness; because our sun does not set and rise like
yours, but remains constantly in a middle altitude between the zenith
and the horizon, which, as you express it, is at an elevation of 45
degrees. Hence, the heat and light proceeding from our sun cause
perpetual spring, and a perpetual vernal warmth inspires those with whom
love is united with wisdom in just proportion; and our Lord, by the
eternal union of heat and light, breathes nothing but uses: hence also
come the germinations of your earth, and the connubial associations of
your birds and animals in the spring; for the vernal warmth opens their
interiors even to the inmost, which are called their souls, and affects
them, and communicates to them its conjugial principle, and causes their
principle of prolification to come into its delights, in consequence of
a continual tendency to produce fruits of use, which use is the
propagation of their kind. But with men (_homines_) there is a perpetual
influx of vernal warmth from the Lord; wherefore they are capable of
enjoying marriage delights at all times, even in the midst of winter;
for the males of the human race were created to be recipients of light,
that is, of wisdom from the Lord, and the females to be recipients of
heat, that is, of the love of the wisdom of the male from the Lord.
Hence then it is, that, as we approached, there breathed on you a vernal
warmth attended with an odoriferous fragrance, like what arises from
gardens and fields in the spring." As he said this, he gave me his right
hand, and conducted me to houses inhabited by married partners in a like
prime of their age with himself and his partner; and said, "These wives,
who now seem like young virgins, were in the world infirm old women; and
their husbands, who now seem in the spring of youth, were in the world
decrepit old men; and all of them were restored by the Lord to this
prime of their age, because they mutually loved each other, and from
religious motives shunned adulteries as enormous sins:" and he added,
"No one knows the blessed delights of conjugial love, unless he rejects
the horrid delights of adultery; and no one can reject these delights,
unless he is under the influence of wisdom from the Lord; and no one is
under the influence of wisdom from the Lord, unless he performs uses
from the love of uses." I also saw on this occasion their house
utensils, which were all in celestial forms, and glittered with gold,
which had a flaming appearance from the rubies with which it was
studded.

       *       *       *       *       *

ON THE CHASTE PRINCIPLE AND THE NON-CHASTE.

138. As we are yet only at the entrance of our subject respecting
conjugial love specifically considered, and as conjugial love cannot be
known specifically, except in a very indistinct and obscure manner,
unless its opposite, which is the unchaste principle, also in some
measure appear; and as this unchaste principle appears in some measure,
or in a shade, when the chaste principle is described together with the
non-chaste, non-chastity being only a removal of what is unchaste from
what is chaste; therefore we will now proceed to treat of the chaste
principle and the non-chaste. But the unchaste principle, which is
altogether opposite to the chaste, is treated of in the latter part of
this work, entitled ADULTEROUS LOVE AND ITS SINFUL PLEASURES, where it
is fully described with all its varieties. But what the unchaste
principle is, and what the non-chaste, and with what persons each of
them prevails, shall be illustrated in the following order: I. _The
chaste principle and the non-chaste are predicated only of marriages and
of such things as relate to marriages._ II. _The chaste principle is
predicated only of monogamical marriages, or of the marriage of one man
with one wife._ III. _The Christian conjugial principle alone is
chaste._ IV. _Love truly conjugial is essential chastity._ V. _All the
delights of love truly conjugial, even the ultimate, are chaste._ VI.
_With those who are made spiritual by the Lord, conjugial love is more
and more purified and rendered chaste._ VII. _The chastity of marriage
exists by a total renunciation of whoredoms from a principle of
religion._ VIII. _Chastity cannot he predicated of infants, or of boys
and girls, or of young men and virgins before they feel in themselves
the love of the sex._ IX. _Chastity cannot be predicated of eunuchs so
born, or of eunuchs so made._ X. _Chastity cannot be predicated of those
who do not believe adulteries to be evils in regard to religion; and
still less of those who do not believe them to be hurtful to society._
XI. _Chastity cannot be predicated of those who abstain from adulteries
only for various external reasons._ XII. _Chastity cannot be predicated
of those who believe marriages to be unchaste._ XIII. _Chastity cannot
be predicated of those who have renounced marriage by vows of perpetual
celibacy, unless there be and remain in them the love of a life truly
conjugial._ XIV. _A state of marriage is to be preferred to a state of
celibacy._ We will now proceed to an explanation of each article.

139. I. THE CHASTE PRINCIPLE AND THE NON-CHASTE ARE PREDICATED ONLY OF
MARRIAGES AND OF SUCH THINGS AS RELATE TO MARRIAGES. The reason of this
is, because, as will be shewn presently, love truly conjugial is
essential chastity; and the love opposite to it, which is called
adulterous, is essential unchastity; so far therefore as any one is
purified from the latter love, so far he is chaste; for so far the
opposite, which is destructive of chastity, is taken away; whence it is
evident that the purity of conjugial love is what is called chastity.
Nevertheless there is a conjugial love which is not chaste, and yet it
is not unchastity; as is the case with married partners, who, for
various external reasons, abstain from the effects of lasciviousness so
as not to think about them; howbeit, if that love is not purified in
their spirits, it is still not chaste; its form is chaste, but it has
not in it a chaste essence.

140. The reason why the chaste principle and the non-chaste are
predicated of such things as relate to marriages, is, because the
conjugial principle is inscribed on both sexes from inmost principles to
ultimates; and a man's quality as to his thoughts and affections, and
consequently as to his bodily actions and behaviour, is according
thereto. That this is the case, appears more evidently from such as are
unchaste. The unchaste principle abiding in their minds is heard from
the tone of their voice in conversation, and from their applying
whatever is said, even though it be chaste, to wanton and loose ends;
(the tone of the voice in conversation is grounded in the
will-affection, and the conversation itself is grounded in the thought
of the understanding;) which is a proof that the will and the
understanding, with everything belonging to them, consequently the whole
mind, and thence everything belonging to the body, from inmost
principles to ultimates, abound with what is unchaste. I have been
informed by the angels, that, with the greatest hypocrites, the unchaste
principle is perceivable from hearing their conversation, however
chastely they may talk, and also is made sensible from the sphere that
issues from them; which is a further proof that unchastity resides in
the inmost principles of their minds, and thence in the inmost
principles of their bodies, and that the latter principles are
exteriorly covered like a shell painted with figures of various colors.
That a sphere of lasciviousness issues forth from the unchaste, is
manifest from the statutes prescribed to the sons of Israel, ordaining
that everything should be unclean that was touched even by the hand of
those who were defiled by such unchaste persons. From these
considerations it may be concluded that the case is similar in regard to
the chaste, viz., that with them everything is chaste from inmost
principles to ultimates, and that this is an effect of the chastity of
conjugial love. Hence it is, that in the world it is said, "To the pure
all things are pure, and to the defiled all things are defiled."

141. The awful silence of the British virgil in the North Sea
is unbroken still."
_Newcastle Daily Journal._
We are glad to see our old friend VIRGIL spoken of as British. It is, no
doubt, the writer's forcible way of indicating Italy's sympathy.

OUR WAR MAP.

I have bought a war map. My newspaper told me to, and I did. It
came yesterday with a host of little coloured flags on pins.

Helen and I surveyed it critically.

"Why, it's only an ordinary map of Europe," she said disgustedly.

"It won't be," I said, "when we've stuck the flags in."
I removed a picture and pinned the map to the wall.

"First of all there's Belgrade," I said.

"Where?" asked Helen eagerly.

"Er, er--somewhere round here, I know.... I do believe they've forgotten
to put it in...."
Gladys (who is only ten) found it for us eventually, and we arranged a
very fine battle there with a river in between.

The Meuse was easier. We infested its banks with our hosts and fixed a
splendid array of troops all along the Franco-German frontier.

Next we invaded Germany and Austria from the other side with several
Russian armies and put some local troops to meet them. Without
boasting, I think I may say the result was very pretty. But to our
dismay we found we had a number of armies left. Helen said they must fight
somewhere.

"You can't keep all those troops idle," she said. "Look at the waste
of good material."
"That's true," I admitted. "Perhaps my newspaper can help."
It did indeed contain enough rumours of battles to dispose of all our
flags and a few dozen besides, but at the same time it urged me
to accept unofficial statements with the greatest reserve. Mr. F. E.
SMITH, it declared (it was a Liberal print; such are the vicissitudes
of war) was the only reliable authority. Helen and I decided we could
accept information from him alone. But Mr.

SMITH gave us no help. I was worried for the moment, I admit; here
were all these armies left in the envelope with nowhere to go
to.
Then I had an inspiration such as comes to a man but seldom in a
lifetime. The Fates should decide.
I pushed the furniture out of the way, led Helen to the other side
of the room, blindfolded her, and thrust a British army into her
hand.
"The idea is to walk across the room without looking and stick it
somewhere on the map," I explained. "Scandinavia and the Peninsula
are out of bounds until we hear further from the KAISER. If you hit
them you have another prod."
Helen planted her army near Moscow. I took a Servian flag and planted
it in the North Sea.
The game was very exciting while it lasted. I consider that I won
it by placing a French force in the environs of Vienna, an
extraordinarily good move. My newspaper would have been glad of the
suggestion, I am sure.
Gladys was handicapped by her height, but, taking everything into
consideration, I think she arranged some quite nice struggles in
Sicily and the Principality of Monaco.
Wilkinson came in after dinner. He collects the latest rumours and
edits them really well.V. ALL THE DELIGHTS OF LOVE TRULY CONJUGIAL, EVEN THE ULTIMATE, ARE
CHASTE. This follows from what has been above explained, that love truly
conjugial is essential chastity, and from the considerations that
delights constitute its life. That the delights of this love ascend and
enter heaven, and in the way pass through the delights of the heavenly
loves, in which the angels of heaven are principled; also, that they
conjoin themselves with the delights of the conjugial love of the
angels, has been mentioned above. Moreover, I have heard it declared by
the angels, that they perceive those delights with themselves to be
exalted and filled, while they ascend from chaste marriages on the
earths: and when some by-standers, who were unchaste, inquired
concerning the ultimate delights whether they were chaste, they assented
and said, "How should it be otherwise? Are not these the delights of
true conjugial love in their fulness?" The origin, nature, and quality
of the delights of this love, may be seen above, n. 69: and also in the
MEMORABLE RELATIONS, especially those which follow.

145. VI. WITH THOSE WHO ARE MADE SPIRITUAL BY THE LORD, CONJUGIAL LOVE
IS MORE AND MORE PURIFIED AND RENDERED CHASTE. The reasons for this are,
1. Because the first love, by which is meant the love previous to the
nuptials and immediately after them, partakes somewhat of the love of
the sex, and thus of the ardor belonging to the body not as yet
moderated by the love of the spirit. 2. Because a man (_homo_) from
natural is successively made spiritual; for he becomes spiritual in
proportion as his rational principle, which is the medium between heaven
and the world, begins to drive a soul from influx out of heaven, which
is the case so far as it is affected and delighted with wisdom;
concerning which wisdom see above, n. 130; and in proportion as this is
effected, in the same proportion his mind is elevated into a superior
_aura_, which is the continent of celestial light and heat, or, what is
the same, of the wisdom and love in which the angels are principled; for
heavenly light acts in unity with wisdom, and heavenly heat with love;
and in proportion as wisdom and the love thereof increase, with married
pairs, in the same proportion conjugial love is purified with them; and
as this is effected successively, it follows that conjugial love is
rendered more and more chaste. This spiritual purification may be
compared with the purification of natural spirits, which is effected by
the chemists, and is called defecation, rectification, castigation,
acution, decantation, and sublimation; and wisdom purified may be
compared with alcohol, which is a highly rectified spirit. 3. Now as
spiritual wisdom in itself is of such a nature that it becomes more and
more warmed with the love of growing wise, and by virtue of this love
increases to eternity; and as this is effected in proportion as it is
perfected by a kind of defecation, castigation, rectification, acution,
decantation, and sublimation, and this by elevating and abstracting the
intellect from the fallacies of the senses, and the will from the
allurements of the body; it is evident that conjugial love, whose parent
is wisdom, is in like manner rendered successively more and more pure,
and thereby chaste. That the first state of love between married
partners is a state of heat not yet tempered by light; but that it is
successively tempered in proportion as the husband is perfected in
wisdom, and the wife loves it in her husband, may be seen in the
MEMORABLE RELATION, n. 137.

146. It is however to be observed, that there is no conjugial love
altogether chaste or pure either with men (_homines_) or with angels;
there is still somewhat not chaste or not pure which adjoins or subjoins
itself thereto; but this has a different origin from that which gives
birth to what is unchaste: for with the angels the chaste principle is
above and the non-chaste beneath, and there is as it were a door with a
hinge interposed by the Lord, which is opened by determination, and is
carefully prevented from standing open, lest the one principle should
pass into the other, and they should mix together: for the natural
principle of man from his birth is defiled and fraught with evils;
whereas his spiritual principle is not so, because its birth is from the
Lord, for it is regeneration; and regeneration is a successive
separation from the evils to which a man is naturally inclined. That no
love with either men or angels is altogether pure, or can be pure; but
that the end, purpose, or intention of the will, is principally regarded
by the Lord: and that therefore so far as a man is principled in a good
end, purpose, or intention, and perseveres therein, so far he is
initiated into purity, and so far he advances and approaches towards
purity, may be seen above, n. 71.

147. VII. THE CHASTITY OF MARRIAGE EXISTS BY A TOTAL RENUNCIATION OF
WHOREDOMS FROM A PRINCIPLE OF RELIGION. The reason of this is, because
chastity is the removal of unchastity; it being a universal law, that so
far as any one removes evil, so far a capacity is given for good to
succeed in its place; and further, so far as evil is hated, so far good
is loved; and also _vice versa_; consequently, so far as whoredom is
renounced, so far the chastity of marriage enters. That conjugial love
is purified and rectified according to the renunciation of whoredoms,
every one sees from common perception as soon as it is mentioned and
heard; thus before confirmation; but as all have not common perception,
it is of importance that the subject should also be illustrated in the
way of proof by such considerations as may tend to confirm it. These
considerations are, that conjugial love grows cold as soon as it is
divided, and this coldness causes it to perish; for the heat of unchaste
love extinguishes it, as two opposite heats cannot exist together, but
one must needs reject the other and deprive it of its potency. Whenever
therefore the heat of conjugial love begins to acquire a pleasant
warmth, and from a sensation of its delights to bud and flourish, like
an orchard and garden in spring; the latter from the vernal temperament
of light and heat from the sun of the natural world, but the former from
the vernal temperament of light and heat from the sun of the spiritual
world.

148. There is implanted in every man (_homo_) from creation, and
consequently from his birth, an internal and an external conjugial
principle; the internal is spiritual, and the external natural: a man
comes first into the latter, and as he becomes spiritual, he comes into
the former. If therefore he remains in the external or natural conjugial
principle, the internal or spiritual conjugial principle is veiled or
covered, until he knows nothing respecting it; yea, until he calls it an
ideal shadow without a substance: but if a man becomes spiritual, he
then begins to know something respecting it, and afterwards to perceive
something of its quality, and successively to be made sensible of its
pleasantness, agreeableness, and delights; and in proportion as this is
the case, the veil or covering between the external and internal, spoken
of above, begins to be attenuated, and afterwards as it were to melt,
and lastly to be dissolved and dissipated. When this effect takes place,
the external conjugial principle remains indeed; but it is continually
purged and purified from its dregs by the internal; and this, until the
external becomes as it were the face of the internal, and derives its
delight from the blessedness which is in the internal, and at the same
time its life, and the delights of its potency. Such is the renunciation
of whoredoms, by which the chastity of marriage exists. It may be
imagined, that the external conjugial principle, which remains after the
internal has separated itself from it, or it from itself, resembles the
external principle not separated: but I have heard from the angels that
they are altogether unlike; for that the external principle in
conjunction with the internal, which they called the external of the
internal, was void of all lasciviousness, because the internal cannot be
lascivious, but only be delighted chastely; and that it imparts the same
disposition to its external, wherein it is made sensible of its own
delights: the case is altogether otherwise with the external separated
from the internal; this they said, was lascivious in the whole and in
every part. They compared the external conjugial principle derived from
the internal to excellent fruit, whose pleasant taste and flavor
insinuate themselves into its outward rind, and form this into
correspondence with themselves; they compared it also to a granary,
whose store is never diminished, but is continually recruited according
to its consumption; whereas they compared the external principle,
separate from the internal, to wheat in a winnowing machine, when it is
put in motion about its axis; in which case the chaff only remains,
which is dispersed by the wind; so it is with the conjugial principle,
unless the adulterous principle be renounced.

149. The reason why the chastity of marriage does not exist by the
renunciation of whoredoms, unless it be made from a principle of
religion, is, because a man (_homo_) without religion is not spiritual,
but remains natural; and if the natural man renounces whoredoms, still
his spirit does not renounce them; and thus, although it seems to
himself that he is chaste by such renunciation, yet nevertheless
unchastity lies inwardly concealed like corrupt matter in a wound only
outwardly healed. That conjugial love is according to the state of the
church with man, may be seen above n. 130. More on this subject may be
seen in the exposition of article XI.

150. VIII. CHASTITY CANNOT BE PREDICATED OF INFANTS, OR OF BOYS AND
GIRLS, OR OF YOUNG MEN AND VIRGINS BEFORE THEY FEEL IN THEMSELVES THE
LOVE OF THE SEX. This is because the chaste principle and the unchaste
are predicated only of marriages, and of such things as relate to
marriages, as may be seen above, n. 139; and of those who know nothing
of the things relating to marriage, chastity is not predicable; for it
is as it were nothing relating to them; and nothing cannot be an object
either of affection or thought: but after this nothing there arises
something, when the first motion towards marriage is felt, which is the
love of the sex. That virgins and young men, before they feel in
themselves the love of the sex, are commonly called chaste, is owing to
ignorance of what chastity is.

151. XI. CHASTITY CANNOT BE PREDICATED OF EUNUCHS SO BORN, OR OF EUNUCHS
SO MADE. Eunuchs so born are those more especially with whom the
ultimate of love is wanting from birth: and as in such case the first
and middle principles are without a foundation on which to stand, they
have therefore no existence; and if they exist, the persons in whom they
exist have no concern to distinguish between the chaste principle and
the unchaste, each being indifferent to them; but of these persons there
are several distinctions. The case is nearly the same with eunuchs so
made as with some eunuchs so born; but eunuchs so made, as they are both
men and women, cannot possibly regard conjugial love any otherwise than
as a phantasy, and the delights thereof as idle stories. If they have
any inclination, it is rendered mute, which is neither chaste nor
unchaste: and what is neither chaste nor unchaste, derives no quality
from either the one or the other.

152. X. CHASTITY CANNOT BE PREDICATED OF THOSE WHO DO NOT BELIEVE
ADULTERIES TO BE EVILS IN REGARD TO RELIGION; AND STILL LESS OF THOSE
WHO DO NOT BELIEVE THEM TO BE HURTFUL TO SOCIETY. The reason why
chastity cannot be predicated of such is, because they neither know what
chastity is nor even that it exists; for chastity relates to marriage,
as was shewn in the first article of this section. Those who do not
believe adulteries be evil in regard to religion, regard even marriages
as unchaste; whereas religion with married pairs constitutes their
chastity; thus such persons have nothing chaste in them, and therefore
it is in vain to talk to them of chastity; these are confirmed
adulterers: but those who do not believe adulteries to be hurtful to
society, know still less than the others, either what chastity is or
even that it exists; for they are adulterers from a determined purpose:
if they say that marriages are less unchaste than adulteries, they say
so merely with the mouth, but not with the heart, because marriages with
them are cold, and those who speak from such cold concerning chaste
heat, cannot have an idea of chaste heat in regard to conjugial love.
The nature and quality of such persons, and of the ideas of their
thought, and hence of the interior principles of their conversation,
will be seen in the second part of this work,--ADULTEROUS LOVE AND ITS
SINFUL PLEASURES.

153. XI. CHASTITY CANNOT BE PREDICATED OF THOSE WHO ABSTAIN FROM
ADULTERIES ONLY FOR VARIOUS EXTERNAL REASONS. Many believe that the mere
abstaining from adulteries in the body is chastity; yet this is not
chastity, unless at the same time there is an abstaining in spirit. The
spirit of man (_homo_), by which is here meant his mind as to affections
and thoughts, constitutes the chaste principle and the unchaste, for
hence it flows into the body, the body being in all cases such as the
mind or spirit is. Hence it follows, that those who abstain from
adulteries in the body, without being influenced from the spirit are not
chaste; neither are those chaste who abstain from them in spirit as
influenced from the body. There are many assignable causes which make a
man desist from adulteries in the body, and also in the spirit as
influenced from the body; but still, he that does not desist from them
in the body as influenced from the spirit, is unchaste; for the Lord
says, "_That whosoever looketh upon another's woman, so as to lust after
her, hath already committed adultery with her in his heart_," Matt. v.
28. It is impossible to enumerate all the causes of abstinence from
adulteries in the body only, they being various according to states of
marriage, and also according to states of the body; for there are some
persons who abstain from them from fear of the civil law and its
penalties; some from fear of the loss of reputation and thereby of
honor; some from fear of diseases which may be thereby contracted; some
from fear of domestic quarrels on the part of the wife, whereby the
quiet of their lives may be disturbed; some from fear of revenge on the
part of the husband or relations; some from fear of chastisement from
the servants of the family; some also abstain from motives of poverty,
avarice, or imbecility, arising either from disease, from abuse, from
age, or from impotence. Of these there are some also, who, because they
cannot or dare not commit adultery in the body, condemn adulteries in
the spirit; and thus they speak morally against adulteries, and in favor
of marriages; but such person, unless in spirit they call adulteries
accursed, and this from a religious principle in the spirit, are still
adulterers; for although they do not commit them in the body, yet they
do in the spirit; wherefore after death, when they become spirits, they
speak openly in favor of them. From these considerations it is manifest,
that even a wicked person may shun adulteries as hurtful; but that none
but a Christian can shun them as sins. Hence then the truth of the
proposition is evident, that chastity cannot be predicated of those who
abstain from adulteries merely for various external reasons.

154. XII. CHASTITY CANNOT BE PREDICATED OF THOSE WHO BELIEVE MARRIAGES
TO BE UNCHASTE. These, like the persons spoken of just above, n. 152, do
not know either what chastity is, or even that it exists; and in this
respect they are like those who make chastity to consist merely in
celibacy, of whom we shall speak presently.

155. XIII. CHASTITY CANNOT BE PREDICATED OF THOSE WHO HAVE RENOUNCED
MARRIAGE BY VOWS OF PERPETUAL CELIBACY, UNLESS THERE BE AND REMAIN IN
THEM THE LOVE OF A LIFE TRULY CONJUGIAL. The reason why chastity cannot
be predicated of these, is, because after a vow of perpetual celibacy,
conjugial love is renounced; and yet it is of this love alone that
chastity can be predicated: nevertheless there still remains an
inclination to the sex implanted from creation, and consequently innate
by birth; and when this inclination is restrained and subdued, it must
needs pass away into heat, and in some cases into a violent burning,
which, in rising from the body into the spirit, infests it, and with
some persons defiles it; and there may be instances where the spirit
thus defiled may defile also the principles of religion, casting them
down from their internal abode, where they are in holiness, into things
external, where they become mere matters of talk and gesture; therefore
it was provided by the Lord, that celibacy should have place only with
those who are in external worship, as is the case with all who do not
address themselves to the Lord, or read the Word. With such, eternal
life is not so much endangered by vows of celibacy attended with
engagements to chastity, as it is with those who are principled in
internal worship: moreover, in many instances that state of life is not
entered upon from any freedom of the will, many being engaged therein
before they attain to freedom grounded in reason, and some in
consequence of alluring worldly motives. Of those who adopt that state
with a view to have their minds disengaged from the world, that they may
be more at leisure to apply themselves to divine things, those only are
chaste with whom the love of a life truly conjugial either preceded that
state or followed it, and with whom it remains; for the love of a life
truly conjugial is that alone of which chastity is predicated. Wherefore
also, after death, all who have lived in monasteries are at length freed
from their vows and set at liberty, that, according to the interior vows
and desires of their love, they may be led to choose a life either
conjugial or extra-conjugial: if in such case they enter into conjugial
life, those who have loved also the spiritual things of divine worship
are given in marriage in heaven; but those who enter into
extra-conjugial life are sent to their like, who dwell on the confines
of heaven. I have inquired of the angels, whether those who have devoted
themselves to works of piety, and given themselves up entirely to divine
worship, and who thus have withdrawn themselves from the snares of the
world and the concupiscences of the flesh, and with this view have vowed
perpetual virginity, are received into heaven, and there admitted among
the blessed to enjoy an especial portion of happiness according to their
faith. To this the angels replied, that such are indeed received into
heaven; but when they are made sensible of the sphere of conjugial love
there, they become sad and fretful, and then, some of their own accord,
some by asking leave, and some from being commanded, depart and are
dismissed, and when they are out of that heaven, a way is opened for
them to their consociates, who had been in a similar state of life in
the world; and then from being fretful they become cheerful, and rejoice
together.

156. XIV. A STATE OF MARRIAGE IS TO BE PREFERRED TO A STATE OF CELIBACY.
This is evident from what has been said above respecting marriage and
celibacy. A state of marriage is to be preferred because it is a state
ordained from creation; because it originates in the marriage of good
and truth; because it corresponds with the marriage of the Lord and the
church; because the church and conjugial love are constant companions;
because its use is more excellent than all the other uses of the things
of creation, for thence according to order is derived the increase of
the human race, and also of the angelic heaven, which is formed from the
human race: moreover, marriage constitutes the completeness of a man
(_homo_); for by it he becomes a complete man, as will be shewn in the
following chapter. All these things are wanting in celibacy. But if the
proposition be taken for granted, that a state of celibacy is preferable
to a state of marriage, and if this proposition be left to the mind's
examination, to be assented to and established by confirming proofs,
then the conclusion must be, that marriages are not holy, neither can
they be chaste; yea, that chastity in the female sex belongs only to
those, who abstain from marriage and vow perpetual virginity: and
moreover, that those who have vowed perpetual celibacy are understood by
the eunuchs _who make themselves eunuchs for the kingdom of heaven's
sake_, Matt. xix. 12; not to mention other conclusions of a like nature;
which, being grounded in a proposition that is not true, are also not
true. The eunuchs who make themselves eunuchs for the kingdom of
heaven's sake, are spiritual eunuchs, who are such as in marriages
abstain from the evils of whoredoms: that Italian eunuchs are not meant,
is evident.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Transcriber's Note: The out-of-order section numbers which follow are
in the original text, as are the asterisks which do not seem to indicate
footnotes.]

151.* To the above I shall add TWO MEMORABLE RELATIONS. FIRST. As I was
going home from the school of wisdom (concerning which, see above, n.
132), I saw in the way an angel dressed in blue. He joined me and walked
by my side, and said, "I see that you are come from the school of
wisdom, and are made glad by what you heard there; and as I perceive
that you are not a full inhabitant of this world, because you are at the
same time in the natural world, and therefore know nothing of our
Olympic gymnasia, where the ancient _sophi_ meet together, and by the
information they collect from every new comer, learn what changes and
successions wisdom has undergone and is still undergoing in your world;
if you are willing I will conduct you to the place where several of
those ancient _sophi_ and their sons, that is, their disciples, dwell."
So he led me to the confines between the north and east; and while I was
looking that way from a rising ground, lo! I saw a city, and on one side
of it two small hills; that which was nearer to the city being lower
than the other. "That city," said he, "is called Athens, the lower hill
Parnassus, and the higher Helicon. They are so called, because in the
city and around it dwell the wise men who formerly lived in Greece, as
Pythagoras, Socrates, Aristippus, Xenophon, with their disciples and
scholars." On my asking him concerning Plato and Aristotle, he said,
"They and their followers dwell in another region, because they taught
principles of rationality which relate to the understanding; whereas the
former taught morality which relates to the life." He further informed
me, that it was customary at times to depute from the city of Athens
some of the students to learn from the literati of the Christians, what
sentiments they entertain at this day respecting God, the creation of
the universe, the immortality of the soul, the relative state of men and
beasts, and other subjects of interior wisdom: and he added, that a
herald had that day announced an assembly, which was a token that the
emissaries had met with some strangers newly arrived from the earth, who
had communicated some curious information. We then saw several persons
going from the city and its suburbs, some having their heads decked with
wreaths of laurel, some holding palms in their hands, some with books
under their arms, and some with pens under the hair of the left temple.
We mixed with the company, and ascended the hill with them; and lo! on
the top was an octagonal palace, which they called the Palladium, into
which we entered; within there were eight hexangular recesses, in each
of which was a book-case and a table: at these recesses were seated the
laureled _sophi_, and in the Palladium itself there were seats cut out
of the rock, on which the rest were seated. A door on the left was then
opened, through which the two strangers newly arrived from the earth
were introduced; and after the compliments of salutation were paid, one
of the laureled _sophi_ asked them, "WHAT NEWS FROM THE EARTH?" They
replied, "This is news, that in forests there have been found men like
beasts, or beasts like men: from their face and body they were known to
have been born men, and to have been lost or left in the forests when
they were two or three years old; they were not able to give utterance
to any thought, nor could they learn to articulate the voice into any
distinct expression; neither did they know the food suitable for them as
the beasts do, but put greedily into their mouths whatever they found in
the forest, whether it was clean or unclean; besides many other
particulars of a like nature: from which some of the learned among us
have formed several conjectures and conclusions concerning the relative
state of men and beasts." On hearing this account, some of the ancient
_sophi_ asked, "What were the conjectures and conclusions formed from
the circumstances you have related?" The two strangers replied, "There
were several: but they may all be comprised under the following: 1. That
a man by nature, and also by birth, is more stupid and consequently
viler than any beast; and that he remains so, unless he is instructed.
2. That he is capable of being instructed, because he has learnt to
frame articulate sounds, and thence to speak, and thereby has begun to
express his thoughts, and this successively more and more perfectly
until he has been able to express the laws of civil society; several of
which are nevertheless impressed on beasts from their birth. 3. That
beasts have rationality like men. 4. Therefore, that if beasts could
speak, they would reason on any subject as acutely as men; a proof of
which is, that they think from reason and prudence just as men do. 5.
That the understanding is only a modification of light from the sun; the
heat co-operating by means of ether, so that it is only an activity of
interior nature; and that this activity may be so exalted as to appear
like wisdom. 6. That therefore it is ridiculous to believe that a man
lives after death any more than a beast; unless perchance, for some days
after his decease, in consequence of an exhalation of the life of the
body, he may appear as a mist under the form of a spectre, before he is
dissipated into nature; just as a shrub raised up from its ashes,
appears in the likeness of its own form. 7. Consequently that religion,
which teaches a life after death, is a mere device, in order to keep the
simple inwardly in bonds by its laws, as they are kept outwardly in
bonds by the laws of the state." To this they added, that "people of
mere ingenuity reason in this manner, but not so the intelligent:" and
they were asked, "How do the intelligent reason?" They said they had not
been informed; but they supposed that they must reason differently.

152.* On hearing this relation, all those who were sitting at the tables
exclaimed, "Alas! what times are come on the earth! What changes has
wisdom undergone? How is she transformed into a false and infatuated
ingenuity! The sun is set, and in his station beneath the earth is in
direct opposition to his meridian altitude. From the case here adduced
respecting such as have been left and found in forests, who cannot see
that an uninstructed man is such as here represented? For is not the
nature of his life determined by the nature of the instruction he
receives? Is he not born in a state of greater ignorance than the
beasts? Must he not learn to walk and to speak? Supposing he never
learnt to walk, would he ever stand upright? And if he never learnt to
speak, would he ever be able to express his thoughts? Is not every man
such as instruction makes him,--insane from false principles, or wise
from truths? and is not he that is insane from false principles,
entirely possessed with an imagination that he is wiser than he that is
wise from truths? Are there not instances of men who are so wild and
foolish, that they are no more like men than those who have been found
in forests? Is not this the case with such as have been deprived of
memory? From all these considerations we conclude, that a man without
instruction is neither a man nor a beast; but that he is a form, which
is capable of receiving in itself that which constitutes a man; and thus
that he is not born a man, but that he is made a man; and that a man is
born such a form as to be an organ receptive of life from God, to the
end that he may be a subject into which God may introduce all good, and,
by union with himself, may make him eternally blessed. We have perceived
from your conversation, that wisdom at this day is so far extinguished
or infatuated, that nothing at all is known concerning the relative
state of the life of men and of beasts; and hence it is that the state
of the life of man after death is not known: but those who are capable
of knowing this, and yet are not willing, and in consequence deny it, as
many Christians do, may fitly be compared to such as are found in
forests: not that they are rendered so stupid from a want of
instruction, but that they have rendered themselves so by the fallacies
of the senses, which are the darkness of truths."

153.* At that instant a certain person standing in the middle of the
Palladium, and holding in his hand a palm, said, "Explain, I pray, this
arcanum, How a man, created a form of God, could be changed into a form
of the devil. I know that the angels of heaven are forms of God and that
the angels of hell are forms of the devil, and that the two forms are
opposite to each other, the latter being insanities, the former wisdoms.
Tell me, therefore, how a man, created a form of God, could pass from
day into such night, as to be capable of denying God and life eternal."
To this the several teachers replied in order; first the Pythagoreans,
next the Socratics, and afterwards the rest: but among them there was a
certain Platonist, who spoke last; and his opinion prevailed, which was
to this effect; That the men of the saturnine or golden age knew and
acknowledged that they were forms receptive of life from God; and that
on this account wisdom was inscribed on their souls and hearts, and
hence they saw truth from the light of truth, and by truths perceived
good from the delight of the love thereof: but as mankind in the
following ages receded from the acknowledgement that all the truth of
wisdom and the consequent good of love belonging to them, continually
flowed in from God, they ceased to be habitations of God; and then also
discourse with God, and consociation with angels ceased: for the
interiors of their minds were bent from their direction, which had been
elevated upwards to God from God, into a direction more and more
oblique, outwardly into the world, and thereby to God from God through
the world, and at length inverted into an opposite direction, which is
downwards to self; and as God cannot be looked at by a man interiorly
inverted, and thereby averted, men separated themselves from God, and
were made forms of hell or devils. From these considerations it follows,
that in the first ages they acknowledged in heart and soul, that all the
good of love and the consequent true wisdom, were derived to them from
God, and also that they were God's in them: and thus that they were mere
recipients of life from God, and hence were called images of God, sons
of God, and born of God: but that in succeeding ages they did not
acknowledge this in heart and soul, but by a certain persuasive faith,
next by an historical faith, and lastly only with the mouth; and this
last kind of acknowledgement is no acknowledgement at all; yea, it is in
fact a denial at heart. From these considerations it may be seen what is
the quality of the wisdom which prevails at this day on the earth among
Christians, while they do not know the distinction between a man and a
beast, notwithstanding their being in possession of a written
revelation, whereby they may be inspired by God: and hence many believe,
that in case a man lives after death, a beast must live also; or because
a beast is not to live after death, neither will a man. Is not our
spiritual light, which enlightens the sight of the mind, become thick
darkness with them? and is not their natural light, which only
enlightens the bodily sight, become brightness to them?

154.* After this they all turned towards the two strangers, and thanked
them for their visit, and for the relation they had given, and entreated
them to go and communicate to their brethren what they had heard. The
strangers replied that they would endeavor to confirm their brethren in
this truth, that so far as they ascribe all the good of charity and the
truth of faith to the Lord, and not to themselves, so far they are men,
and so far they become angels of heaven.

155.* THE SECOND MEMORABLE RELATION. One morning I was awoke by some
delightful singing which I heard at a height above me, and in
consequence, during the first watch, which is internal, pacific, and
sweet, more than the succeeding part of the day, I was in a capacity of
being kept for some time in the spirit as it were out of the body, and
of attending carefully to the affection which was sung. The singing of
heaven is an affection of the mind, sent forth through the mouth as a
tune: for the tone of the voice in speaking, separate from the discourse
of the speaking, and grounded in the affection of love, is what gives
life to the speech. In that state I perceived that it was the affection
of the delights of conjugial love, which was made musical by wives in
heaven: that this was the case, I observed from the sound of the song,
in which those delights were varied in a wonderful manner. After this I
arose, and looked into the spiritual world; and lo! in the east, beneath
the sun, there appeared as it were a GOLDEN SHOWER. It was the morning
dew descending in great abundance, which, catching the sun's rays,
exhibited to my eyes the appearance of a golden shower. In consequence
of this I became fully awake, and went forth in the spirit, and asked an
angel who then happened to meet me, whether he saw a golden shower
descending from the sun? He replied, that he saw one whenever he was
meditating on conjugial love; and at the same time turning his eyes
towards the sun, he added, "That shower falls over a hall, in which are
three husbands with their wives, who dwell in the midst of an eastern
paradise. Such a shower is seen falling from the sun over that hall,
because with those husbands and wives there resides wisdom respecting
conjugial love and its delights; with the husbands respecting conjugial
love, and with the wives respecting its delights. But I perceive that
you are engaged in meditating on the delights of conjugial love: I will
therefore conduct you there, and introduce you to them." He led me
through paradisiacal scenery to houses built of olive wood, having two
cedar columns before the gate, and introduced me to the husbands, and
asked their permission for me to converse with them in the presence of
the wives. They consented, and called their wives. These looked into my
eyes most shrewdly; upon which I asked them, "Why do you do so?" They
said, "We can thereby discover exquisitely what is your inclination and
consequent affection, and your thought grounded in affection, respecting
the love of the sex; and we see that you are meditating intensely, but
still chastely, concerning it." And they added, "What do you wish us to
tell you on the subject?" I replied, "Tell me, I pray, something
respecting the delights of conjugial love." The husbands assented,
saying, "If you are so disposed, give them some information in regard to
those delights: their ears are chaste." They asked me, "Who taught you
to question us respecting the delights of that love? Why did you not
question our husbands?" I replied, "This angel, who accompanies me,
informed me, that wives are the recipients and sensories of those
delights, because they are born loves; and all delights are of love." To
this they replied with a smile, "Be prudent, and declare nothing of this
sort except ambiguously; because it is a wisdom deeply seated in the
hearts of our sex, and is not discovered to any husband, unless he be
principled in love truly conjugial. There are several reasons for this,
which we keep entirely to ourselves." Then the husbands said, "Our wives
know all the states of our minds, none of which are hid from them: they
see, perceive, and are sensible of whatever proceeds from our will. We,
on the other hand, know nothing of what passes with our wives. This
faculty is given to wives, because they are most tender loves, and as it
were burning zeals for the preservation of friendship and conjugial
confidence, and thereby of all the happiness of life, which they
carefully attend to, both in regard to their husbands and themselves, by
virtue of a wisdom implanted in their love, which is so full of
prudence, that they are unwilling to say, and consequently cannot say,
that they love, but that they are loved." I asked the wives, "Why are
you unwilling, and consequently cannot say so?" They replied, "If the
least hint of the kind were to escape from the mouth of a wife, the
husband would be seized with coolness, which would entirely separate him
from all communication with his wife, so that he could not even bear to
look upon her; but this is the case only with those husbands who do not
hold marriages to be holy, and therefore do not love their wives from
spiritual love: it is otherwise with those who do. In the minds of the
latter this love is spiritual, and by derivation thence in the body is
natural. We in this hall are principled in the latter love by derivation
from the former; therefore we trust our husbands with our secrets
respecting our delights of conjugial love." Then I courteously asked
them to disclose to me some of those secrets: they then looked towards a
window on the southern quarter, and lo! there appeared a white dove,
whose wings shone as if they were of silver, and its head was crested
with a crown as of gold: it stood upon a bough, from which there went
forth an olive; and while it was in the attempt to spread out its wings,
the wives said, "We will communicate something: the appearing of that
dove is a token that we may. Every man (_vir_)" they continued, "has
five senses, seeing, hearing, smelling, taste, and touch; but we have
likewise a sixth, which is the sense of all the delights of the
conjugial love of the husband; and this sense we have in the palms of
our hands, while we touch the breasts, arms, hands, or cheeks, of our
husbands, especially their breasts; and also while we are touched by
them. All the gladness and pleasantness of the thoughts of their minds
(_mentium_), all the joys and delights of their minds (_animarum_) and
all the festive and cheerful principles of their bosoms, pass from them
to us, and become perceptible, sensible, and tangible: we discern them
as exquisitely and distinctly as the ear does the tune of a song, and
the tongue the taste of dainties; in a word, the spiritual delights of
our husbands put on with us a kind of natural embodiment; therefore they
call us the sensory organs of chaste conjugial love, and thence its
delights. But this sixth sense of ours exists, subsists, persists, and
is exalted in the degree in which our husbands love us from wisdom and
judgement, and in which we in our turn love them from the same
principles in them. This sense in our sex is called in the heavens the
sport of wisdom with its love, and of love with its wisdom." From this
information I became desirous of asking further questions concerning the
variety of their delights. They said, "It is infinite; but we are
unwilling and therefore unable to say more; for the dove at our window,
with the olive branch under his feet, is flown away." I waited for its
return, but in vain. In the meantime I asked the husbands, "Have you a
like sense of conjugial love?" They replied, "We have a like sense in
general, but not in particular. We enjoy a general blessedness, delight,
and pleasantness, arising from the particulars of our wives; and this
general principle, which we derive from them, is serenely peaceful." As
they said this, lo! through the window there appeared a swan standing on
a branch of a fig-tree, which spread out his wings and flew away. On
seeing this, the husbands said, "This is a sign for us to be silent
respecting conjugial love: come again some other time, and perhaps you
may hear more." They then withdrew, and we took our leave.

       *       *       *       *       *

ON THE CONJUNCTION OF SOULS AND MINDS BY MARRIAGE, WHICH IS MEANT BY THE
LORD'S WORDS,--THEY ARE NO LONGER TWO, BUT ONE FLESH.

156.* That at creation there was implanted in the man and the woman an
inclination and also a faculty of conjunction as into a one, and that
this inclination and this faculty are still in man and woman, is evident
from the book of creation, and at the same time from the Lord's words.
In the book of creation, called GENESIS, it is written, "_Jehovah God
builded the rib, which he had taken from the man, into a woman, and
brought her to the man. And the man said, This now is bone of my bones,
and flesh of my flesh. She shall be called Woman, because she was taken
out of man; for this cause shall a man leave his father and his mother,
and shall cleave to his wife: and they shall be one flesh_," chap. ii.
22-24. The Lord also says in Matthew, "_Have ye not read, that he that
made them from the beginning, made them a male and a female, and said,
For this cause shall a man leave father and mother, and shall cleave to
his wife; and they TWO SHALL BECOME ONE FLESH? WHEREFORE THEY ARE NO
LONGER TWO, BUT ONE FLESH_," chap. xix. 4-6. From this it is evident,
that the woman was created out of the man (_vir_), and that each has an
inclination and faculty to reunite themselves into a one. That such
reunion means into one man (_homo_), is also evident from the book of
creation, where both together are called man (_homo_); for it is
written, "_In the day that God created man (homo), he created them a
male and a female, and called their name Man (homo)_," chap. v. 2. It is
there written, he called their name Adam; but Adam and man are one
expression in the Hebrew tongue: moreover, both together are called man
in the same book, chap. i. 27; chap. iii. 22-24. One flesh also
signifies one man; as is evident from the passages in the Word where
mention is made of all flesh, which signifies every man, as Gen. chap.
vi. 12, 13, 17, 19; Isaiah xl. 5, 6; chap. xlix. 26; chap. lxvi. 16, 23,
24; Jer. xxv. 31; chap, xxxii. 27; chap. xlv. 5; Ezek. xx. 48; chap.
xxi. 4, 5; and other passages. But what is meant by the man's rib, which
was builded into a woman; what by the flesh, which was closed up in the
place thereof, and thus what by bone of my bones, and flesh of my flesh;
and what by a father and a mother, whom a man (_vir_) shall leave after
marriage; and what by cleaving to a wife, has been shewn in the ARCANA
COELESTIA; in which work the two books, Genesis and Exodus, are
explained as to the spiritual sense. It is there proved that a rib does
not mean a rib,--nor flesh, flesh,--nor a bone, a bone,--nor cleaving
to, cleaving to; but that they signify spiritual things, which
correspond thereto, and consequently are signified thereby. That
spiritual things are understood, which from two make one man (_homo_),
is evident from this consideration, that conjugial love conjoins them,
and this love is spiritual. That the love of the man's wisdom is
transferred into the wife, has been occasionally observed above, and
will be more fully proved in the following sections: at this time it is
not allowable to digress from the subject proposed, which is concerning
the conjunction of two married partners into one flesh by a union of
souls and minds. This union we will elucidate by treating of it in the
following order. I. _From creation there is implanted in each sex a
faculty and inclination, whereby they are able and willing to be
conjoined together as it were into a one._ II. _Conjugial love conjoins
two souls, and thence two minds into a one._ III. _The will of the wife
conjoins itself with the understanding of the man, and thence the
understanding of the man conjoins itself with the will of the wife._ IV.
_The inclination to unite the man to herself is constant and perpetual
with the wife; but is inconstant and alternate with the man._ V.
_Conjunction is inspired into the man from the wife according to her
love, and is received by the man according to his wisdom._ VI. _This
conjunction is effected successively from the first days of marriage;
and with those who are principled in love truly conjugial, is effected
more and more thoroughly to eternity._ VII. _The conjunction of the wife
with the rational wisdom of the husband is effected from within, but
with this moral wisdom from without._ VIII. _For the sake of this
conjunction as an end, the wife has a perception of the affections of
the husband, and also the utmost prudence in moderating them._ IX.
_Wives conceal this perception with themselves, and hide it from their
husbands, for reasons of necessity, in order that conjugial love,
friendship, and confidence, and thereby the blessedness of dwelling
together, and the happiness of life may he secured._ X. _This perception
is the wisdom of the wife, and is not communicable to the man; neither
is the rational wisdom of the man communicable to the wife._ XI. _The
wife, from a principle of love, is continually thinking about the man's
inclination to her, with the purpose of joining him to herself: it is
otherwise with the man._ XII. _The wife conjoins herself to the man, by
applications to the desires of his will._ XIII. _The wife is conjoined
to her husband by the sphere of her life flowing from the love of him._
XIV. _The wife is conjoined to the husband by the appropriation of the
powers of his virtue; which however is effected according to their
mutual spiritual love._ XV. _Thus the wife receives in herself the image
of her husband, and thence perceives, sees, and is sensible of, his
affections._ XVI. _There are duties proper to the husband, and others
proper to the wife; and the wife cannot enter into the duties proper to
the husband, nor the husband into the duties proper to the wife, so as
to perform them aright._ XVII. _These duties, also, according to mutual
aid, conjoin the two into a one, and at the same time constitute one
house._ XVIII. _Married partners, according to these conjunctions,
become one man (homo) more and more._ XIX. _Those who are principled in
love truly conjugial, are sensible of their being a united man, and as
it were one flesh._ XX. _Love truly conjugial, considered in itself, is
a union of souls, a conjunction of minds, and an endeavor towards
conjunction in the bosoms and thence in the body._ XXI. _The states of
this love are innocence, peace, tranquillity, inmost friendship, full
confidence, and a mutual desire of mind and heart to do very good to
each other; and the states derived from these are blessedness,
satisfaction, delight, and pleasure; and from the eternal enjoyment of
these is derived heavenly felicity._ XXII. _These things can only exist
in the marriage of one man with one wife._ We proceed now to the
explanation of these articles.

157. I. FROM CREATION THERE IS IMPLANTED IN EACH SEX A FACULTY AND
INCLINATION, WHEREBY THEY ARE ABLE AND WILLING TO BE JOINED TOGETHER, AS
IT WERE INTO A ONE. That the woman was taken out of the man, was shewn
just above from the book of creation; hence it follows, that there is in
each sex a faculty and inclination to join themselves together into a
one; for that which is taken out of anything, derives and retains its
constituent principle, from the principle proper to the thing whence it
was taken; and as this derived principle is of a similar nature with
that from which it was derived, it seeks after a reunion; and when it is
reunited, it is as in itself when it is in that from whence it came, and
_vice versa_. That there is a faculty of conjunction of the one sex with
the other, or that they are capable of being united, is universally
allowed; and also that there is an inclination to join themselves the
one with the other; for experience supplies sufficient confirmation in
both cases.

158. II. CONJUGIAL LOVE CONJOINS TWO SOULS, AND THENCE TWO MINDS, INTO A
ONE. Every man consists of a soul, a mind, and a body. The soul is his
inmost, the mind his middle, and the body his ultimate constituent. As
the soul is a man's inmost principle, it is, from its origin, celestial;
as the mind is his middle principle, it is, from its origin, spiritual;
and as the body is his ultimate principle, it is, from its origin,
natural. Those things, which, from their origin, are celestial and
spiritual, are not in space, but in the appearance of space. This also
is well known in the word; therefore it is said, that neither extension
nor place can be predicated of spiritual things. Since therefore spaces
are appearances, distances also and presences are appearances. That the
appearances of distances and presences in the spiritual world are
according to proximities, relationships, and affinities of love, has
been frequently pointed out and confirmed in small treatises respecting
that world. These observations are made, in order that it may be known
that the souls and minds of men are not in space like their bodies;
because the former, as was said above, from their origin, are celestial
and spiritual; and as they are not in space, they may be joined together
as into a one, although their bodies at the same time are not so joined.
This is the case especially with married partners, who love each other
intimately: but as the woman is from the man, and this conjunction is a
species of reunion, it may be seen from reason, that it is not a
conjunction into a one, but an adjunction, close and near according to
the love, and approaching to contact with those who are principled in
love truly conjugial. This adjunction may be called spiritual dwelling
together; which takes place with married partners who love each other
tenderly, however distant their bodies may be from each other. Many
experimental proofs exist, even in the natural world, in confirmation of
these observations. Hence it is evident, that conjugial love conjoins
two souls and minds into a one.

159. III. THE WILL OF THE WIFE CONJOINS ITSELF WITH THE UNDERSTANDING OF
THE MAN, AND THENCE THE UNDERSTANDING OF THE MAN WITH THE WILL OF THE
WIFE. The reason of this is, because the male is born to become
understanding, and the female to become will, loving the understanding
of the male; from which consideration it follows, that conjugial
conjunction is that of the will of the wife with the understanding of
the man, and the reciprocal conjunction of the understanding of the man
with the will of the wife. Every one sees that the conjunction of the
understanding and the will is of the most intimate kind; and that it is
such, that the one faculty can enter into the other, and be delighted
from and in the conjunction.

160. IV. THE INCLINATION TO UNITE THE MAN TO HERSELF IS CONSTANT AND
PERPETUAL WITH THE WIFE, BUT INCONSTANT AND ALTERNATE WITH THE MAN. The
reason of this is, because love cannot do otherwise than love and unite
itself, in order that it may be loved in return, this being its very
essence and life; and women are born loves; whereas men, with whom they
unite themselves in order that they may be loved in return, are
receptions. Moreover love is continually efficient; being like heat,
flame, and fire, which perish if their efficiency is checked. Hence the
inclination to unite the man to herself is constant and perpetual with
the wife: but a similar inclination does not operate with the man
towards the wife, because the man is not love, but only a recipient of
love; and as a state of reception is absent or present according to
intruding cares, and to the varying presence or absence of heat in the
mind, as derived from various causes, and also according to the increase
and decrease of the bodily powers, which do not return regularly and at
stated periods, it follows, that the inclination to conjunction is
inconstant and alternate with men.

161. V. CONJUNCTION IS INSPIRED INTO THE MAN FROM THE WIFE ACCORDING TO
HER LOVE, AND IS RECEIVED BY THE MAN ACCORDING TO HIS WISDOM. That love
and consequent conjunction is inspired into the man by the wife, is at
this day concealed from the men; yea, it is universally denied by them;
because wives insinuate that the men alone love, and that they
themselves receive; or that the men are loves, and themselves
obediences: they rejoice also in heart when the men believe it to be so.
There are several reasons why they endeavour to persuade the men of
this, which are all grounded in their prudence and circumspection;
respecting which, something shall be said in a future part of this work,
particularly in the chapter ON THE CAUSES OF COLDNESS, SEPARATIONS, AND
DIVORCES BETWEEN MARRIED PARTNERS. The reason why men receive from their
wives the inspiration or insinuation of love, is, because nothing of
conjugial love, or even of the love of the sex, is with the men, but
only with wives and females. That this is the case, has been clearly
shewn me in the spiritual world. I was once engaged in conversation
there on this subject; and the men, in consequence of a persuasion
infused from their wives, insisted that they loved and not the wives;
but that the wives received love from them. In order to settle the
dispute respecting this arcanum, all the females, married and unmarried,
were withdrawn from the men, and at the same time the sphere of the love
of the sex was removed with them. On the removal of this sphere, the men
were reduced to a very unusual state, such as they had never before
perceived, at which they greatly complained. Then, while they were in
this state, the females were brought to them, and the wives to the
husbands; and both the wives and the other females addressed them in the
tenderest and most engaging manner; but they were cold to their
tenderness, and turned away, and said one to another, "What is all this?
what is a female?" And when some of the women said that they were their
wives, they replied, "What is a wife? we do not know you." But when the
wives began to be grieved at this absolutely cold indifference of the
men, and some of them to shed tears, the sphere of the love of the
female sex, and the conjugial sphere, which had for a time been
withdrawn from the men, was restored; and then the men instantly
returned into their former state, the lovers of marriage into their
state, and the lovers of the sex into theirs. Thus the men were
convinced, that nothing of conjugial love, or even of the love of the
sex, resides with them, but only with the wives and females.
Nevertheless, the wives afterwards from their prudence induced the men
to believe, that love resides with the men, and that some small spark of
it may pass from them into the wives. This experimental evidence is here
adduced, in order that it may be known, that wives are loves and men
recipients. That men are recipients according to their wisdom,
especially according to this wisdom grounded in religion, that the wife
only is to be loved, is evident from this consideration, that so long as
the wife only is loved, the love is concentrated; and because it is also
ennobled, it remains in its strength, and is fixed and permanent; and
that in any other case it would be as when wheat from the granary is
cast to the dogs, whereby there is scarcity at home.

162. VI. THIS CONJUNCTION IS EFFECTED SUCCESSIVELY FROM THE FIRST DAYS
OF MARRIAGE; AND WITH THOSE WHO ARE PRINCIPLED IN LOVE TRULY CONJUGIAL,
IT IS EFFECTED MORE AND MORE THOROUGHLY TO ETERNITY. The first heat of
marriage does not conjoin; for it partakes of the love of the sex, which
is the love of the body and thence of the spirit; and what is in the
spirit, as derived from the body, does not long continue; but the love
which is in the body, and is derived from the spirit, does continue. The
love of the spirit, and of the body from the spirit, is insinuated into
the souls and minds of married partners, together with friendship and
confidence. When these two (friendship and confidence) conjoin
themselves with the first love of marriage, there is effected conjugial
love, which opens the bosoms, and inspires the sweets of that love; and
this more and more thoroughly, in proportion as those two principles
adjoin themselves to the primitive love, and that love enters into them,
and _vice versa_.

163. VII. THE CONJUNCTION OF THE WIFE WITH THE RATIONAL WISDOM OF THE
HUSBAND IS EFFECTED FROM WITHIN, BUT WITH HIS MORAL WISDOM FROM WITHOUT.
That wisdom with men is two-fold, rational and moral, and that their
rational wisdom is of the understanding alone, and their moral wisdom is
of the understanding and the life together, may be concluded and seen
from mere intuition and examination. But in order that it may be known
what we mean by the rational wisdom of men, and what by their moral
wisdom, we will enumerate some of the specific distinctions. The
principles constituent of their rational wisdom are called by various
names; in general they are called knowledge, intelligence, and wisdom;
but in particular they are called rationality, judgement, capacity,
erudition, and sagacity; but as every one has knowledge peculiar to his
office, therefore they are multifarious; for the clergy, magistrates,
public officers, judges, physicians and chemists, soldiers and sailors,
artificers and laborers, husbandmen, &c., have each their peculiar
knowledge. To rational wisdom also appertain all the knowledge into
which young men are initiated in the schools, and by which they are
afterwards initiated into intelligence, which also are called by various
names, as philosophy, physics, geometry, mechanics, chemistry,
astronomy, jurisprudence, politics, ethics, history, and several others,
by which, as by doors, an entrance is made into things rational, which
are the ground of rational wisdom.

164. But the constituents of moral wisdom with men are all the moral
virtues, which have respect to life, and enter into it, and also all the
spiritual virtues, which flow from love to God and love towards our
neighbour, and centre in those loves. The virtues which appertain to the
moral wisdom of men are also of various kinds, and are called
temperance, sobriety, probity, benevolence, friendship, modesty,
sincerity, courtesy, civility, also carefulness, industry, quickness of
wit, alacrity, munificence, liberality, generosity, activity,
intrepidity, prudence and many others. Spiritual virtues with men are
the love of religion, charity, truth, conscience, innocence, and many
more. The latter virtues and also the former, may in general be referred
to love and zeal for religion, for the public good, for a man's country,
for his fellow-citizens, for his parents, for his married partner, and
for his children. In all these, justice and judgement have dominion;
justice having relation to moral, and judgement to rational wisdom.

165. The reason why the conjunction of the wife with the man's rational
wisdom is from within, is, because this wisdom belongs to the man's
understanding, and ascends into the light in which women are not and
this is the reason why women do not speak from that wisdom; but, when
the conversation of the men turns on subjects proper thereto, they
remain silent and listen. That nevertheless such subjects have place
with the wives from within, is evident from their listening thereto, and
from their inwardly recollecting what had been said, and favoring those
things which they had heard from their husbands. But the reason why the
conjunction of the wife with the moral wisdom of the man is from
without, is, because the virtues of that wisdom for the most part are
akin to similar virtues with the women, and partake of the man's
intellectual will, with which the will of the wife unites and
constitutes a marriage; and since the wife knows those virtues
appertaining to the man more than the man himself does, it is said that
the conjunction of the wife with those virtues is from without.

166. VIII. FOR THE SAKE OF THIS CONJUNCTION AS AN END, THE WIFE HAS A
PERCEPTION OF THE AFFECTIONS OF THE HUSBAND, AND ALSO THE UTMOST
PRUDENCE IN MODERATING THEM. That wives know the affections of their
husbands, and prudently moderate them, is among the arcana of conjugial
love which lie concealed with wives. They know those affections by three
senses, the sight, the hearing, and the touch, and moderate them while
their husbands are not at all aware of it. Now as the reasons of this
are among the arcana of wives, it does not become me to disclose them
circumstantially; but as it is becoming for the wives themselves to do
so, therefore four MEMORABLE RELATIONS are added to this chapter, in
which those reasons are disclosed by the wives: two of the RELATIONS are
taken from the three wives that dwelt in the hall, over which was seen
falling as it were a golden shower; and two from the seven wives that
were sitting in the garden of roses. A perusal of these RELATIONS will
unfold this arcanum.

167. IX. WIVES CONCEAL THIS PERCEPTION WITH THEMSELVES AND HIDE IT FROM
THEIR HUSBANDS, FOR REASONS OF NECESSITY, IN ORDER THAT CONJUGIAL LOVE,
FRIENDSHIP, AND CONFIDENCE, AND THEREBY THE BLESSEDNESS OF DWELLING
TOGETHER AND THE HAPPINESS OF LIFE MAY BE SECURED. The concealing and
hiding of the perception of the affections of the husband by the wives,
are said to be of necessity; because if they should reveal them, they
would cause a complete alienation of their husbands, both in mind and
body. The reason of this is, because there resides deep in the minds of
many men a conjugial coldness, originating in several causes, which will
be enumerated in the chapter ON THE CAUSES OF COLDNESSES, SEPARATION,
AND DIVORCES BETWEEN MARRIED PARTNERS. This Coldness, in case the wives
should discover the affections and inclinations of their husbands, would
burst forth from its hiding places, and communicate its cold, first to
the interiors of the mind, afterwards to the breast, and thence to the
ultimates of love which are appropriated to generation; and these being
affected with cold, conjugial love would be banished to such a degree,
that there would not remain any hope of friendship, of confidence, of
the blessedness of dwelling together, and thence of the happiness of
life; when nevertheless wives are continually feeding on this hope. To
make this open declaration, that they know their husbands' affections
and inclinations of love, carries with it a declaration and publication
of their own love: and it is well known, that so far as wives make such
a declaration, so far the men grow cold and desire a separation. From
these considerations the truth of this proposition is manifest, that the
reasons why wives conceal their perception with themselves, and hide it
from their husbands, are reasons of necessity.

168. X. THIS PERCEPTION IS THE WISDOM OF THE WIFE, AND IS NOT
COMMUNICABLE TO THE MAN; NEITHER IS THE RATIONAL WISDOM OF THE MAN
COMMUNICABLE TO THE WIFE. This follows from the distinction subsisting
between the male principle and the female. The male principle consists
in perceiving from the understanding, and the female in perceiving from
love: and the understanding perceives also those things which are above
the body and are out of the world; for the rational and spiritual sight
reaches to such objects; whereas love reaches no further than to what it
feels; when it reaches further, it is in consequence of conjunction with
the understanding of the man established from creation: for the
understanding has relation to light, and love to heat; and those things
which have relation to light, are seen, and those which have relation to
heat, are felt. From these considerations it is evident, that from the
universal distinction subsisting between the male principle and the
female, the wisdom of the wife is not communicable to the man, neither
is the wisdom of the man communicable to the wife: nor, further, is the
moral wisdom of the man communicable to women, so far as it partakes of
his rational wisdom.

169. XI. THE WIFE FROM A PRINCIPLE OF LOVE IN CONTINUALLY THINKING ABOUT
THE MAN'S INCLINATION TO HER, WITH THE PURPOSE OF JOINING HIM TO
HERSELF: IT IS OTHERWISE WITH THE MAN. This agrees with what was
explained above; namely, that the inclination to unite the man to
herself is constant and perpetual with the wife, but inconstant and
alternate with the man; see n. 160: hence it follows, that the wife's
thoughts are continually employed about her husband's inclination to
her, with the purpose of joining him to herself. Her thoughts concerning
her husband are interrupted indeed by domestic concerns; but still they
remain in the affection of her love; and this affection does not
separate itself from the thoughts with women, as it does with men: these
things, however, I relate from hearsay; see the two MEMORABLE RELATIONS
from the seven wives sitting in the rose-garden, which are annexed to
some of the following chapters.

170. XII. THE WIFE CONJOINS HERSELF TO THE MAN BY APPLICATIONS TO THE
DESIRES OF HIS WILL. This being generally known and admitted, it is
needless to explain it.

171. XIII. THE WIFE IS CONJOINED TO HER HUSBAND BY THE SPHERE OF HER
LIFE FLOWING FROM THE LOVE OF HIM. There flows, yea there overflows,
from every man (_homo_) a spiritual sphere, derived from the affections
of his love, which encompasses him, and infuses itself into the natural
sphere derived from the body, so that the two spheres are conjoined.
That a natural sphere is continually flowing, not only from men, but
also from beasts, yea from trees, fruits, flowers, and also from metals,
is generally known. The case is the same in the spiritual world; but the
spheres flowing from subjects in that world are spiritual, and those
which emanate from spirits and angels are altogether spiritual; because
there appertain thereto affections of love, and thence interior
perceptions and thoughts. This is the origin of all sympathy and
antipathy, and likewise of all conjunction and disjunction, and,
according thereto, of presence and absence in the spiritual world: for
what is of a similar nature or concordant causes conjunction and
presence, and what is of a dissimilar nature and discordant causes
disjunction and absence; therefore those spheres cause distances in that
world. What effects those spiritual spheres produce in the natural
world, is also known to some. The inclinations of married partners
towards each other are from no other origin. They are united by
unanimous and concordant spheres, and disunited by adverse and
discordant spheres; for concordant spheres are delightful and grateful,
whereas discordant spheres are undelightful and ungrateful. I have been
informed by the angels, who are in a clear perception of those spheres,
that every part of a man, both interior and exterior, renews itself;
which is effected by solutions and reparations; and that hence arises
the sphere which continually issues forth. I have also been informed
that this sphere encompasses a man on the back and on the breast,
lightly on the back, but more densely on the breast, and that the sphere
issuing from the breast conjoins itself with the respiration; and that
this is the reason why two married partners, who are of different minds
and discordant affections, lie in bed back to back, and, on the other
hand, why those who agree in minds and affections, mutually turn towards
each other. I have been further informed by the angels, that these
spheres, because they flow from every part of a man (_homo_), and are
abundantly continued around him, conjoin and disjoin two married
partners not only externally, but also internally; and that hence come
all the differences and varieties of conjugial love. Lastly, I have been
informed, that the sphere of love, flowing from a wife who is tenderly
loved, is perceived in heaven as sweetly fragrant, by far more pleasant
than it is perceived in the world by a newly married man during the
first days after marriage. From these considerations is manifested the
truth of the assertion, that a wife is conjoined to a man by the sphere
of her life flowing from the love of him.

172. XIV. THE WIFE IS CONJOINED TO THE HUSBAND BY THE APPROPRIATION OF
THE POWERS OF HIS VIRTUE; WHICH HOWEVER IS EFFECTED ACCORDING TO THEIR
MUTUAL SPIRITUAL LOVE. That this is the case, I have also gathered from
the mouth of angels. They have declared that the prolific principles
imparted from the husbands are received universally by the wives and add
themselves to their life; and that thus the wives lead a life unanimous,
and successively more unanimous with their husbands; and that hence is
effectively produced a union of souls and a conjunction of minds. They
declared the reason of this was, because in the prolific principle of
the husband is his soul, and also his mind as to its interiors, which
are conjoined to the soul. They added, that this was provided from
creation, in order that the wisdom of the man, which constitutes his
soul, may be appropriated to the wife, and that thus they may become,
according to the Lord's words, one flesh: and further, that this was
provided, lest the husband (_homovir_) from some caprice should leave
the wife after conception. But they added further, that applications and
appropriations of the life of the husband with the wife are effected
according to conjugial love, because love which is spiritual union,
conjoins; and that this also is provided for several reasons.

173. XV. THUS THE WIFE RECEIVES IN HERSELF THE IMAGE OF HER HUSBAND, AND
THENCE PERCEIVES, SEES, AND IS SENSIBLE OF, HIS AFFECTIONS. From the
reasons above adduced it follows as an established fact, that wives
receive in themselves those things which appertain to the wisdom of
their husbands, thus which are proper to the souls and minds of their
husbands, and thereby from virgins make themselves wives. The reasons
from which this follows, are, 1. That the woman was created out of the
man. 2. That hence she has an inclination to unite, and as it were to
reunite herself with the man. 3. That by virtue of this union with her
partner, and for the sake of it, the woman is born the love of the man,
and becomes more and more the love of him by marriage; because in this
case the love is continually employing its thoughts to conjoin the man
to itself. 4. That the woman is conjoined to her only one (_unico suo_)
by application to the desires of his life. 5. That they are conjoined by
the spheres which encompass them, and which unite themselves universally
and particularly according to the quality of the conjugial love with the
wives, and at the same time according to the quality of the wisdom
recipient thereof with the husbands. 6. That they are also conjoined by
appropriations of the powers of the husbands by the wives. 7. From which
reasons it is evident, that there is continually somewhat of the husband
being transferred to the wife, and inscribed on her as her own. From all
these considerations it follows, that the image of the husband is formed
in the wife; by virtue of which image the wife perceives, sees, and is
sensible of, the things which are in her husband, in herself, and thence
as it were herself in him. She perceives from communication, she sees
from aspect, and she is made sensible from the touch. That she is made
sensible of the reception of her love by the husband from the touch in
the palms of the hands, on the cheeks, the shoulders, the hands, and the
breasts, I learnt from the three wives in the hall, and the seven wives
in the rose garden, spoken of in the MEMORABLE RELATIONS which follow.

174. XVI. THERE ARE DUTIES PROPER TO THE HUSBAND AND OTHERS PROPER TO
THE WIFE; AND THE WIFE CANNOT ENTER INTO THE DUTIES PROPER TO THE
HUSBAND, NOR THE HUSBAND INTO THE DUTIES PROPER TO THE WIFE, SO AS TO
PERFORM THEM ARIGHT. That there are duties proper to the husband, and
others proper to the wife, needs not to be illustrated by an enumeration
of them; for they are many and various: and every one that chooses to do
so can arrange them numerically according to their genera and species.
The duties by which wives principally conjoin themselves with their
husbands, are those which relate to the education of the children of
each sex, and of the girls till they are marriageable.

175. The wife cannot enter into the duties proper to the husband, nor on
the other hand the husband into the duties proper to the wife, because
they differ like wisdom and the love thereof, or like thought and the
affection thereof, or like understanding and the will thereof. In the
duties proper to husbands, the primary agent is understanding, thought,
and wisdom; whereas in the duties proper to wives, the primary agent is
will, affection, and love; and the wife from the latter performs her
duties, and the husband from the former performs his; wherefore their
duties are naturally different, but still conjunctive in a successive
series. Many believe that women can perform the duties of men, if they
are initiated therein at an early age, as boys are. They may indeed be
initiated into the practice of such duties, but not into the judgement
on which the propriety of duties interiorly depends; wherefore such
women as have been initiated into the duties of men, are bound in
matters of judgement to consult men, and then, if they are left to their
own disposal, they select from the counsels of men that which suits
their own inclination. Some also suppose that women are equally capable
with men of elevating their intellectual vision, and into the same
sphere of light, and of viewing things with the same depth; and they
have been led into this opinion by the writings of certain learned
authoresses: but these writings, when examined in the spiritual world in
the presence of the authoresses, were found to be the productions, not
of judgement and wisdom, but of ingenuity and wit; and what proceeds
from these on account of the elegance and neatness of the style in which
it is written, has the appearance of sublimity and erudition; yet only
in the eyes of those who dignify all ingenuity by the name of wisdom. In
like manner men cannot enter into the duties proper to women, and
perform them aright, because they are not in the affections of women,
which are altogether distinct from the affections of men. As the
affections and perceptions of the male (and of the female) sex are thus
distinct by creation and consequently by nature, therefore among the
statutes given to the sons of Israel this also was ordained, "_A woman
shall not put on the garment of a man, neither shall a man put on the
garment of a woman; because this is an abomination_." Deut. xxii. 5.
This was, because, all in the spiritual world are clothed according to
their affections; and the two affections, of the woman and of the man,
cannot be united except (as subsisting) between two, and in no case (as
subsisting) in one.

176. XVII. THESE DUTIES ALSO, ACCORDING TO MUTUAL AID, CONJOIN THE TWO
INTO A ONE, AND AT THE SAME TIME CONSTITUTE ONE HOUSE. It is well known
in the world that the duties of the husband in some way conjoin
themselves with the duties of the wife, and that the duties of the wife
adjoin themselves to the duties of the husband, and that these
conjunctions and adjunctions are a mutual aid, and according thereto:
but the primary duties, which confederate, consociate, and gather into
one the souls and lives of two married partners, relate to the common
care of educating their children; in relation to which care, the duties
of the husband and of the wife are distinct, and yet join themselves
together. They are distinct; for the care of suckling and nursing the
infants of each sex, and also the care of instructing the girls till
they become marriageable, is properly the duty of the wife; whereas the
care of instructing the boys, from childhood to youth, and from youth
till they become capable of governing themselves, is properly the duty
of the husband: nevertheless the duties, of both the husband and the
wife, are blended by means of counsel and support, and several other
mutual aids. That these duties, both conjoined and distinct, or both
common and peculiar, combine the minds of conjugial partners into one;
and that this is effected by the love called _storge_, is well known. It
is also well known, that these duties, regarded in their distinction and
conjunction, constitute one house.

177. XVIII. MARRIED PARTNERS, ACCORDING TO THESE CONJUNCTIONS, BECOME
ONE MAN (homo) MORE AND MORE. This coincides with what is contained in
article VI.; where it was observed, that conjunction is effected
successively from the first days of marriage and that with those who are
principled in love truly conjugial, it is effected more and more
thoroughly to eternity; see above. They become one man in proportion as
conjugial love increases; and as this love in the heavens is genuine by
virtue of the celestial and spiritual life of the angels, therefore two
married partners are there called two, when they are regarded as husband
and wife, but one, when they are regarded as angels.

178. XIX. THOSE WHO ARE PRINCIPLED IN LOVE TRULY CONJUGIAL, ARE SENSIBLE
OF THEIR BEING A UNITED MAN, AND AS IT WERE ONE FLESH. That this is the
case, must be confirmed not from the testimony of any inhabitant of the
earth, but from the testimony of the inhabitants of heaven; for there is
no love truly conjugial at this day with men on earth; and moreover, men
on earth are encompassed with a gross body, which deadens and absorbs
the sensation that two married partners are a united man, and as it were
one flesh; and besides, those in the world who love their married
partners only exteriorly, and not interiorly, do not wish to hear of
such a thing: they think also on the subject lasciviously under the
influence of the flesh. It is otherwise with the angels of heaven, who
are principled in spiritual and celestial conjugial love, and are not
encompassed with so gross a body as men on earth. From those among them
who have lived for ages with their conjugial partners in heaven, I have
heard it testified, that they are sensible of their being so united, the
husband with the wife, and the wife with the husband, and each in the
other mutually and interchangeably, as also in the flesh, although they
are separate. The reason why this phenomenon is so rare on earth, they
have declared to be this; because the union of the souls and minds of
married partners on earth is made sensible in their flesh; for the soul
constitutes the inmost principles not only of the head, but also of the
body: in like manner the mind, which is intermediate between the soul
and the body, and which, although it appears to be in the head, is yet
also actually in the whole body: and they have declared, that this is
the reason why the acts, which the soul and mind intend, flow forth
instantly from the body; and that hence also it is, that they
themselves, after the rejection of the body in the former world, are
perfect men. Now, since the soul and the mind join themselves closely to
the flesh of the body, in order that they may operate and produce their
effects, it follows that the union of soul and mind with a married
partner is made sensible also in the body as one flesh. As the angels
made these declarations, I heard it asserted by the spirits who were
present, that such subjects belong to angelic wisdom, being above
ordinary apprehension; but these spirits were rational-natural, and not
rational-spiritual.

179. XX. LOVE TRULY CONJUGIAL, CONSIDERED IN ITSELF, IS A UNION OF
SOULS, A CONJUNCTION OF MINDS, AND AN ENDEAVOUR TOWARDS CONJUNCTION IN
THE BOSOMS AND THENCE IN THE BODY. That it is a union of souls and a
conjunction of minds, may be seen above, n. 158. The reason why it is an
endeavour towards conjunction in the bosoms is, because the bosom (or
breast) is as it were a place of public assembly, and a royal
council-chamber, while the body is as a populous city around it. The
reason why the bosom is as it were a place of public assembly, is,
because all things, which by derivation from the soul and mind have
their determination in the body, first flow into the bosom; and the
reason why it is as it were a royal council chamber, is, because in the
bosom there is dominion over all things of the body; for in the bosom
are contained the heart and lungs; and the heart rules by the blood, and
the lungs by the respiration, in every part. That the body is as a
populous city around it, is evident. When therefore the souls and minds
of married partners are united, and love truly conjugial unites them, it
follows that this lovely union flows into their bosoms, and through
their bosoms into their bodies, and causes an endeavour towards
conjunction; and so much the more, because conjugial love determines the
endeavour to its ultimates, in order to complete its satisfactions; and
as the bosom is intermediate between the body and the mind, it is
evident on what account conjugial love has fixed therein the seat of its
delicate sensation.

180. XXI. THE STATES OF THIS LOVE ARE INNOCENCE, PEACE, TRANQUILLITY,
INMOST FRIENDSHIP, FULL CONFIDENCE, AND A MUTUAL DESIRE OF MIND AND
HEART TO DO EVERY GOOD TO EACH OTHER; AND THE STATES DERIVED FROM THESE
ARE BLESSEDNESS, SATISFACTION, DELIGHT AND PLEASURE; AND FROM THE
ETERNAL ENJOYMENT OF THESE IS DERIVED HEAVENLY FELICITY. All these
things are in conjugial love, and thence are derived from it, because
its origin is from the marriage of good and truth, and this marriage is
from the Lord; and because love is of such a nature, that it desires to
communicate with another, whom it loves from the heart, yea, confer joys
upon him, and thence to derive its own joys. This therefore is the case
in an infinitely high degree with the divine love, which is in the Lord,
in regard to man, whom he created a receptacle of both love and wisdom
proceeding from himself; and as he created man (_homo_) for the
reception of those principles, the man (_vir_) for the reception of
wisdom, and the woman for the reception of the love of the man's wisdom,
therefore from inmost principles he infused into men (_homines_)
conjugial love into which love he might insinuate all things blessed,
satisfactory, delightful, and pleasant, which proceed solely from his
divine love through his divine wisdom, together with life, and flow into
their recipients; consequently, which flow into those who are principled
in love truly conjugial; for these alone are recipients. Mention is made
of innocence, peace, tranquillity, inmost friendship, full confidence,
and the mutual desire of doing every good to each other; for innocence
and peace relate to the soul, tranquillity to the mind, inmost
friendship to the breast, full confidence to the heart, and the mutual
desire of doing every good to each other, to the body as derived from
the former principles.

181. XXII. THESE THINGS CAN ONLY EXIST IN THE MARRIAGE OF ONE MAN WITH
ONE WIFE. This is a conclusion from all that has been said above, and
also from all that remains to be said; therefore there is no need of any
particular comment for its confirmation.

       *       *       *       *       *

182. To the above I will add TWO MEMORABLE RELATIONS. FIRST. After some
weeks, I heard a voice from heaven, saying, "Lo! there is again an
assembly on Parnassus: come hither, and we will shew you the way." I
accordingly came; and as I drew near, I saw a certain person on Helicon
with a trumpet, with which he announced and proclaimed the assembly. And
I saw the inhabitants of Athens and its suburbs ascending as before; and
in the midst of them three novitiates from the world. They were of a
Christian community; one a priest, another a politician, and the third a
philosopher. These they entertained on the way with conversation on
various subjects, especially concerning the wise ancients, whom they
named. They inquired whether they should see them, and were answered in
the affirmative, and were told, that if they were desirous, they might
pay their respects to them, as they were courteous and affable. The
novitiates then inquired after Demosthenes, Diogenes, and Epicurus; and
were answered, "Demosthenes is not here, but with Plato; Diogenes, with
his scholars, resides under Helicon, because of his little attention to
worldly things, and his being engaged in heavenly contemplations;
Epicurus dwells in a border to the west, and has no intercourse with us;
because we distinguish between good and evil affections, and say, that
good affections are one with wisdom, and evil affections are contrary to
it." When they had ascended the hill Parnassus, some guards there
brought water in crystal cups from a fountain in the mount, and said,
"This is water from the fountain which, according to ancient fable, was
broken open by the hoof of the horse Pegasus, and was afterwards
consecrated to nine virgins: but by the winged horse Pegasus they meant
the understanding of truth, by which comes wisdom; by the hoofs of his
feet they understood experiences whereby comes natural intelligence; and
by the nine virgins they understood knowledges and sciences of every
kind. These things are now called fables; but they were correspondences,
agreeable to the primeval method of speaking." Then those who attended
the three strangers said, "Be not surprised; the guards are told thus to
speak; but we know that to drink water from the fountain, means to be
instructed concerning truths, and by truths concerning goods, and
thereby to grow wise." After this, they entered the Palladium, and with
them the three novitiates, the priest, the politician, and the
philosopher; and immediately the laureled sophi who were seated at the
tables, asked, "WHAT NEWS FROM THE EARTH?" They replied, "This is news;
that a certain person declares that he converses with angels, and has
his sight opened into the spiritual world, equally as into the natural
world; and he brings thence much new information, and, among other
particulars, asserts, that a man lives a man after death, as he lived
before in the world; that he sees, hears, speaks, as before in the
world; that he is clothed and decked with ornaments, as before in the
world; that he hungers and thirsts, eats and drinks, as before in the
world; that he enjoys conjugial delights, as before in the world; that
he sleeps and wakes, as before in the world; that in the spiritual world
there are land and water, mountains and hills, plains and valleys,
fountains and rivers, paradises and groves; also that there are palaces
and houses, cities and villages, as in the natural world; and further,
that there are writings and books, employments and trades; also precious
stones, gold and silver; in a word, that there are all such things there
as there are on earth, and that those things in the heavens are
infinitely more perfect; with this difference only, that all things in
the spiritual world are from a spiritual origin, and therefore are
spiritual, because they are from the sun of that world, which is pure
love; whereas all things in the natural world are from a natural origin,
and therefore are natural and material, because they are from the sun of
that world, which is pure fire; in short, that a man after death is
perfectly a man, yea more perfectly than before in the world; for before
in the world he was in a material body, but in the spiritual world he is
in a spiritual body." Hereupon the ancient sages asked, "What do the
people on the earth think of such information?" The three strangers
replied, "We know that it is true, because we are here, and have viewed
and examined everything; wherefore we will tell you what has been said
and reasoned about it on earth." Then the PRIEST said, "Those of our
order, when they first heard such relations, called them visions, then
fictions; afterwards they insisted that the man had seen spectres, and
lastly they hesitated, and said, 'Believe them who will; we have
hitherto taught that a man will not be in a body after death until the
day of the last judgement.'" Then the sages asked, "Are there no
intelligent persons among those of your order, who can prove and evince
the truth, that a man lives a man after death?" The priest said, "There
are indeed some who prove it, but not to the conviction of others. Those
who prove it say, that it is contrary to sound reason to believe, that a
man does not live a man till the day of the last judgement, and that in
the mean while he is a soul without a body. What is the soul, or where
is it in the interim? Is it a vapor, or some wind floating in the
atmosphere, or some thing hidden in the bowels of the earth? Have the
souls of Adam and Eve, and of all their posterity, now for six thousand
years, or sixty ages, been flying about in the universe, or been shut up
in the bowels of the earth, waiting for the last judgement? What can be
more anxious and miserable than such an expectation? May not their lot
in such a case be compared with that of prisoners bound hand and foot,
and lying in a dungeon? If such be a man's lot after death, would it not
be better to be born an ass than a man? Is it not also contrary to
reason to believe, that the soul can be re-clothed with its body? Is not
the body eaten up by worms, mice, and fish? And can a bony skeleton that
has been parched in the sun, or mouldered into dust, be introduced into
a new body? And how could the cadaverous and putrid materials be
collected, and reunited to the souls? When such questions as these are
urged, those of our order do not offer any answers grounded in reason,
but adhere to their creed, saying, 'We keep reason under obedience to
faith.' With respect to collecting all the parts of the human body from
the grave at the last day, they say, 'This is a work of omnipotence;'
and when they name omnipotence and faith, reason is banished; and I am
free to assert, that in such case sound reason is not appreciated, and
by some is regarded as a spectre; yea, they can say to sound reason,
'Thou art unsound.'" On hearing these things, the Grecian sages said,
"Surely such paradoxes vanish and disperse of themselves, as being full
of contradiction; and yet in the world at this day they cannot be
dispersed by sound reason. What can be believed more paradoxical than
what is told respecting the last judgement; that the universe will then
be destroyed, and that the stars of heaven will then fall down upon the
earth, which is less than the stars; and that then the bodies of men,
whether they be mouldering carcases, or mummies eaten by men, or reduced
to mere dust, will meet and be united again with their souls? We, during
our abode in the world, from the inductions of reason, believed the
immortality of the souls of men; and we also assigned regions for the
blessed, which we call the elysian fields; and we believed that the soul
was a human image or appearance, but of a fine and delicate nature,
because spiritual." After this, the assembly turned to the other
stranger, who in the world had been a POLITICIAN. He confessed that he
did not believe in a life after death, and that respecting the new
information which he had heard about it, he thought it all fable and
fiction. "In my meditations on the subject," said he, "I used to say to
myself, 'How can souls be bodies?--does not the whole man lie dead in
the grave?--is not the eye there; how can he see?--is not the ear there,
how can he hear?--whence must he have a mouth wherewith to speak?
Supposing anything of a man to live after death, must it not resemble a
spectre? and how can a spectre eat and drink, or how can it enjoy
conjugial delights? whence can it have clothes, houses, meats, &c.?
Besides, spectres, which are mere aerial images, appear as if they
really existed; and yet they do not. These and similar sentiments I used
to entertain in the world concerning the life of men after death; but
now, since I have seen all things, and touched them with my hands, I am
convinced by my very senses that I am a man as I was in the world; so
that I know no other than that I live now as I lived formerly; with only
this difference, that my reason now is sounder. At times I have been
ashamed of my former thoughts." The PHILOSOPHER gave much the same
account of himself as the politician had done; only differing in this
respect, that he considered the new relations which he had heard
concerning a life after death, as having reference to opinions and
hypotheses which he had collected from the ancients and moderns. When
the three strangers had done speaking, the sophi were all in amazement;
and those who were of the Socratic school, said, that from the news they
had heard from the earth, it was quite evident, that the interiors of
human minds had been successively closed; and that in the world at this
time a belief in what is false shines as truth, and an infatuated
ingenuity as wisdom; and that the light of wisdom, since their times,
has descended from the interiors of the brain into the mouth beneath the
nose, where it appears to the eyes as a shining of the lip, while the
speech of the mouth thence proceeding appears as wisdom. Hereupon one of
the young scholars said, "How stupid are the minds of the inhabitants of
the earth at this day! I wish we had here the disciples of Heraclitus,
who weep at every thing, and of Democritus, who laugh at every thing;
for then we should hear much lamentation and much laughter." When the
assembly broke up, they gave the three novitiates the insignia of their
authority, which were copper plates, on which were engraved some
hieroglyphic characters; with which they took their leave and departed.

183. THE SECOND MEMORABLE RELATION. I saw in the eastern quarter a grove
of palm-trees and laurels, set in winding rows, which I approached and
entered; and walking in the winding paths I saw at the end a garden,
which formed the centre of the grove. There was a little bridge dividing
the grove from the garden, and at the bridge two gates, one on the side
next the grove, and the other on the side next the garden. And as I drew
near, the keeper opened the gates, and I asked him the name of the
garden. He said, "ADRAMANDONI; which is the delight of conjugial love."
I entered, and lo! there were olive-trees; and among them ran pendulous
vines, and underneath and among them were shrubs in flower. In the midst
of the garden was a grassy circus, on which were seated husbands and
wives, and youths and maidens, in pairs; and in the midst of the circus,
on an elevated piece of ground, there was a little fountain, which, from
the strength of its spring, threw its water to a considerable height. 
Aliter sensero?"

CHAPTER XIX.

The conquest of Gaul had been an exploit of extraordinary military
difficulty. The intricacy of the problem had been enhanced by the venom
of a domestic faction, to which the victories of a democratic general
were more unwelcome than national disgrace. The discomfiture of Crassus
had been more pleasant news to the Senate than the defeat of Ariovistus,
and the passionate hope of the aristocracy had been for some
opportunity which would enable them to check Caesar in his career of
conquest and bring him home to dishonor and perhaps impeachment.
They had failed. The efforts of the Gauls to maintain or recover their
independence had been successively beaten down, and at the close of the
summer of 53 Caesar had returned to the north of Italy, believing
that the organization of the province which he had added to the Empire
was all that remained to be accomplished. But Roman civilians had
followed in the van of the armies. Roman traders had penetrated into
the towns on the Seine and the Loire, and the curious Celts had learnt
from them the distractions of their new rulers. Caesar's situation was
as well understood among the Aedui and the Sequani as in the clubs and
coteries of the capital of the Empire, and the turn of events was watched
with equal anxiety. The victory over Sabinus, sharply avenged as it
had been, kept alive the hope that their independence might yet be
recovered. The disaffection of the preceding summer had been trampled
out, but the ashes of it were still smouldering; and when it became known
that Clodius, who was regarded as Caesar's tribune, had been killed,
that the Senate was in power again, and that Italy was threatened
with civil convulsions, their passionate patriotism kindled once more
into flame.
Sudden in their resolutions, they did not pause to watch how the
balance would incline. Caesar was across the Alps. Either he would be
deposed, or civil war would detain him in Italy. His legions were
scattered between Trèves, Auxerre, and Sens, far from the Roman frontier.
A simultaneous rising would cut them off from support, and they could
be starved out or overwhelmed in detail, as Sabinus had been at Tongres
and Cicero had almost been at Charleroy. Intelligence was swiftly exchanged.
The chiefs of all the tribes established communications with each
other. They had been deeply affected by the execution of Acco, the
patriotic leader of the Carnutes. The death of Acco was an
intimation that they were Roman subjects, and were to be punished as
traitors if they disobeyed a Roman command. They buried their own
dissensions. Except among the Aedui there was no longer a Roman
faction and a patriot faction. The whole nation was inspired by a
simultaneous impulse to snatch the opportunity, and unite in a
single effort to assert their freedom. The understanding was complete.
A day was fixed for a universal rising. The Carnutes began by a
massacre which would cut off possibility of retreat, and, in revenge
for Acco, slaughtered a party of Roman civilians who were engaged
in business at _Gien_.[1] A system of signals had been quietly arranged.
The massacre at Gien was known in a few hours in the south, and the
Auvergne country, which had hitherto been entirely peaceful, rose in
reply, under a young high-born chief named Vercingetorix. Gergovia, the
principal town of the Arverni, was for the moment undecided.[2]
The elder men there, who had known the Romans long, were against immediate
action; but Vercingetorix carried the people away with him. His name had
not appeared in the earlier campaigns, but his father had been a man
of note beyond the boundaries of Auvergne; and he must himself have had
a wide reputation among the Gauls, for everywhere, from the Seine to the
Garonne, he was accepted as chief of the national confederacy.
Vercingetorix had high ability and real organizing powers.
He laid out a plan for the general campaign. He fixed a contingent of
men and arms which each tribe was to supply, and failure brought
instantaneous punishment. Mild offences were visited with the loss of
eyes or ears; neglect of a more serious sort with death by fire in the
wicker tower. Between enthusiasm and terror he had soon an army at his
command, which he could increase indefinitely at his need. Part he
left to watch the Roman province and prevent Caesar, if he should arrive,
from passing through. With part he went himself to watch the Aedui, the
great central race, where Roman authority had hitherto prevailed unshaken,
but among whom, as he well knew, he had the mass of the people on his
side. The Aedui were hesitating. They called their levies under arms,
as if to oppose him, but they withdrew them again; and to waver at such
a moment was to yield to the stream.

The Gauls had not calculated without reason on Caesar's embarrassments.
The death of Clodius had been followed by the burning of the senate-house
and by many weeks of anarchy. To leave Italy at such a moment might be
to leave it a prey to faction or civil war. His anxiety was relieved
at last by hearing that Pompey had acted, and that order was
restored; and seeing no occasion for his own interference, and
postponing the agitation for his second consulship, he hurried back
to encounter the final and convulsive effort of the Celtic race to
preserve their liberties. The legions were as yet in no danger. They
were dispersed in the north of France, far from the scene of the present
rising, and the northern tribes had suffered too desperately in the
past years to be in a condition to stir without assistance. But how was
Caesar to join them? The garrisons in the province could not be moved.
If he sent for the army to come across to him, Vercingetorix would
attack them on the march, and he could not feel confident of the result;
while the line of the old frontier of the province was in the
hands of the insurgents, or of tribes who could not be trusted
to resist the temptation, if he passed through himself without more
force than the province could supply. But Caesar had a resource
which never failed him in the daring swiftness of his own movements.
He sent for the troops which were left beyond the Alps. He had a few
levies with him to fill the gaps in the old legions, and after a rapid
survey of the stations on the provincial frontier he threw himself upon
the passes of the Cevennes. It was still winter. The snow lay six
feet thick on the mountains, and the roads at that season were considered
impracticable even for single travellers. The Auvergne rebels dreamt
of nothing so little as of Caesar's coming upon them at such a
time and from such a quarter. He forced his way. He fell on them while
they were lying in imagined security, Vercingetorix and his army being
absent watching the Aedui, and, letting loose his cavalry, he laid
their country waste.

       But Vercingetorix, he knew, would fly back at the news of his
arrival; and he had already made his further plans.

He formed a strong entrenched camp, where he left Decimus Brutus in charge,
telling him that he would return as quickly as possible; and,
unknown to any one, lest the troops should lose courage at parting
with him, he flew across through an enemy's country with a handful
of attendants to Vienne, on the Rhone, where some cavalry from the
province had been sent to wait for him.

Vercingetorix, supposing him still to be in the Auvergne, thought only
of the camp of Brutus; and Caesar, riding day and night through the
doubtful territories of the Aedui, reached the two legions which
were quartered near Auxerre. Thence he sent for the rest to join him,
and he was at the head of his army before Vercingetorix knew that only
Brutus was in front of him. The Aedui, he trusted, would now remain
faithful. But the problem before him was still most intricate. The grass
had not begun to grow. Rapid movement was essential to prevent
the rebel confederacy from consolidating itself; but rapid movements
with a large force required supplies; and whence were the supplies to
come? Some risks had to be run, but to delay was the most dangerous of
all. On the defeat of the Helvetii, Caesar had planted a
colony of them at Gorgobines, near Nevers, on the Loire. These colonists,
called Boii, had refused to take part in the rising; and
Vercingetorix, turning in contempt from Brutus, had gone off to punish
them. Caesar ordered the Aedui to furnish his commissariat, sent word
to the Boii that he was coming to their relief, swept through
the Senones, that he might leave no enemy in his rear, and then advanced
on Gien, where the Roman traders had been murdered, and which the
Carnutes still occupied in force.
There was a bridge there over the Loire, by which they tried to escape
in the night. Caesar had beset the passage. He took the whole of
them prisoners, plundered and burnt the town, gave the spoil to his
troops, and then crossed the river and went up to help the Boii. He
took Nevers.
Vercingetorix, who was hastening to its relief, ventured his first
battle with him; but the cavalry, on which the Gauls most depended,
were scattered by Caesar's German horse. He was entirely beaten, and
Caesar turned next to Avaricum (Bourges), a rich and strongly fortified
town of the Bituriges. From past experience Caesar had gathered that the
Gauls were easily excited and as easily discouraged. If he could
reduce Bourges, he hoped that this part of the country would return
to its allegiance.
Perhaps he thought that Vercingetorix himself would give up the struggle.

But he had to deal with a spirit and with a man different from any which
he had hitherto encountered. Disappointed in his political expectations,
baffled in strategy, and now defeated in open fight, the young chief of
the Arverni had only learnt that he had taken a wrong mode of carrying
on the war, and that he was wasting his real advantages. Battles in the
field he saw that he would lose. But the Roman numbers were limited,
and his were infinite. Tens of thousands of gallant young men,
with their light, active horses, were eager for any work on which he
might set them. They could scour the country far and wide. They could
cut off Caesar's supplies. They could turn the fields into a
blackened wilderness before him on whichever side he might turn. The
hearts of the people were with him. They consented to a universal
sacrifice. They burnt their farmsteads.
They burnt their villages. Twenty towns (so called) of the Bituriges
were consumed in a single day.

The tribes adjoining caught the enthusiasm. The horizon at night was a
ring of blazing fires. Vercingetorix was for burning Bourges also; but
it was the sacred home of the Bituriges, the one spot which they
implored to be allowed to save, the most beautiful city in all Gaul.
Rivers defended it on three sides, and on the fourth there were swamps
and marshes which could be passed only by a narrow ridge. Within the
walls the people had placed the best of their property, and Vercingetorix,
against his judgment, consented, in pity for their entreaties, that
Avaricum should be defended. A strong garrison was left inside.
Vercingetorix entrenched himself in the forests sixteen miles distant,
keeping watch over Caesar's communications. The place could only be taken
by regular approaches, during which the army had to be fed. The Aedui
were growing negligent. The feeble Boii, grateful, it seemed, for Caesar's
treatment of them, exerted themselves to the utmost, but their small
resources were soon exhausted. For many days the legions were without
bread. The cattle had been driven into the woods. It came at last to
actual famine.[3] "But not one word was heard from them," says
Caesar, "unworthy of the majesty of the Roman people or their own
earlier victories." He told them that if the distress became unbearable
he would raise the siege. With one voice they entreated him to persevere.
They had served many years with him, they said, and had never abandoned
any enterprise which they had undertaken. They were ready to endure any
degree of hardship before they would leave unavenged their countrymen
who had been murdered at Gien.

Vercingetorix, knowing that the Romans were in difficulties, ventured
nearer. Caesar surveyed his position. It had been well chosen behind
a deep morass. The legions clamored to be allowed to advance
and attack him, but a victory, he saw, would be dearly purchased. No
condemnation could be too severe for him, he said, if he did not
hold the lives of his soldiers dearer than his own interest,[4] and he
led them back without indulging their eagerness.

The siege work was unexpectedly difficult. The inhabitants of the Loire
country were skilled artisans, trained in mines and iron works.
The walls, built of alternate layers of stone and timber, were forty
feet in thickness, and could neither be burnt nor driven in with the
ram. The town could be taken only with the help of an agger--a bank of
turf and fagots raised against the wall of sufficient height to
overtop the fortifications. The weather was cold and wet, but the legions
worked with such a will that in twenty-five days they had raised their
bank at last, a hundred yards in width and eighty feet high. As the work
drew near its end Caesar himself lay out all night among the men,
encouraging them. One morning at daybreak he observed that the agger was
smoking. The ingenious Gauls had undermined it and set it on fire.
At the same moment they appeared along the walls with pitch-balls, torches,
fagots, which they hurled in to feed the flames. There was an instant
of confusion, but Caesar uniformly had two legions under arms while
the rest were working.
The Gauls fought with a courage which called out his warm admiration. He
watched them at the points of greatest danger falling under the
shots from the scorpions, and others stepping undaunted into their
places to fall in the same way. Their valor was unavailing. They were
driven in, and the flames were extinguished; the agger was level
with the walls, and defence was no longer possible. The garrison intended
to slip away at night through the ruins to join their friends
outside. The wailing of the women was heard in the Roman camp, and escape
was made impossible.

The morning after, in a tempest of rain and wind, the place was stormed.
The legionaries, excited by the remembrance of Gien and the long resistance,
slew every human being that they found, men, women, and children all
alike. Out of forty thousand who were within the walls, eight hundred
only, that had fled at the first sound of the attack, made their way to
the camp of Vercingetorix.

Undismayed by the calamity, Vercingetorix made use of it to sustain the
determination of his followers. He pointed out to them that he had
himself opposed the defence. The Romans had defeated them, not by superior
courage, but by superior science. The heart of the whole nation was
united to force the Romans out of Gaul, and they had only to persevere
in a course of action where science would be useless, to be sure of
success in the end. He fell back upon his own country, taking
special care of the poor creatures who had escaped from the carnage;
and the effect of the storming of Bourges was to make the national
enthusiasm hotter and fiercer than before.

The Romans found in the town large magazines of corn and other provisions,
which had been laid in for the siege, and Caesar remained there some
days to refresh his troops. The winter was now over. The Aedui were
giving him anxiety, and as soon as he could he moved to Decize, a frontier
town belonging to them on the Loire, almost in the very centre of
France. The anti-Roman faction were growing in influence. He called a
council of the principal persons, and, to secure the fidelity of so
important a tribe, he deposed the reigning chief and appointed another
who had been nominated by the Druids.[5] He lectured the Aedui on their
duty, bade them furnish him with ten thousand men, who were to take
charge of the commissariat, and then divided his army. Labienus, with
four legions, was sent to compose the country between Sens and
Paris. He himself, with the remaining six legions, ascended the
right bank of the Allier towards Gergovia in search of Vercingetorix.

The bridges on the Allier were broken, but Caesar seized and repaired one
of them and carried his army over.

The town of Gergovia stood on a high plateau, where the rivers rise
which run into the Loire on one side and into the Dordogne on the
other. The sides of the hill are steep, and only accessible at a very
few places, and the surrounding neighborhood is broken with rocky
valleys. Vercingetorix lay in force outside, but in a situation where
he could not be attacked except at disadvantage, and with his communication
with the fortress secured. He was departing again from his general plan
for the campaign in allowing Gergovia to be defended; but it was the
central home of his own tribe, and the result showed that he was right
in believing it to be impregnable. Caesar saw that it was too strong to
be stormed, and that it could only be taken after long operations. After
a few skirmishes he seized a spur of the plateau which cut off the
garrison from their readiest water-supply, and he formed an entrenched
camp upon it. He was studying the rest of the problem when bad news
came that the Aedui were unsteady again. The ten thousand men had been
raised as he had ordered, but on their way to join him they had
murdered the Roman officers in charge of them, and were preparing to
go over to Vercingetorix. Leaving two legions to guard his works,
he intercepted the Aeduan contingent, took them prisoners, and
protected their lives. In his absence Vercingetorix had attacked
the camp with determined fury. The fighting had been desperate, and
Caesar only returned in time to save it. The reports from the Aedui
were worse and worse. The patriotic faction had the upper hand, and
with the same passionate determination to commit themselves
irrevocably, which had been shown before at Gien, they had massacred
every Roman in their territory. It was no time for delaying over a
tedious siege: Caesar was on the point of raising it, when accident
brought on a battle under the walls. An opportunity seemed to offer
itself of capturing the place by escalade, which part of the army
attempted contrary to orders. They fought with more than their usual
gallantry. The whole scene was visible from the adjoining hills,
the Celtic women, with long streaming hair, wildly gesticulating
on the walls. The Romans were driven back with worse loss than they
had yet met with in Gaul. Forty-six officers and seven hundred men
had been killed.

Caesar was never more calm than under a reverse.These
elevations, considered in themselves, are openings of the mind; for the
human mind is distinguished into regions, as the world is distinguished
into regions as to the atmosphere; the lowest of which is the watery,
the next above is the aerial, and still higher is the ethereal, above
which there is also the highest: into similar regions the mind of man is
elevated as it is opened, with men by wisdom, and with women by love
truly conjugial.

189. We have said, that the woman is made sensible of the delights of
her heat in the man's light; by which we mean that the woman is made
sensible of the delights of her love in the man's wisdom, because wisdom
is the receptacle; and wherever love finds such a receptacle
corresponding to itself, it is in the enjoyment of its delights: but we
do not mean, that heat with its light is delighted out of forms, but
within them; and spiritual heat is delighted with spiritual light in
their forms to a greater degree, because those forms by virtue of wisdom
and love are vital, and thereby susceptible. This may be illustrated by
what are called the sports of heat with light in the vegetable kingdom:
out of the vegetable there is only a simple conjunction of heat and
light, but within it there is a kind of sport of the one with the other;
because there they are in forms or receptacles; for they pass through
astonishing meandering ducts, and in the inmost principles therein they
tend to use in bearing fruit, and also breathe forth their satisfactions
far and wide into the atmosphere, which they fill with fragrance. The
delight of spiritual heat with spiritual light is more vividly
perceivable in human forms, in which spiritual heat is conjugial love,
and spiritual light is wisdom.

190. V. WITH BOTH MEN AND WOMEN, THE STATES OF LIFE BEFORE MARRIAGE ARE
DIFFERENT FROM WHAT THEY ARE AFTERWARDS. Before marriage, each sex
passes through two states, one previous and the other subsequent to the
inclination for marriage. The changes of both these states, and the
consequent formations of minds, proceed in successive order according to
their continual increase; but we have not leisure now to describe these
changes, which are various and different in their several subjects. The
inclination to marriage, previous to marriage, are only imaginary in the
mind, and become more and more sensible in the body; but the states
thereof after marriage are states of conjunction and also of
prolification, which, it is evident, differ from the forgoing states as
effects differ from intentions.

191. VI. WITH MARRIED PARTNERS THE STATES OF LIFE AFTER MARRIAGE ARE
CHANGED AND SUCCEED EACH OTHER ACCORDING TO THE CONJUNCTIONS OF THEIR
MINDS BY CONJUGIAL LOVE. The reason why changes of the state and the
successions thereof after marriage, with both the man and the wife, are
according to conjugial love with each, and thus are either conjunctive
or disjunctive of their minds, is, because conjugial love is not only
various but also different with conjugial pairs: various, with those who
love each other interiorly; for with such it has its intermissions,
notwithstanding its being inwardly in its heat regular and permanent;
but it is different with those who love each other only exteriorly; for
with such its intermissions do not proceed from similar causes, but from
alternate cold and heat. The true ground of these differences is, that
with the latter the body is the principal agent, the ardour of which
spreads itself around, and forcibly draws into communion with it the
inferior principles of the mind; whereas, with the former, who love each
other interiorly, the mind is the principal agent, and brings the body
into communion with it. It appears as if love ascended from the body
into the soul; because as soon as the body catches the allurement, it
enters through the eyes, as through doors, into the mind, and thus
through the sight, as through an outer court, into the thoughts, and
instantly into the love: nevertheless it descends from the mind, and
acts upon the inferior principles according to their orderly
arrangement; therefore the lascivious mind acts lasciviously, and the
chaste mind chastely; and the latter arranges the body, whereas the
former is arranged by the body.

192. VII. MARRIAGE ALSO INDUCES OTHER FORMS IN THE SOULS AND MINDS OF
MARRIED PARTNERS. That marriage has this effect cannot be observed in
the natural world; because in this world souls and minds are encompassed
with a material body, through which the mind rarely shines: the men
(_homines_) also of modern times, more than the ancients, are taught
from their infancy to assume feigned countenances, whereby they deeply
conceal the affections of their minds; and this is the reason why the
forms of minds are not known and distinguished according to their
different quality, as existing before marriage and after it:
nevertheless that the forms of souls and minds differ after marriage
from what they were before, is very manifest from their appearance in
the spiritual world; for they are then spirits and angels, who are minds
and souls in a human form, stripped of their outward coverings, which
had been composed of watery and earthy elements, and of aerial vapors
thence arising; and when these are cast off, the forms of the minds are
plainly seen, such as they had been inwardly in their bodies; and then
it is clearly perceived, that there is a difference in regard to those
forms with those who live in marriage, and with those who do not. In
general, married partners have an interior beauty of countenance, the
man deriving from the wife the ruddy bloom of her love, and the wife
from the man the fair splendor of his wisdom; for two married partners
in the spiritual world are united as to their souls; and moreover there
appears in each a human fulness. This is the case in heaven, because
there are no marriages (_conjugia_) in any other place; beneath heaven
there are only nuptial connections (_connubia_), which are alternately
tied and loosed.

193. VIII. THE WOMAN IS ACTUALLY FORMED INTO A WIFE, ACCORDING TO THE
DESCRIPTION IN THE BOOK OF CREATION. In this book it is said, that the
woman was created out of the man's rib, and that the man said, when she
was brought to him, "This is bone of my bones, and flesh of my flesh;
and she shall be called Eve (_Ischah_), because she was taken out of man
(_Isch_):" Gen. chap. ii. 21-23. A rib of the breast, in the Word,
signifies, in the spiritual sense, natural truth. This is signified by
the ribs which the bear carried between his teeth, Dan. vii. 5; for
bears signify those who read the Word in the natural sense, and see
truths therein without understanding: the man's breast signifies that
essential and peculiar principle, which is distinguished from the breast
of the woman: that this is wisdom, may be seen above, n. 187; for truth
supports wisdom as the ribs do the breast. These things are signified,
because the breast is that part of a man in which all his principles are
as in their centre. From these considerations, it is evident, that the
woman was created out of the man by a transfer of his peculiar wisdom,
which is the same thing as to be created out of natural truth; and that
the love thereof was transferred from the man into the woman, to the end
that conjugial love might exist; and that this was done in order that
the love of the wife and not self-love might be in the man: for the
wife, in consequence of her innate disposition, cannot do otherwise than
convert self-love, as existing with the man, into his love to herself;
and I have been informed, that this is effected by virtue of the wife's
love itself, neither the man nor the wife being conscious of it: hence,
no man can possibly love his wife with true conjugial love, who from a
principle of self-love is vain and conceited of his own intelligence.
When this arcanum relating to the creation of the woman from the man, is
understood, it may then be seen, that the woman in like manner is as it
were created or formed from the man in marriage; and that this is
effected by the wife, or rather through her by the Lord, who imparts
inclinations to women whereby they produce such an effect: for the wife
receives into herself the image of a man, and thereby appropriates to
herself his affections, as may be seen above, n. 183; and conjoins the
man's internal will with her own, of which we shall treat presently; and
also claims to herself the propagated forms (_propagines_) of his soul,
of which also we shall speak elsewhere. From these considerations it is
evident, that, according to the description in the book of Genesis,
interiorly understood, a woman is formed into a wife by such things as
she takes out of the husband and his breast, and implants in herself.

194. IX. THIS FORMATION IS EFFECTED ON THE PART OF THE WIFE BY SECRET
MEANS; AND THIS IS MEANT BY THE WOMAN'S BEING CREATED WHILE THE MAN
SLEPT. It is written in the book of Genesis, that Jehovah God caused a
deep sleep to fall upon Adam, so that he slept; and that then he took
one of his ribs, and builded it into a woman: chap. ii. 21, 22. That by
the man's sleep and sleeping is signified his entire ignorance that the
wife is formed and as it were created from him, appears from what was
shewn in the preceding chapter, and also from the innate prudence and
circumspection of wives, not to divulge anything concerning their love,
or their assumption of the affections of the man's life, and thereby of
the transfer of his wisdom into themselves. That this is effected on the
part of the wife without the husband's knowledge, and while he is as it
were sleeping, thus by secret means, is evident from what was explained
above, n. 166-168; where also it is clearly shewn, that the prudence
with which women are influenced herein, was implanted in them from
creation, and consequently from their birth, for reasons of necessity,
so that conjugial love, friendship, and confidence, and thereby the
blessedness of dwelling together and a happy life, may be secured:
wherefore for the right accomplishing of this, the man is enjoined to
_leave his father and mother and to cleave to his wife_, Gen. ii. 24;
Matt. xix. 4, 5. The father and mother, whom the man is to leave, in a
spiritual sense signify his _proprium_ of will and _proprium_ of
understanding; and the _proprium_ of a man's (_homo_) will is to love
himself, and the _proprium_ of his understanding is to love his own
wisdom; and to cleave to his wife signifies to devote himself to the
love of his wife. Those two _propriums_ are deadly evils to man, if they
remain with him, and the love of those two _propriums_ is changed into
conjugial love, so far as a man cleaves to his wife, that is, so far as
he receives her love; see above, n. 193, and elsewhere. To sleep
signifies to be in ignorance and unconcern; a father and a mother
signify the two _propriums_ of a man (_homo_), the one of the will and
the other of the understanding; and to cleave to, signifies to devote
one's self to the love of any one, as might be abundantly confirmed from
passages in other parts of the Word; but this would be foreign to our
present subject.

195. X. THIS FORMATION ON THE PART OF THE WIFE IS EFFECTED BY THE
CONJUNCTION OF HER OWN WILL WITH THE INTERNAL WILL OF THE MAN. That the
man possesses rational and moral wisdom, and that the wife conjoins
herself with those things which relate to his moral wisdom, may be seen
above, n. 163-165. The things which relate to rational wisdom constitute
the man's understanding, and those which relate to moral wisdom
constitute his will. The wife conjoins herself with those things which
constitute the man's will. It is the same, whether we say that the wife
conjoins herself, or that she conjoins her will to the man's will;
because she is born under the influence of the will, and consequently in
all her actions acts from the will. The reason why it is said _with the
man's internal will_, is, because the man's will resides in his
understanding, and the man's intellectual principle is the inmost
principle of the woman, according to what was observed above concerning
the formation of the woman from the man, n. 32, and in other places. The
man has also an external will; but this frequently takes its tincture
from simulation and dissimulation. This will the wife notices; but she
does not conjoin herself with it, except pretendedly or in the way of
sport.

196. XI. THE END HEREIN IS, THAT THE WILL OF BOTH MAY BECOME ONE, AND
THAT THUS BOTH MAY BECOME ONE MAN (_homo_): for whoever conjoins to
himself the will of another, also conjoins to himself his understanding;
for the understanding regarded in itself is merely the minister and
servant of the will. That this is the case, appears evidently from the
affection of love, which moves the understanding to think as it directs.
Every affection of love belongs to the will; for what a man loves that
he also wills. From these considerations it follows, that whoever
conjoins to himself the will of a man conjoins to himself the whole man:
hence it is implanted as a principle in the wife's love to unite the
will of her husband to her own will; for hereby the wife becomes the
husband's, and the husband the wife's; thus both become one man
(_homo_).

197. XII. THIS FORMATION (ON THE PART OF THE WIFE) IS EFFECTED BY AN
APPROPRIATION OF THE AFFECTIONS OF THE HUSBAND. This article agrees with
the two preceding, because affections are of the will; for affections
which are merely derivations of the love, form the will, and make and
compose it; but these affections with men are in the understanding,
whereas with women they are in the will.

198. XIII. THIS FORMATION (ON THE PART OF THE WIFE) IS EFFECTED BY A
RECEPTION OF THE PROPAGATIONS OF THE SOUL OF THE HUSBAND, WITH THE
DELIGHT ARISING FROM HER DESIRE TO BE THE LOVE OF HER HUSBAND'S WISDOM.
This coincides with what was explained above, n. 172, 173, therefore any
further explanation is needless. Conjugial delights with wives arise
solely from their desire to be one with their husbands, as good is one
with truth in the spiritual marriage. That conjugial love descends from
this spiritual marriage, has been proved above in the chapter which
treats particularly on that subject; hence it may be seen, as in an
image, that the wife conjoins the man to herself, as good conjoins truth
to itself; and that the man reciprocally conjoins himself to the wife,
according to the reception of her love in himself, as truth reciprocally
conjoins itself to good, according to the reception of good in itself;
and that thus the love of the wife forms itself by the wisdom of the
husband, as good forms itself by truth; for truth is the form of good.
From these considerations it is also evident, that conjugial delights
with the wife originate principally in her desiring to be one with the
husband, consequently to be the love of her husband's wisdom; for in
such case she is made sensible of the delights of her own heat in the
man's light, according to what was explained in Article IV., n. 188.

199. XIV. THUS A MAIDEN IS FORMED INTO A WIFE, AND A YOUTH INTO A
HUSBAND. This flows as a consequence, from what has been said above in
this and the foregoing chapter respecting the conjunction of married
partners into one flesh. A maiden becomes or is made a wife, because in
a wife there are principles taken out of the husband, and therefore
supplemental, which were not previously in her as a maiden: a youth also
becomes or is made a husband, because in a husband there are principles
taken out of the wife, which exalt his receptibility of love and wisdom,
and which were not previously in him as a youth: this is the case with
those who are principled in love truly conjugial. That it is these who
feel themselves a united man (_homo_), and as it were one flesh, may be
seen in the preceding chapter, n. 178. From these considerations it is
evident, that with females the maiden principle is changed into that of
a wife, and with men the youthful principle is changed into that of a
husband. That this is the case, was experimentally confirmed to me in
the spiritual world, as follows: Some men asserted, that conjunction
with a female before marriage is like conjunction with a wife after
marriage.--On hearing this, the wives were very indignant, and said:
"There is no likeness at all in the two cases. The difference between
them is like that between what is fancied and what is real." Hereupon
the men rejoined, "Are you not females as before?" To this the wives
replied more sharply, "We are not females, but wives; you are in fancied
and not in real love; you therefore talk fancifully." Then the men said,
"If you are not females (_feminae_) still you are women (_mulieres_):"
and they replied, "In the first states of marriage we were women
(_mulieres_); but now we are wives."

200. XV. IN THE MARRIAGE OF ONE MAN WITH ONE WIFE, BETWEEN WHOM THERE
EXISTS LOVE TRULY CONJUGIAL, THE WIFE BECOMES MORE AND MORE A WIFE, AND
THE HUSBAND MORE AND MORE A HUSBAND. That love truly conjugial more and
more conjoins two into one man (_homo_), may be seen above n. 178, 179;
and as a wife becomes a wife from and according to conjunction with the
husband, and in like manner the husband with the wife; and as love truly
conjugial endures to eternity, it follows, that the wife becomes more
and more a wife, and the husband more and more a husband. The true
reason of this is, because in the marriage of love truly conjugial, each
married partner becomes continually a more interior man; for that love
opens the interiors of their minds; and as these are opened, a man
becomes more and more a man (_homo_): and to become more a man (_homo_)
in the case of the wife is to become more a wife, and in the case of the
husband to become more a husband. I have heard from the angels, that the
wife becomes more and more a wife as the husband becomes more and more a
husband, but not _vice versa_; because it rarely, if ever, happens, that
a chaste wife is wanting in love to her husband, but that the husband is
wanting in a return of love to his wife; and that this return of love is
wanting because he has no elevation of wisdom, which alone receives the
love of the wife: respecting this wisdom see above n. 130, 163-165.
These things however they said in regard to marriages on earth.

201. XVI. THUS ALSO THEIR FORMS ARE SUCCESSIVELY PERFECTED AND ENNOBLED
FROM WITHIN. The most perfect and noble human form results from the
conjunction of two forms by marriage so as to become one form; thus from
two fleshes becoming one flesh, according to creation. That in such case
the man's mind is elevated into superior light, and the wife's into
superior heat, and that then they germinate, and bear flowers and
fruits, like trees in the spring, may be seen above, n. 188, 189. That
from the nobleness of this form are produced noble fruits, which in the
heavens are spiritual, and on earth natural, will be seen in the
following article.

202. XVII. CHILDREN BORN OF PARENTS WHO ARE PRINCIPLED IN LOVE TRULY
CONJUGIAL, DERIVE FROM THEM THE CONJUGIAL PRINCIPLE OF GOOD AND TRUTH,
WHENCE THEY HAVE AN INCLINATION AND FACULTY, IF SONS, TO PERCEIVE THE
THINGS RELATING TO WISDOM, AND IF DAUGHTERS, TO LOVE THOSE THINGS WHICH
WISDOM TEACHES. That children derive from their parents inclination to
such things as had been objects of the love and life of the parents, is
a truth most perfectly agreeable to the testimony of history in general,
and of experience in particular; but that they do not derive or inherit
from their parents the affections themselves, and thence the lives of
those affections, but only inclinations and faculties thereto, has been
shewn me by the wise in the spiritual world; concerning whom, see the
two MEMORABLE RELATIONS above adduced. That children to the latest
posterity, from innate inclinations, if they are not modified, are led
into affections, thoughts, speech, and life, similar to those of their
parents, is clearly manifest from the Jews, who at this day are like
their fathers in Egypt, in the wilderness, in the land of Canaan, and in
the Lord's time; and this likeness is not confined to their minds only,
but extends to their countenances; for who does not know a Jew by his
look? The case is the same with the descendants of others: from which
considerations it may infallibly be concluded, that children are born
with inclinations to such things as their parents were inclined to. But
it is of the divine providence, lest thought and act should follow
inclination, that perverse inclinations may be corrected; and also that
a faculty has been implanted for this purpose, by virtue whereof parents
and masters have the power of amending the morals of children, and
children may afterwards, when they come to years of discretion, amend
their own morals.

203. We have said that children derive from their parents the conjugial
principle of good and truth, because this is implanted from creation in
the soul of every one; for it is that which flows into every man from
the Lord, and constitutes his human life. But this conjugial principle
passes into derivatives from the soul even to the ultimates of the body.
In its passage through these ultimates and those derivatives, it is
changed by the man himself in various ways, and sometimes into the
opposite, which is called the conjugial or connubial principle of what
is evil and false. When this is the case, the mind is closed from
beneath, and is sometimes twisted as a spire into the contrary; but with
some that principle is not closed, but remains half-open above, and with
some open. The latter and the former conjugial principle is the source
of those inclinations which children inherit from their parents, a son
after one manner, and a daughter after another. The reason why such
inclinations are derived from the conjugial principle, is, because, as
was proved above, n. 65, conjugial love is the foundation of all loves.

204. The reason why children born of parents who are principled in love
truly conjugial, derive inclinations and faculties, if a son, to
perceive the things relating to wisdom, and if a daughter, to love the
things which wisdom teaches, is, because the conjugial principle of good
and truth is implanted from creation in every soul, and also in the
principles derived from the soul; for it was shewn above, that this
conjugial principle fills the universe from first principles to last,
and from a man even to a worm; and also that the faculty to open the
inferior principles of the mind even to conjunction with its superior
principles, which are in the light and heat of heaven, is also implanted
in every man from creation: hence it is evident, that a superior
suitableness and facility to conjoin good to truth, and truth to good,
and thus to grow wise, is inherited by those who are born from such a
marriage; consequently they have a superior suitableness and facility
also to embrace the things relating to the church and heaven; for that
conjugial love is conjoined with these things, has been frequently shewn
above. From these considerations, reason may clearly discover the end
for which the Lord the Creator has provided, and still provides,
marriages of love truly conjugial.

205. I have been informed by the angels, that those who lived in the
most ancient times, live at this day in the heavens, in separate houses,
families, and nations, as they had lived on earth, and that scarce any
one of a house is wanting; and this because they were principled in love
truly conjugial; and that hence their children inherited inclinations to
the conjugial principle of good and truth, and were easily initiated
into it more and more interiorly by education received from their
parents, and afterwards as from themselves, when they become capable of
judging for themselves, were introduced into it by the Lord.

206. XVIII. THE REASON OF THIS IS BECAUSE THE SOUL OF THE OFFSPRING IS
FROM THE FATHER AND ITS CLOTHING FROM THE MOTHER. No wise man entertains
a doubt that the soul is from the father; it is also manifestly
conspicuous from minds, and likewise from faces which are the types of
minds, in descendants from fathers of families in a regular series; for
the father returns as in an image, if not in his sons, yet in his
grandsons and great grandsons; and this because the soul constitutes a
man's (_homo_) inmost principle, which may be covered and concealed by
the offspring nearest in descent, but nevertheless it comes forth and
manifests itself in the more remote issue. That the soul is from the
father, and its clothing from the mother, may be illustrated by
analogies in the vegetable kingdom. In this kingdom the earth or ground
is the common mother, which in itself, as in a womb, receives and
clothes seeds; yea, as it were conceives, bears, brings forth, and
educates them, as a mother her offspring from the father.

207. To the above I will add TWO MEMORABLE RELATIONS. FIRST. After some
time I was looking towards the city Athens, of which mention was made in
a former memorable relation, and I heard thence an unusual clamor. There
was in it something of laughter, and in the laughter something of
indignation, and in the indignation something of sadness: still however
the clamor was not thereby dissonant, but consonant: because one tone
was not together with the other, but one was within another. In the
spiritual world a variety and commixture of affections is distinctly
perceived in sound. I inquired from afar what was the matter. They said,
"A messenger is arrived from the place where the new comers from the
Christian world first appear, bringing information of what he has heard
there from three persons, that in the world whence they came they had
believed with the generality, that the blessed and happy after death
enjoy absolute rest from labor; and since administrations, offices, and
employments, are labor, they enjoy rest from these: and as those three
persons are now conducted hither by our emissary, and are at the gate
waiting for admission, a clamor was made, and it was deliberately
resolved they should not be introduced into the Palladium on Parnassus,
as the former were, but into the great auditory, to communicate the news
they brought from the Christian world: accordingly some deputies have
been sent to introduce them in form." Being at that time myself in the
spirit, and distances with spirits being according to the states of
their affections, and having at that time a desire to see and hear them,
I seemed to myself to be present there, and saw them introduced, and
heard what they said. The seniors or wiser part of the audience sat at
the sides of the auditory, and the rest in the midst; and before these
was an elevated piece of ground. Hither the three strangers, with the
messenger, were formally conducted by attendants, through the middle of
the auditory. When silence was obtained, they were addressed by a kind
of president of the assembly, and asked, "WHAT NEWS FROM THE EARTH?"
They replied, "There is a variety of news: but pray tell us what
information you want." The president answered, "WHAT NEWS IS THERE FROM
THE EARTH CONCERNING OUR WORLD AND HEAVEN?" They replied, "When we first
came into this world, we were informed, that here and in heaven there
are administrations, offices, employments, trades, studies, relating to
all sciences and professions, together with wonderful mechanical arts;
and yet we believed that after our removal or translation from the
natural world into the spiritual, we should enter upon an eternal rest
from labor; and what are employments but labor?" To this the president
replied, "By eternal rest from labor did you understand eternal
inactivity, in which you should be continually sitting and laying down,
with your bosoms and mouths open, attracting and inhaling delights and
joys?" "We conceived something of this sort," said the three strangers
smiling courteously. Then they were asked, "What connection have joys
and delights and the happiness thence resulting, with a state of
inactivity? By inactivity the mind is enfeebled and contracted, instead
of being strengthened and expanded; or in other words, the man is
reduced to a state of death, instead of being quickened into life.
Suppose a person to sit still in the most complete inactivity, with his
hands hanging down, his eyes fixed on the ground, and withdrawn from all
other objects, and suppose him at the same time to be encompassed by an
atmosphere of gladness, would not a lethargy seize both his head and
body, and the vital expansion of his countenance would be contracted,
and at length with relaxed fibres he would nod and totter, till he fell
to the earth? What is it that keeps the whole bodily system in its due
expansion and tension, but the tension of the mind? and whence comes the
tension of the mind but from administrations and employments, while the
discharge of them is attended with delight? I will therefore tell you
some news from heaven: in that world there are administrations, offices,
judicial proceedings both in greater and lesser cases, also mechanical
arts and employments." The strangers on hearing of judicial proceedings
in heaven, said, "To what purpose are such proceedings? are not all in
heaven inspired and led by God, and in consequence thereof taught what
is just and right? what need then is there of judges?" The president
replied, "In this world we are instructed and learn what is good and
true, also what is just and equitable, as in the natural world; and
these things we learn, not immediately from God, but mediately through
others; and every angel, like every man, thinks what is true, and does
what is good, as from himself; and this, according to the state of the
angel, is mixed and not pure: and moreover, there are among the angels
some of a simple and some of a wise character; and it is the part of the
wise to judge, when the simple, from their simplicity and ignorance, are
doubtful about what is just, or through mistake wander from it. But as
you are as yet strangers in this world, if it be agreeable to you to
accompany me into our city, we will shew you all that is contained
therein." Then they quitted the auditory, and some of the elders also
accompanied them. They were introduced into a large library, which was
divided into classes arranged according to the sciences. The three
strangers, on seeing so many books, were astonished, and said, "There
are books also in this world! whence do you procure parchment and paper,
pens and ink?" The elders replied, "We perceive that in the former world
you believed that this world is empty and void, because it is spiritual;
and you believed so because you had conceived an idea of what is
spiritual abstracted from what is material; and that which is so
abstracted appeared to you as nothingness, thus as empty and void; when
nevertheless in this world there is a fulness of all things. Here all
things are SUBSTANTIAL and not material: and material things derive
their origin from things substantial. We who live here are spiritual
men, because we are substantial and not material; hence in this world we
have all things that are in the natural world, in their perfection, even
books and writings, and many other things which are not in the natural
world." The three strangers, when they heard talk of things SUBSTANTIAL,
conceived that it must be so, as well because they saw written books, as
because they heard it asserted that material things originate in
substantial. For their further confirmation in these particulars, they
were conducted to the houses of the scribes, who were copying the
writings of the wise ones of the city; and they inspected the writings,
and wondered to see them so beautiful and elegant. After this they were
conducted to the museums, schools, and colleges, and to the places where
they had their literary sports. Some of these were called the sports of
the Heliconides, some of the Parnassides, some of the Athæides, and some
the sports of the maidens of the fountain. They were told that the
latter were so called, because maidens signify affections of the
sciences, and every one has intelligence according to his affection for
the sciences: the sports so called were spiritual exercises and trials
of skill. Afterwards they were led about the city to see the rulers,
administrators, and their officers, by whom they were conducted to see
several wonderful works executed in a spiritual manner by the
artificers. When they had taken a view of all these things, the
president again conversed with them about the eternal rest from labor,
into which the blessed and happy enter after death, and said, "Eternal
rest is not inactivity; for inactivity occasions a thorough languor,
dulness, stupor, and drowsiness of the mind and thence of the body; and
these things are death and not life, still less eternal life which the
angels of heaven enjoy; therefore eternal rest is that which dispels
such mischiefs, and causes a man to live; and it is this which elevates
the mind; consequently it is by some employment and work that the mind
is excited, vivified, and delighted; which is affected according to the
use, from which, in which, and to which the mind is actuated. Hence the
universal heaven is regarded by the Lord as containing uses; and every
angel is an angel according to use; the delight of use carries him
along, as a prosperous gale a ship, and causes him to be in eternal
peace, and the rest of peace. This is the meaning of eternal rest from
labor. That an angel is alive according as his mind is directed to use,
is evident from the consideration, that every one has conjugial love
with its energy, ability and delights, according as he devotes himself
to the genuine use in which he is." When the three strangers were
convinced that eternal rest is not inactivity, but the delight of some
useful employment, there came some maidens with pieces of embroidery and
net-work, wrought with their own hands, which they presented to them.
When the novitiate spirits were gone, the maidens sang an ode, wherein
they expressed with angelic melody the affection of useful works with
the pleasures attending it.

208. THE SECOND MEMORABLE RELATION. While I was meditating on the arcana
of conjugial love stored up with wives, there again appeared the GOLDEN
SHOWER described above; and I recollected that it fell over a hall in
the east where there lived three conjugial loves, that is, three married
pairs, who loved each other tenderly. On seeing it, and as if invited by
the sweetness of meditating on that love, I hastened towards it, and as
I approached, the shower from golden became purple, afterwards scarlet,
and when I came near, it was sparkling like dew. I knocked at the door,
and when it was opened, I said to the attendant, "Tell the husbands that
the person who before came with an angel, is come again, and begs the
favor of being admitted into their company." Presently the attendant
returned with a message of assent from the husbands, and I entered. The
three husbands with their wives were together in an open gallery, and as
I paid my respects to them, they returned the compliment. I then asked
the wives, Whether the white dove in the window afterwards appeared?
They said, "Yes; and to-day also; and it likewise expanded its wings;
from which we concluded that you were near at hand, and were desirous of
information respecting one other arcanum concerning conjugial love." I
inquired, "Why do you say _one_ arcanum; when I came here to learn
several?" They replied, "They are arcana, and some of them transcend
your wisdom to such a degree, that the understanding of your thought
cannot comprehend them. --Storm and Injury to the Fleet.--Approach of the
Equinox.-- Further Prosecution of the Enterprise postponed till the
following Year.-- Caesar goes to Italy for the Winter.--Large Naval
Preparations.--Return of Spring.--Alarm on the Moselle.--Fleet
collects at Boulogne.--Caesar sails for Britain a Second Time.--Lands
at Deal.--Second and more Destructive Storm.--Ships repaired,
and placed out of Danger.--Caesar marches through Kent.--Crosses the
Thames, and reaches St. Albans.--Goes no further, and returns to
Gaul.--Object of the Invasion of Britain.--Description of the Country
and People.

CHAPTER XVII.

Distribution of the Legions after the Return from Britain.--Conspiracy
among the Gallic Chiefs.--Rising of the Eburones.--Destruction of Sabinus,
and a Division of the Roman Army.--Danger of Quintus Cicero.--Relieved
by Caesar in Person.--General Disturbance.--Labienus attacked at
Lavacherie.--Defeats and kills Induciomarus.--Second Conquest of the
Belgae.--Caesar again crosses the Rhine.--Quintus Cicero in Danger a
Second Time.--Courage of a Roman Officer.--Punishment of the Revolted
Chiefs.--Execution of Acco.

CHAPTER XVIII.

Correspondence of Cicero with Caesar.--Intimacy with Pompey and Crassus.--
Attacks on Piso and Gabinius.---Cicero compelled to defend Gabinius--and
Vatinius.--Dissatisfaction with his Position.--Corruption at the Consular
Elections.--Public Scandal.--Caesar and Pompey.--Deaths of Aurelia and
Julia.--Catastrophe in the East.--Overthrow and Death of Crassus.--
Intrigue to detach Pompey from Caesar.---Milo a Candidate for the
Consulship.--Murder of Clodius.--Burning of the Senate-house.--Trial
and Exile of Milo.--Fresh Engagements with Caesar.--Promise of the
Consulship at the End of his Term in Gaul.

CHAPTER XIX.

Last Revolt of Gaul.--Massacre of Romans at Gien.--Vercingetorix.--Effect
on the Celts of the Disturbances at Rome.--Caesar crosses the Cevennes.--
Defeats the Arverni.--Joins his Army on the Seine.--Takes Gien, Nevers,
and Bourges.--Fails at Gergovia.--Rapid March to Sens.--Labienus at
Paris.--Battle of the Vingeanne.--Siege of Alesia.--Caesar's Double
Lines.--Arrival of the Relieving Army of Gauls.--First Battle on the
Plain.--Second Battle.--Great Defeat of the Gauls.--Surrender of
Alesia.--Campaign against the Carnutes and the Bellovaci.--Rising on the
Dordogne.--Capture of Uxellodunum.--Caesar at Arras.--Completion of
the Conquest.

CHAPTER XX.
Bibulus in Syria.--Approaching Term of Caesar's Government.--Threats
of Impeachment.--Caesar to be Consul or not to be Consul?--Caesar's
Political Ambition.--Hatred felt toward him by the Aristocracy.--Two
Legions taken from him on Pretense of Service against the
Parthians.--Caesar to be recalled before the Expiration of his
Government.--Senatorial Intrigues.-- Curio deserts the Senate.--Labienus
deserts Caesar.--Cicero in Cilicia.-- Returns to Rome.--Pompey
determined on War.--Cicero's Uncertainties.-- Resolution of the
Senate and Consuls.--Caesar recalled.--Alarm in Rome.-- Alternative
Schemes.--Letters of Cicero.--Caesar's Crime in the Eyes of the
Optimates.

CHAPTER XXI.
Caesar appeals to his Army.--The Tribunes join him at Rimini.--Panic
and Flight of the Senate.--Incapacity of Pompey.--Fresh Negotiations.--
Advance of Caesar.--The Country Districts refuse to arm against
him.-- Capture of Corfinium.--Release of the Prisoners.--Offers of
Caesar.-- Continued Hesitation of Cicero.--Advises Pompey to make
Peace.--Pompey, with the Senate and Consuls, flies to Greece.As they said
this, the dove was heard to make a sort of moaning; and immediately the
wives said, "This is a token to us that we have a wish to communicate
greater arcana, but that it is not allowable: probably you will reveal
to the men what you have heard." I replied, "I intend to do so: what
harm can come from it?" Hereupon the wives talked together on the
subject, and then said, "Reveal it, if you like. We are well aware of
the power of persuasion which wives possess. They will say to their
husbands, 'The man is not in earnest; he tells idle tales: he is but
joking from appearances, and from strange fancies usual with men. Do not
believe him, but believe us: we know that you are loves, and we
obediences.' Therefore you may reveal it if you like; but still the
husbands will place no dependence on what comes from your lips, but on
that which comes from the lips of their wives which they kiss."

       *       *       *       *       *

UNIVERSALS RESPECTING MARRIAGES.

209. There are so many things relating to marriages that, if
particularly treated of, they would swell this little work into a large
volume: for we might treat particularly of the similitude and
dissimilitude subsisting among married partners; of the elevation of
natural conjugial love into spiritual, and of their conjunction; of the
increase of the one and the decrease of the other; of the varieties and
diversities of each; of the intelligence of wives; of the universal
conjugial sphere proceeding from heaven, and of its opposite from hell,
and of their influx and reception; with many other particulars, which,
if individually enlarged upon, would render this work so bulky as to
tire the reader. For this reason, and to avoid useless prolixity, we
will condense these particulars into UNIVERSAL RESPECTING MARRIAGES. But
these, like the foregoing subjects, must be considered distinctly as
arranged under the following articles: I. _The sense proper to conjugial
love is the sense of touch._ II. _With those who are in love truly
conjugial, the faculty of growing wise gradually increases; but with
those who are not it decreases._ III. _With those who are in love truly
conjugial the happiness of dwelling together increases; but with those
who are not it decreases._ IV. _With those who are in love truly
conjugial, conjunction of minds increases, and therewith friendship; but
with those who are not they both decrease._ V. _Those who are in love
truly conjugial continually desire to be one man (homo); but those who
are not desire to be two._ VI. _Those who are in love truly conjugial,
in marriage have respect to what is eternal; but with those who are not
the case is reversed._ VII. _Conjugial love resides with chaste wives;
but still their love depends on the husbands._ VIII. _Wives love the
bonds of marriage if the men do._ IX. _The intelligence of women is in
itself modest, elegant, pacific, yielding, soft, tender; but the
intelligence of men is in itself grave, harsh, hard, daring, fond of
licentiousness_. X. _Wives are in no excitation as men are; but they
have a state of preparation for reception._ XI. _Men have abundant store
according to the love of propagating the truths of their wisdom, and to
the love of doing uses._ XII. _Determination is in the good pleasure of
the husband._ XIII. _The conjugial sphere flows from the Lord through
heaven into everything in the universe, even to its ultimates._ XIV.
_This sphere is received by the female sex, and through that is
transferred into the male sex; and not_ vice versa. XV. _Where there is
love truly conjugial, this sphere is received by the wife, and only
through her by the husband._ XVI. _Where there is love not conjugial,
this sphere is received indeed by the wife, but not by the husband
through her._ XVII. _Love truly conjugial may exist with one of the
married partners and not at the same time with the other._ XVIII. _There
are various similitudes and dissimilitudes, both internal and external,
with married partners._ XIX. _Various similitudes can be conjoined, but
not with dissimilitudes._ XX. _The Lord provides similitudes for those
who desire love truly conjugial; and if not on earth, he yet provides
them in heaven._ XXI. _A man (homo) according to the deficiency and loss
of conjugial love, approaches to the nature of a beast._ We proceed to
the explanation of each article.

210. I. THE SENSE PROPER TO CONJUGIAL LOVE IS THE SENSE OF TOUCH. Every
love has its own proper sense. The love of seeing, grounded in the love
of understanding, has the sense of seeing; and the gratifications proper
to it are the various kinds of symmetry and beauty. The love of hearing
grounded in the love of hearkening to and obeying, has the sense of
hearing; and the gratifications proper to it are the various kinds of
harmony. The love of knowing these things which float about in the air,
grounded in the love of perceiving, is the sense of smelling; and the
gratifications proper to it are the various kinds of fragrance. The love
of self-nourishment, grounded in the love of imbibing goods, is the
sense of tasting; and the delights proper to it are the various kinds of
delicate foods. The love of knowing objects, grounded in the love of
circumspection and self-preservation, is the sense of touching, and the
gratifications proper to it are the various kinds of titillation. The
reason why the love of conjunction with a partner, grounded in the love
of uniting good and truth, has the sense of touch proper to it, is,
because this sense is common to all the senses, and hence borrows from
them somewhat of support and nourishment. That this love brings all the
above-mentioned senses into communion with it, and appropriates their
gratification, is well known. That the sense of touch is devoted to
conjugial love, and is proper to it, is evident from all its sports, and
from the exaltation of its subtleties to the highest degree of what is
exquisite. But the further consideration of this subject we leave to
lovers.

211. II. WITH THOSE WHO ARE IN LOVE TRULY CONJUGIAL, THE FACULTY OF
GROWING WISE INCREASES; BUT WITH THOSE WHO ARE NOT IT DECREASES. The
faculty of growing wise increases with those who are in love truly
conjugial, because this love appertains to married partners on account
of wisdom, and according to it, as has been fully proved in the
preceding sections; also, because the sense of that love is the touch,
which is common to all the senses, and also is full of delights; in
consequence of which it opens the interiors of the mind, as it opens the
interiors of the senses, and therewith the organical principles of the
whole body. Hence it follows, that those who are principled in that
love, prefer nothing to growing wise; for a man grows wise in proportion
as the interiors of his mind are opened; because by such opening, the
thoughts of the understanding are elevated into superior light, and the
affections of the will into superior heat; and superior light is wisdom,
and superior heat is the love thereof. Spiritual delights conjoined to
natural delights, which are the portion of those who are in love truly
conjugial, constitute loveliness, and thence the faculty of growing
wise. Hence it is that the angels have conjugial love according to
wisdom; and the increase of that love and at the same time of its
delights is according to the increase of wisdom; and spiritual
offspring, which are produced from their marriages, are such things as
are of wisdom from the father, and of love from the mother, which they
love from a spiritual _storge_; which love unites with their conjugial
love, and continually elevates it, and joins them together.

212. The contrary happens with those who are not in any conjugial love,
from not having any love of wisdom. These enter the marriage state with
no other end in view than lasciviousness, in which is also the love of
growing insane; for every end considered in itself is a love, and
lasciviousness in its spiritual origin is insanity. By insanity we mean
a delirium in the mind occasioned by false principles; and an eminent
degree of delirium is occasioned by truths which are falsified until
they are believed to be wisdom. That such persons are opposed to
conjugial love, is confirmed or evinced by manifest proof in the
spiritual world; where, on perceiving the first scent of conjugial love,
they fly into caverns, and shut the doors; and if these are opened, they
rave like madmen in the world.

213. III. WITH THOSE WHO ARE IN LOVE TRULY CONJUGIAL, THE HAPPINESS OF
DWELLING TOGETHER INCREASES; BUT WITH THOSE WHO ARE NOT IT DECREASES.
The happiness of dwelling together increases with those who are in love
truly conjugial, because they mutually love each other with every sense.
The wife sees nothing more lovely than the husband, and the husband
nothing more lovely than the wife; neither do they hear, smell, or touch
any thing more lovely; hence the happiness they enjoy of living together
in the same house, chamber, and bed. That this is the case, you that are
husbands can assure yourselves from the first delights of marriage,
which are in their fulness; because at that time the wife is the only
one of the sex that is loved. That the reverse is the case with those
who are not in conjugial love, is well known.

214. IV. WITH THOSE WHO ARE IN LOVE TRULY CONJUGIAL CONJUNCTION OF MINDS
INCREASES, AND THEREWITH FRIENDSHIP; BUT WITH THOSE WHO ARE NOT, THEY
BOTH DECREASE. That conjunction of minds increases with those who are in
love truly conjugial, was proved in the chapter ON THE CONJUNCTION OF
SOULS AND MINDS BY MARRIAGE, WHICH IS MEANT BY THE LORD'S WORDS, THAT
THEY ARE NO LONGER TWO BUT ONE FLESH, see n. 156*-191. But that
conjunction increases as friendship unites with love; because friendship
is as it were the face and also the raiment of that love; for it not
only joins itself to love as raiment, but also conjoins itself thereto
as a face. Love preceding friendship is like the love of the sex, which,
after the marriage vow, takes its leave and departs; whereas love
conjoined to friendship after the marriage vow, remains and is
strengthened; it likewise outers more interiorly into the breast,
friendship introducing it, and making it truly conjugial. In this case
the love makes its friendship also conjugial, which differs greatly from
the friendship of every other love; for it is full. That the case is
reversed with those who are not principled in conjugial love, is well
known. With these, the first friendship, which was insinuated during the
time of courtship, and afterwards during the period immediately
succeeding marriage, recedes more and more from the interiors of the
mind, and thence successively at length retires to the cuticles; and
with those who think of separation it entirely departs; but with those
who do not think of separation, love remains in the externals, yet it is
cold in the internals.

215. V. THOSE WHO ARE IN LOVE TRULY CONJUGIAL, CONTINUALLY DESIRE TO BE
ONE MAN, BUT THOSE WHO ARE NOT IN CONJUGIAL LOVE, DESIRE TO BE TWO.
Conjugial love essentially consists in the desire of two to become one;
that is, in their desire that two lives may become one life. This desire
is the perpetual _conatus_ of that love, from which flow all its
effects. That _conatus_ is the very essence of motion, and that desire
is the living _conatus_ appertaining to man, is confirmed by the
researches of philosophers, and is also evident to such as take a view
of the subject from refined reason. Hence it follows, that those who are
in love truly conjugial, continually endeavour, that is, desire to be
one man. That the contrary is the case with those who are not in
conjugial love, they themselves very well know; for as they continually
think themselves two from the disunion of their souls and minds, so they
do not comprehend what is meant by the Lord's words, "_They are no
longer two, but one flesh_;" Matt. xix. 6.

216. VI. THOSE WHO ARE IN LOVE TRULY CONJUGIAL, IN MARRIAGE HAVE RESPECT
TO WHAT IS ETERNAL; BUT WITH THOSE WHO ARE NOT THE CASE IS REVERSED.
Those who are in love truly conjugial have respect to what is eternal,
because in that love there is eternity; and its eternity is grounded in
this, that love with the wife, and wisdom with the husband, increases to
eternity; and in the increase or progression the married partners enter
more and more interiorly into the blessedness of heaven, which their
wisdom and its love have stored up together in themselves: if therefore
the idea of what is eternal were to be plucked away, or by any casualty
to escape from their minds, it would be as if they were cast down from
heaven. What is the state of conjugial partners in heaven, when the idea
of what is eternal falls out of their minds, and the idea of what is
temporal takes its place, was made evident to me from the following
case. On a certain time, permission having been granted for the purpose,
two married partners were present with me from heaven: and at that
instant the idea of what is eternal respecting marriage was taken away
from them by an idle disorderly spirit who was talking with craft and
subtlety. Hereupon they began to bewail themselves, saying, that they
could not live any longer, and that they felt such misery as they had
never felt before. When this was perceived by their co-angels in heaven,
the disorderly spirit was removed and cast down; whereupon the idea of
what is eternal instantly returned to them, and they were gladdened in
heart, and most tenderly embraced each other. Besides this, I have heard
two married partners, who at one instant entertained an idea of what is
eternal respecting their marriage, and the next an idea of what is
temporal. This arose from their being internally dissimilar. When they
were in the idea of what is eternal, they were mutually glad; but when
in the idea of what is temporal, they said, "There is no longer any
marriage between us;" and the wife, "I am no longer a wife, but a
concubine;" and the husband, "I am no longer a husband, but an
adulterer;" wherefore while their internal dissimilitude was open to
them, the man left the woman, and the woman the man: afterwards,
however, as each had an idea of what is eternal respecting marriage,
they were consociated with suitable partners. From these instances it
may be clearly seen, that those who are in love truly conjugial have
respect to what is eternal; and if this idea escapes from their inmost
thoughts, they are disunited as to conjugial love, though not at the
same time as to friendship; for friendship dwells in externals, but
conjugial love in internals. The case is similar with marriages on
earth, where married partners who tenderly love each other, think of
what is eternal respecting the marriage-covenant, and not at all of its
termination by death; and if this should enter their thoughts, they are
grieved; nevertheless they are cherished again by hope from the thought
of its continuance after their decease.

[Transcriber's Note: The out-of-order section number which follows is in
the original text, as is the asterisk which does not seem to indicate a
footnote.]

216.* VII. CONJUGIAL LOVE RESIDES WITH CHASTE WIVES; BUT STILL THEIR
LOVE DEPENDS ON THE HUSBANDS. The reason of this is, because wives are
born loves; and hence it is innate to them to desire to be one with
their husbands and from this thought of their will they continually feed
their love; wherefore to recede from the _conatus_ of uniting themselves
to their husbands, would be to recede from themselves: it is otherwise
with the husbands, who are not born loves, but recipients of that love
from their wives; and on this account, so far as they receive it, so far
the wives enter with their love; but so far as they do not receive it,
so far the wives stand aloof with their love, and wait in expectation.
This is the case with chaste wives; but it is otherwise with the
unchaste. From these considerations it is evident, that conjugial love
resides with the wives, but that their love depends on the husbands.

217. VIII. WIVES LOVE THE BONDS OF MARRIAGE IF THE MEN DO. This follows
from what was said in the foregoing article: moreover, wives naturally
desire to be, and to be called wives; this being to them a name of
respect and honor; they therefore love the bonds of marriage. And as
chaste wives desire, not in name only, but in reality, to be wives, and
this is effected by a closer and closer binding with their husbands,
therefore they love the bonds of marriage as establishing the
marriage-covenant, and this so much the more as they are loved again by
their husbands, or what is tantamount, as the men love those bonds.

218. IX. THE INTELLIGENCE OF WOMEN IS IN ITSELF MODEST, ELEGANT,
PACIFIC, YIELDING, SOFT, TENDER; BUT THE INTELLIGENCE OF MEN IN ITSELF
IS GRAVE, HARSH, HARD, DARING, FOND OF LICENTIOUSNESS. That such is the
characteristic distinction of the woman and the man, is very evident
from the body, the face, the tone of voice, the conversation, the
gesture, and the manners of each: from the BODY, in that there is more
hardness in the skin and flesh of men, and more softness in that of
women; from the FACE, in that it is harder, more fixed, harsher, of
darker complexion, also bearded, thus less beautiful in men; whereas in
women it is softer, more yielding, more tender, of fairer complexion,
and thence more beautiful; from the TONE OF VOICE, in that it is deeper
with men, and sweeter with women; from the CONVERSATION in that with men
it is given to licentiousness and daring, but with women it is modest
and pacific; from the GESTURE, in that with men it is stronger and
firmer, whereas with women it is more weak and feeble; from the MANNERS,
in that with men they are more unrestrained, but with women more
elegant. How far from the very cradle the genius of men differs from
that of women, was discovered to me clearly from seeing a number of boys
and girls met together. I saw them at times through a window in the
street of a great city, where more than twenty assembled every day. The
boys, agreeably to the disposition born with them, in their pastimes
were tumultuous, vociferous, apt to fight, to strike, and to throw
stones at each other; whereas the girls sat peaceably at the doors of
the houses, some playing with little children, some dressing dolls or
working on bits of linen, some kissing each other; and to my surprise,
they still looked with satisfaction at the boys whose pastimes were so
different from their own. Hence I could see plainly, that a man by birth
is understanding, and a woman, love; and also the quality of
understanding and of love in their principles; and thereby what would be
the quality of a man's understanding without conjunction with female
love, and afterwards with conjugial love.

219. X. WIVES ARE IN NO EXCITATION AS MEN ARE; BUT THEY HAVE A STATE OF
PREPARATION FOR RECEPTION. That men have semination and consequent
excitation, and that women have not the latter because they have not the
former, is evident, but that women have a state of preparation for
reception, and thus for conception, I relate from what has been told me;
but what the nature and quality of this state with the women is, I am
not allowed to describe; besides, it is known to them alone: but whether
their love, while they are in that state, is in the enjoyment of its
delight, or in what is undelightful, as some say, they have not made
known. This only is generally known, that it is not allowed the husband
to say to the wife, that he is able and not willing: for thereby the
state of reception is greatly hurt, which is prepared according to the
state of the husband's ability.

220. XI. MEN HAVE ABUNDANT STORE ACCORDING TO THE LOVE OF PROPAGATING
THE TRUTHS OF WISDOM, AND TO THE LOVE OF DOING USES. This position is
one of the arcana which were known to the ancients, and which are now
lost. The ancients knew that everything which was done in the body is
from a spiritual origin: as that from the will, which in itself is
spiritual, actions flow; that from the thought, which also is spiritual,
speech flows; also that natural sight is grounded in spiritual sight,
which is that of the understanding; natural hearing in spiritual
hearing, which is attention of the understanding and at the same time
accommodation of the will; and natural smelling in spiritual smelling,
which is perception; and so forth: in like manner they saw that
semination with men is from a spiritual origin. That it is from the
truths of which the understanding consists, they concluded from several
deductions both of reason and of experience; and they asserted, that
nothing is received by males from the spiritual marriage, which is that
of good and truth, and which flows into everything in the universe, but
truth, and whatever has relation to truth; and that this in its progress
into the body is formed into seed; and that hence it is, that seeds
spiritually understood are truths. As to formation, they asserted, that
the masculine soul, as being intellectual, is thus truth; for the
intellectual principle is nothing else; wherefore while the soul
descends, truth also descends: that this is effected by this
circumstance, that the soul, which is the inmost principle of every man
(_homo_) and every animal, and which in its essence is spiritual, from
an implanted tendency to self-propagation, follows in the descent, and
is desirous to procreate itself; and that when this is the case, the
entire soul forms itself, and clothes itself, and becomes seed: and that
this may be done thousands of times, because the soul is a spiritual
substance, which is not a subject of extension but of impletion, and
from which no part can be taken away, but the whole may be produced,
without any loss thereof: hence it is, that it is as fully present in
the smallest receptacles, which are seeds, as in its greatest
receptacle, the body. Since therefore the principle of truth in the soul
is the origin of seed, it follows, that men have abundant store
according to their love of propagating the truths of their wisdom: it is
also according to their love of doing uses; because uses are the goods
which truths produce. In the world also it is well known to some, that
the industrious have abundant store, but not the idle. I inquired, "How
is a feminine principle produced from a male soul?" and I received for
answer, that it was from intellectual good; because this in its essence
is truth: for the intellect can think that this is good, thus that it is
true that it is good. It is otherwise with the will: this does not think
what is good and true, but loves and does it. Therefore in the Word sons
signify truths, and daughters goods, as may be seen above, n. 120; and
seed signifies truth, as may be seen in the APOCALYPSE REVEALED, n. 565.

221. XII. DETERMINATION IS IN THE GOOD PLEASURE OF THE HUSBAND. This is,
because with men there is the abundant store above mentioned; and this
varies with them according to the states of their minds and bodies: for
the understanding is not so constant in its thoughts as the will is in
its affections; since it is sometimes carried upwards, sometimes
downwards; at one time it is in a serene and clear state in another in a
turbulent and obscure one; sometimes it is employed on agreeable
objects, sometimes on disagreeable; and as the mind, while it acts, is
also in the body, it follows, that the body has similar states: hence
the husband at times recedes from conjugial love, and at times accedes
to it, and the abundant store is removed in the one state, and restored
in the other. These are the reasons why determination at all times is to
be left to the good pleasure of the husband: hence also it is that
wives, from a wisdom implanted in them, never offer any admonition on
such subjects.

222. XIII. THE CONJUGIAL SPHERE FLOWS FROM THE LORD THROUGH HEAVEN INTO
EVERYTHING IN THE UNIVERSE, EVEN TO ITS ULTIMATES. That love and wisdom,
or, what is the same, good and truth, proceed from the Lord, was shewn
above in a chapter on the subject. Those two principles in a marriage
proceed continually from the Lord, because they are himself, and from
him are all things; and the things which proceed from him fill the
universe, for unless this were the case, nothing which exists would
subsist. There are several spheres which proceed from him; the sphere of
the conservation of the created universe; the sphere of the defence of
good and truth against evil and false, the sphere of reformation and
regeneration, the sphere of innocence and peace, the sphere of mercy and
grace, with several others; but the universal of all is the conjugial
sphere, because this also is the sphere of propagation, and thus the
supereminent sphere of the conservation of the created universe by
successive generations. That this conjugial sphere fills the universe,
and pervades all things from first to last, is evident from what has
been shewn above, that there are marriages in the heavens, and the most
perfect in the third or supreme heaven: and that besides taking place
with men it takes place also with all the subjects of the animal kingdom
in the earth, even down to worms; and moreover with all the subjects of
the vegetable kingdom, from olives and palms even to the smallest
grasses. That this sphere is more universal than the sphere of heat and
light, which proceeds from the sun of our world, may appear reasonable
from this consideration, that it operates also in the absence of the
sun's heat, as in winter, and in the absence of its light, as in the
night, especially with men (_homines_). The reason why it so operates
is, because it was from the sun of the angelic heaven, and thence there
is a constant equation of heat and light, that is, a conjunction of good
and truth; for it is in a continual spring. The changes of good and
truth, or of its heat and light, are not variations thereof, like the
variations on earth arising from changes of the heat and light
proceeding from the natural sun; but they arise from the recipient
subjects.

223. XIV. THIS SPHERE IS RECEIVED BY THE FEMALE SEX, AND THROUGH THAT IS
TRANSFERRED TO THE MALE SEX. There is not any conjugial love
appertaining to the male sex, but it appertains solely to the female
sex, and from this sex is transferred to the male: this I have seen
evidenced by experience; concerning which see above, n. 161. A further
proof of it is supplied from this consideration, that the male form is
the intellectual form, and the female the voluntary; and the
intellectual form cannot grow warm with conjugial heat from itself, but
from the conjunctive heat of some one, in whom it was implanted from
creation; consequently it cannot receive that love except by the
voluntary form of the woman adjoined to itself; because this also is a
form of love. This same position might be further confirmed by the
marriage of good and truth; and, to the natural man, by the marriage of
the heart and lungs; for the heart corresponds to love, and the lungs to
understanding; but as the generality of mankind are deficient in the
knowledge of these subjects, confirmation thereby would tend rather to
obscure than to illustrate. It is in consequence of the transference of
this sphere from the female sex into the male, that the mind is also
inflamed solely from thinking about the sex; that hence also comes
propagative formation and thereby excitation, follows of course; for
unless heat is united to light on earth, nothing flourishes and is
excited to cause fructification there.

224. XV. WHERE THERE IS LOVE TRULY CONJUGIAL, THIS SPHERE IS RECEIVED BY
THE WIFE, AND ONLY THROUGH HER BY THE HUSBAND. That this sphere, with
those who are in love truly conjugial, is received by the husband only
through the wife, is at this day an arcanum; and yet in itself it is not
an arcanum, because the bridegroom and new-married husband may know
this; is he not affected conjugially by whatever proceeds from the bride
and new-married wife, but not at that time by what proceeds from others
of the sex? The case is the same with those who live together in love
truly conjugial. And since everyone, both man and woman, is encompassed
by his own sphere of life, densely on the breast, and less densely on
the back, it is manifest whence it is that husbands who are very fond of
their wives, turn themselves to them, and in the day-time regard them
with complacency; and on the other hand, why those who do not love their
wives, turn themselves away from them, and in the day-time regard them
with aversion. By the reception of the conjugial sphere by the husband
only through the wife, love truly conjugial is known and distinguished
from that which is spurious, false, and cold.

225. XVI. WHERE THERE IS LOVE NOT CONJUGIAL, THIS SPHERE IS RECEIVED
INDEED BY THE WIFE, BUT NOT BY THE HUSBAND THROUGH HER. This conjugial
sphere flowing into the universe is in its origin divine; in its
progress in heaven with the angels it is celestial and spiritual; with
men it is natural, with beasts and birds animal, with worms merely
corporeal, with vegetables it is void of life; and moreover in all its
subjects it is varied according to their forms. Now as this sphere is
received immediately by the female sex, and mediately by the male, and
as it is received according to forms, it follows, that this sphere,
which in its origin is holy, may in the subjects be turned into what is
not holy, yea may be even inverted into what is opposite. The sphere
opposite to it is called meretricious with such women, and adulterous
with such men; and as such men and women are in hell, this sphere is
from thence: but of this sphere there is also much variety, and hence
there are several species of it; and such a species is attracted and
appropriated by a man (_vir_) as is agreeable to him, and as is
conformable and correspondent with his peculiar temper and disposition.
From these considerations it may appear, that the man who does not love
his wife, receives that sphere from some other source than from his
wife; nevertheless it is a fact, that it is also inspired by the wife,
but without the husband's knowing it, and while he grows warm.

226. XVII. LOVE TRULY CONJUGIAL MAY EXIST WITH ONE OF THE MARRIED
PARTNERS, AND NOT AT THE SAME TIME WITH THE OTHER. For one may from the
heart devote himself to chaste marriage, while the other knows not what
chaste marriage is; one may love the things which are of the church, but
the other those which are of the world alone: as to their minds, one may
be in heaven, the other in hell; hence there may be conjugial love with
the one, and not with the other. The minds of such, since they are
turned in a contrary direction, are inwardly in collision with each
other; and if not outwardly, still, he that is not in conjugial love,
regards his lawful consort as a tiresome old woman; and so in other
cases.

227. XVIII. THERE ARE VARIOUS SIMILITUDES AND DISSIMILITUDES, BOTH
INTERNAL AND EXTERNAL, WITH MARRIED PARTNERS. It is well known, that
between married partners there are similitudes and dissimilitudes, and
that the external appear, but not the internal, except after some time
of living together, to the married partners themselves, and by
indications to others; but it would be useless to mention each so that
they might be known, since several pages might be filled with an account
and description of their varieties. Similitudes may in part be deduced
and concluded from the dissimilitudes on account of which conjugial love
is changed into cold; of which we shall speak in the following chapter.
Similitudes and dissimilitudes in general originate from connate
inclinations, varied by education, connections, and persuasions that
have been imbibed.

228. XIX. VARIOUS SIMILITUDES CAN BE CONJOINED, BUT NOT WITH
DISSIMILITUDES. The varieties of similitudes are very numerous, and
differ more or less from each other; but still those which differ may in
time be conjoined by various things, especially by accommodations to
desires, by mutual offices and civilities, by abstaining from what is
unchaste, by the common love of infants and the care of children, but
particularly by conformity in things relating to the church; for things
relating to the church effect a conjunction of similitudes differing
interiorly, other things only exteriorly. But with dissimilitudes no
conjunction can be effected, because they are antipathetical.

229. XX. THE LORD PROVIDES SIMILITUDES FOR THOSE WHO DESIRE LOVE TRULY
CONJUGIAL, AND IF NOT ON EARTH, HE YET PROVIDES THEM IN HEAVEN. The
reason of this is, because all marriages of love truly conjugial are
provided by the Lord. That they are from him, may be seen above, n. 130,
131; but in what manner they are provided in heaven, I have heard thus
described by the angels: The divine providence of the Lord extends to
everything, even to the minutest particulars, concerning marriages and
in marriages, because all the delights of heaven spring from the
delights of conjugial love, as sweet waters from the fountain-head; and
on this account it is provided that conjugial pairs be born; and that
they be continually educated to their several marriages under the Lord's
auspices, neither the boy nor the girl knowing anything of the matter;
and after a stated time, when they both become marriageable, they meet
in some place as by chance, and see each other, and in this case they
instantly know, as by a kind of instinct, that they are a pair, and by a
kind of inward dictate think within themselves, the youth, that she is
mine, and the maiden, that he is mine; and when this thought has existed
some time in the mind of each, they accost each other from a deliberate
purpose, and betroth themselves. It is said, as by chance, by instinct,
and by dictate; and the meaning is, by divine providence; since, while
the divine providence is unknown, it has such an appearance; for the
Lord opens internal similitudes, so that they may see themselves.

230. XXI. A MAN (_homo_) ACCORDING TO THE DEFICIENCY AND LOSS OF
CONJUGIAL LOVE, APPROACHES TO THE NATURE OF A BEAST. The reason of this
is, because so far as a man (_homo_) is in conjugial love, so far he is
spiritual, and so far as he is spiritual, so far he is a man (_homo_);
for a man is born to a life after death, and attains the possession
thereof in consequence of having in him a spiritual soul, and is capable
of being elevated thereto by the faculty of his understanding; if in
this case his will, from the faculty also granted to it, is elevated at
the same time, he lives after death the life of heaven. The contrary
comes to pass, if he is in a love opposite to conjugial love; for so far
as he is in this opposite love, so far he is natural; and a merely
natural man is like a beast as to lusts and appetites, and to their
delights; with this difference only, that he has the faculty of
elevating his understanding into the light of wisdom, and also of
elevating his will into the heat of celestial love. These faculties are
never taken away from airy man (_homo_); therefore the merely natural
man, although as to concupiscences and appetites and their delights, he
is like a beast, still lives after death, but in a state corresponding
to his past life. From these considerations it may appear that a man,
according to the deficiency of conjugial love, approaches to the nature
of a beast. This position may seem to be contradicted by the
consideration, that there are a deficiency and loss of conjugial love
with some who yet are men (_homines_); but the position is meant to be
confined to those who make light of conjugial love from a principle of
adulterous love, and who therefore are in such deficiency and loss.

       *       *       *       *       *

231. To the above I shall add THREE MEMORABLE RELATIONS. FIRST. I once
heard loud exclamations, which issued from the hells, with a noise as if
they bubbled up through water: one to the left hand, in these words, "O
HOW JUST!" another to the right, "O HOW LEARNED!" and a third from
behind, "O HOW WISE!" and as I was in doubt whether there are also in
hell persons of justice, learning, and wisdom, I was impressed with a
strong desire of seeing what was the real case; and a voice from heaven
said to me, "You shall see and hear." I therefore in spirit went out of
the house, and saw before me an opening, which I approached; and looked
down; and lo! there was a ladder, by which I descended: and when I was
down, I observed a level country set thick with shrubs, intermixed with
thorns and nettles; and on my asking, whether this was hell, I was told
it was the lower earth next above hell. I then continued my course in a
direction according to the exclamations in order; first to those who
exclaimed, "O HOW JUST!" where I saw a company consisting of such as in
the world had been judges influenced by friendship and gifts; then to
the second exclamation, "O HOW LEARNED!" where I saw a company of such
as in the world had been reasoners; and lastly to the third exclamation,
"O HOW WISE!" where I saw a company such as in the world had been
confirmators. From these I returned to the first, where there were
judges influenced by friendship and gifts, and who were proclaimed
"Just." On one side I saw as it were an amphitheatre built of brick, and
covered with black slates; and I was told that they called it a
tribunal. There were three entrances to it on the north, and three on
the west, but none on the south and east; a proof that their decisions
were not those of justice, but were arbitrary determinations. In the
middle of the amphitheatre there was a fire, into which the servants who
attended threw torches of sulphur and pitch; the light whereof, by its
vibrations on the plastered walls, presented pictured images of birds of
the evening and night; but both the fire and the vibrations of light
thence issuing, together with the forms of the images thereby produced,
were representations that in their decisions they could adorn the matter
of any debate with colored dyes, and give it a form according to their
own interest. In about half an hour I saw some old men and youths in
robes and cloaks, enter the amphitheatre, who, laying aside their caps,
took their seats at the tables, in order to sit in judgement. I heard
and perceived with what cunning and ingenuity, under the impulse of
prejudice in favor of their friends, they warped and inverted judgement
so as to give it an appearance of justice, and this to such a degree,
that they themselves saw what was unjust as just, and on the other hand
what was just as unjust. Such persuasions respecting the points to be
decided upon, appeared from their countenances, and were heard from
their manner of speaking. I then received illustration from heaven, from
which I perceived how far each point was grounded in right or not; and I
saw how industriously they concealed what was unjust, and gave it a
semblance of what was just; and how they selected some particular
statute which favored their own side of the question, and by cunning
reasonings warped the rest to the same side. After judgement was given,
the decrees were conveyed to their clients, friends and favorers, who,
to recompense them for their services, continued to shout, "O HOW JUST,
O HOW JUST!" After this I conversed respecting them with the angels of
heaven, and related to them some of the things I had seen and heard. The
angels said to me, "Such judges appear to others to be endowed with a
most extraordinary acuteness of intellect; when yet they do not at all
see what is just and equitable. If you remove the prejudices of
friendship in favor of particular persons, they sit mute in judgement
like so many statues, and only say, 'I acquiesce, and am entirely of
your opinion on this point.' This happens because all their judgements
are prejudices; and prejudice with partiality influences the case in
question from beginning to end. Hence they see nothing but what is
connected with their friend's interest; and whatever is contrary
thereto, they set aside; or if they pay any attention to it, they
involve it in intricate reasonings, as a spider wraps up its prey in a
web, and make an end of it; hence, unless they follow the web of their
prejudice, they see nothing of what is right. They were examined whether
they were able to see it, and it was discovered that they were not. That
this is the case, will seem wonderful to the inhabitants of your world;
but tell them it is a truth that has been investigated by the angels of
heaven. As they see nothing of what is just, we in heaven regard them
not as men but as monsters, whose heads are constituted of things
relating to friendship, their breasts of those relating to injustice,
their feet of those which relate to confirmation, and the soles of the
feet of those things which relate to justice, which they supplant and
trample under foot, in case they are unfavorable to the interests of
their friend. But of what quality they appear to us from heaven, you
shall presently see; for their end is at hand." And lo! at that instant
the ground was cleft asunder, and the tables fell one upon another, and
they were swallowed up, together with the whole amphitheatre, and were
cast into caverns, and imprisoned. It was then said to me, "Do you wish
to see them where they now are?" And lo! their faces appeared as of
polished steel, their bodies from the neck to the loins as graven images
of stone clothed with leopards' skins, and their feet like snakes: the
law books too, which they had arranged in order on the tables, were
changed into packs of cards: and now, instead of sitting in judgement,
the office appointed to them is to prepare vermilion and mix it up into
a paint, to bedaub the faces of harlots and thereby turn them into
beauties.

After seeing these things, I was desirous to visit the two other
assemblies, one of which consisted of mere reasoners, and the other of
mere confirmators; and it was said to me, "Stop awhile, and you shall
have attendant angels from the society next above them; by these you
will receive light from the Lord and will see what will surprise you."

232. THE SECOND MEMORABLE RELATION. After some time I heard again from
the lower earth voices exclaiming as before, "O HOW LEARNED! O HOW
WISE!" I looked round to see what angels were present; and lo! they were
from the heaven immediately above those who cried out, "O HOW LEARNED!"
and I conversed with them respecting the cry, and they said, "Those
learned ones are such as only reason _whether a thing be so or not_, and
seldom think _that it is so_; therefore, they are like winds which blow
and pass away, like the bark about trees which are without sap, or like
shells about almonds without a kernel, or like the outward rind about
fruit without pulp; for their minds are void of interior judgement, and
are united only with the bodily senses; therefore unless the senses
themselves decide, they can conclude nothing; in a word, they are merely
sensual, and we call them REASONERS. We give them this name, because
they never conclude anything, and make whatever they hear a matter of
argument, and dispute whether it be so, with perpetual contradiction.
They love nothing better than to attack essential truths, and so to pull
them in pieces as to make them a subject of dispute. These are those who
believe themselves learned above the rest of the world." On hearing this
account, I entreated the angels to conduct me to them: so they led me to
a cave, from which there was a flight of steps leading to the earth
below. We descended and followed the shout, "O HOW LEARNED!" and lo!
there were some hundreds standing in one place, beating the ground with
their feet. Being at first surprised at this sight, I inquired the
reason of their standing in that manner and beating the ground with the
soles of their feet, and said, "They may thus by their feet make holes
in the floor." At this the angel smiled and said, "They appear to stand
in this manner, because they never think on any subject that it is so,
but only whether it is so, and dispute about it; and when the thinking
principle proceeds no further than this, they appear only to tread and
trample on a single clod, and not to advance." Upon this I approached
the assembly, and lo! they appeared to me to be good-looking men and
well dressed; but the angels said, "This is their appearance when viewed
in their own light; but if light from heaven flows in, their faces are
changed, and so is their dress;" and so it came to pass: they then
appeared with dark faces, and dressed in black sackcloth; but when this
light was withdrawn, they appeared as before. I presently entered into
conversation with some of them, and said, "I heard the shout of a crowd
about you, '_O how learned!_' may I be allowed therefore to have a
little conversation with you on subjects of the highest learning?" they
replied, "Mention any subject, and we will give you satisfaction." I
then asked, "What must be the nature of that religion by which a man is
saved?" They said, "We will divide this subject into several parts; and
we cannot answer it until we have concluded on its subdivisions. The
first inquiry shall be, Whether religion be anything? the second,
Whether there be such a thing as salvation or not? the third, Whether
one religion be more efficacious than another? the fourth, Whether there
be a heaven and a hell? the fifth, Whether there be eternal life after
death?" besides many more inquiries. Then I desired to know their
opinion concerning the first article of inquiry, Whether religion be
anything? They began to discuss the subject with abundance of arguments,
whether there be any such thing as religion, and whether what is called
religion be anything? I requested them to refer it to the assembly, and
they did so; and the general answer was, that the proposition required
so much investigation that it could not be finished within the evening.
I then asked. "Can you finish it within the year?" and one of them said,
"Not within a hundred years:" so I observed, "In the mean while you are
without religion;" and he replied, "Shall it not be first demonstrated
whether there be such a thing as religion, and whether what is called
religion be anything? if there be such a thing, it must be also for the
wise; if there be no such thing, it must he only for the vulgar. It is
well known that religion is called a bond; but it is asked, for whom? if
it be only for the vulgar, it is not anything in itself; if it be
likewise for the wise, it is something." On hearing these arguments, I
said to them, "There is no character you deserve less than that of being
learned; because all your thoughts are confined to the single inquiry,
whether a thing be, and to canvass each side of the question. Who can
become learned, unless he know something for certain, and progressively
advance into it, as a man in walking progressively advances from step to
step, and thereby successively arrives at wisdom! If you follow any
other rule, you make no approach to truths, but remove them more and
more out of sight. To reason only whether a thing be, is it not like
reasoning about a cap or a shoe, whether they fit or not, before they
are put on? and what must be the consequence of such reasoning, but that
you will not know whether anything exist, yea, whether there be any such
thing as salvation, or eternal life after death; whether one religion be
more efficacious than another, and whether there be a heaven and a hell?
On these subjects you cannot possibly think at all, so long as you halt
at the first step, and beat the sand at setting out, instead of setting
one foot before another and going forward. Take heed to yourselves, lest
your minds, standing thus without in a state of indetermination, should
inwardly harden and become statues of salt, and yourselves friends of
Lot's wife." With these words I took my leave, and they being indignant
threw stones after me; and then they appeared to me like graven images
of stone, without any human reason in them. On my asking the angels
concerning their lot, they said, "Their lot is, that they are cast down
into the deep, into a wilderness, where they are forced to carry
burdens; and in this case, as they are no longer capable of rational
conversation, they give themselves up to idle prattle and talk, and
appear at a distance like asses that are heavily laden."

233. THE THIRD MEMORABLE RELATION. After this one of the angels said,
"Follow me to the place where they exclaim, 'O HOW WISE!' and you shall
see prodigies of men; you shall see faces and bodies, which are the
faces and bodies of a man, and yet they are not men." I said, "Are they
beasts then?" he replied, "They are not beasts, but beast-men; for they
are such as cannot at all see whether truth be truth or not, and yet
they can make whatever they will to be truth. Such persons with us are
called CONFIRMATORS." We followed the vociferation, and came to the
place; and lo! there was a company of men, and around them a crowd, and
in the crowd some of noble blood, who, on hearing that they confirmed
whatever they said, and favored themselves with such manifest consent,
turned, and said, "O HOW WISE!" But the angel said to me, "Let us not go
to them, but call one out of the company." We called him and went aside
with him, and conversed on various subjects; and he confirmed every one
of them, so that they appeared altogether as true; and we asked him,
whether he could also confirm the contrary? he said, "As well as the
former." Then he spoke openly and from the heart, and said, "What is
truth? Is there anything true in the nature of things, but what a man
makes true? Advance any proposition you please, and I will make it to be
true." Hereupon I said, "Make this true; That faith is the all of the
church." This he did so dexterously and cunningly, that the learned who
were standing by admired and applauded him. I afterwards requested him
to make it true, That charity is the all of the church; and he did so:
and afterwards, That charity is nothing of the church: and he dressed up
each side of the question, and adorned it so with appearances, that the
bystanders looked at each other, and said, "Is not this a wise man?" But
I said, "Do not you know that to live well is charity, and that to
believe well is faith? does not he that lives well also believe well?
and consequently, is not faith of charity, and charity of faith? do you
not see that this is true?" He replied, "I will make it true, and will
then see." He did so, and said, "Now I see it;" but presently he made
the contrary to be true, and then said, "I also see that this is true."
At this we smiled and said, "Are they not contraries? how can two
contraries appear true?" To this he replied with indignation, "You are
mistaken; each is true; since truth is nothing but what a man makes
true." There was a certain person standing near, who in the world had
been a legate of the first rank. He was surprised at this assertion, and
said, "I acknowledge that in the world something like this method of
reasoning prevails; but still you are out of your senses. Try if you can
make it to be true, that light is darkness, and darkness light." He
replied, "I will easily do this. What are light and darkness but a state
of the eye? Is not light changed into shade when the eye comes out of
sunshine, and also when it is kept intensely fixed on the sun? Who does
not know, that the state of the eye in such a case is changed, and that
in consequence light appears as shade; and on the other hand, when the
state of the eye is restored, that shade appears as light? Does not
an owl see the darkness of night as the light of day, and the light of
day as the darkness of night, and also the sun itself as an opaque and
dusky globe? If any man had the eyes of an owl, which would he call
light and which darkness? What then is light but the state of the eye?
and if it be a state of the eye, is not light darkness, and darkness
light? therefore each of the propositions is true." Afterwards the
legate asked him to make this true, That a raven is white and not black;
and he replied, "I will do this also with ease;" and he said, "Take a
needle or razor, and lay open the feathers or quills of a raven; are
they not white within? Also remove the feathers and quills, and look at
its skin; is it not white? What is the blackness then which envelops it
but a shade, which ought not to determine the raven's color? That
blackness is merely a shade. I appeal to the skilful in the science of
optics, who will tell you, that if you pound a black stone or glass into
fine powder, you will see that the powder is white." But the legate
replied, "Does not the raven appear black to the sight?" The confirmator
answered, "Will you, who are a man, think in any case from appearance?
you may indeed say from appearance, that a crow is black, but you cannot
think so; as for example, you may speak from the appearance and say that
the sun rises, advances to its meridian altitude, and sets; but, as you
are a man, you cannot think so; because the sun stands unmoved and the
earth only changes its position. The case is the same with the raven;
appearance is appearance; and say what you will, a raven is altogether
and entirely white; it grows white also as it grows old; and this I have
seen." We next requested him to tell us from his heart, whether he was
in joke, or whether he really believed that nothing is true but what a
man makes true? and he replied, "I swear that I believe it." Afterwards
the legate asked him, whether he could make it true that he was out of
his senses; and he said, "I can; but I do not choose: who is not out of
his senses?" When the conversation was thus ended, this universal
confirmator was sent to the angels, to be examined as to his true
quality; and the report they afterwards made was, that he did not
possess even a single grain of understanding; because all that is above
the rational principle was closed in him, and that alone which is below
was open. Above the rational principle is heavenly light, and below it
is natural light; and this light is such that it can confirm whatever it
pleases; but if heavenly light does not flow into natural light, a man
does not see whether any thing true is true, and consequently neither
does he see that any thing false is false. To see in either case is by
virtue of heavenly light in natural light; and heavenly light is from
the God of heaven, who is the Lord; therefore this universal confirmator
is not a man or a beast, but a beast-man. I questioned the angel
concerning the lot of such persons, and whether they can be together
with those who are alive, since every one has life from heavenly light,
and from this light has understanding. He said, that such persons when
they are alone, can neither think nor express their thoughts, but stand
mute like machines, and as in a deep sleep; but that they awake as soon
as any sound strikes their ears: and he added, that those become such,
who are inmostly wicked; into these no heavenly light can flow from
above, but only somewhat spiritual through the world, whence they derive
the faculty of confirming. As he said this, I heard a voice from the
angels who had examined the confirmation, saying to me, "From what you
have now heard form a general conclusion." I accordingly formed the
following: "That intelligence does not consist in being able to confirm
whatever a man pleases, but in being able to see that what is true is
true, and what is false is false." After this I looked towards the
company where the confirmators stood, and where the crowd about them
shouted, "_O how wise!_" and lo! a dusky cloud covered them, and in the
cloud were owls and bats on the wing; and it was said to me, "The owls
and bats flying in the dusky cloud, are correspondences and consequent
appearances of their thoughts; because confirmations of falsities so as
to make them appear like truths, are represented in this world under the
forms of birds of night, whose eyes are inwardly illuminated by a false
light, from which they see objects in the dark as if in the light. By
such a false spiritual light are those influenced who confirm falses
until they seem as truths, and afterwards are said and believed to be
truths: all such see backwards, and not forwards."

       *     *     *     *     *     *

ON THE CAUSES OF COLDNESS, SEPARATION, AND DIVORCE IN MARRIAGES.

234. In treating here on the causes of coldness in marriages, we shall
treat also at the same time on the causes of separation, and likewise of
divorce, because they are connected; for separations come from no other
source than from coldnesses, which are successively inborn after
marriage, or from causes discovered after marriage, from which also
coldness springs; but divorces come from adulteries; for these are
altogether opposite to marriages; and opposites induce coldness, if not
in both parties, at least in one. This is the reason why the causes of
coldness, separations, and divorces, are brought together into one
chapter. But the coherence of the causes will be more clearly discerned
from viewing them in the following series:--I. _There are spiritual heat
and spiritual cold; and spiritual heat is love, and spiritual cold the
privation thereof._ II. _Spiritual cold in marriages is a disunion of
souls and a disjunction of minds, whence come indifference, discord,
contempt, disdain, and aversion; from which, in several cases, at length
comes separation as to bed, chamber, and house._ III. _There are several
successive causes of cold, some internal, some external, and some
accidental._ IV. _Internal causes of cold are from religion._ V. _The
first of these causes is the rejection of religion by each of the
parties._ VI. _The second is, that one has religion and not the other._
VII. _The third is, that one is of one religion and the other of
another._ VIII. _The fourth is the falsity of the religion imbibed._ IX.
_With many, these are causes of internal cold, but not at the same time
of external._ X. _There are also several external causes of cold; the
first of which is dissimilitude of minds and manners._ XI. _The second
is, that conjugial love is believed to be the same as adulterous love,
only that the latter is not allowed by law, but the former is._ XII.
_The third is, a striving for pre-eminence between married partners._
XIII. _The fourth is, a want of determination to any employment or
business, whence comes wandering passion._ XIV. _The fifth is,
inequality of external rank and condition._ XV. _There are also causes
of separation._ XVI. _The first of them is a vitiated state of mind._
XVII. _The second is a vitiated state of body._ XVIII. _The third is
impotence before marriage._ XIX. _Adultery is the cause of divorce._ XX.
_There are also several accidental causes of cold; the first of which
is, that enjoyment is common (or cheap), because continually allowed._
XXI. _The second is that living with a married partner, from a covenant
and compact, seems to be forced and not free._ XXII. _The third is,
affirmation on the part of the wife, and her talking incessantly about
love._ XXIII. _The fourth is, the man's continually thinking that his
wife is willing; and on the other hand, the wife's thinking that the man
is not willing._ XXIV. _As cold is in the mind it is also in the body;
and according to the increase of that cold, the externals also of the
body are closed._ We proceed to an explanation of each article.

235. I. THERE ARE SPIRITUAL HEAT AND SPIRITUAL COLD; AND SPIRITUAL HEAT
IS LOVE, AND SPIRITUAL COLD IS THE PRIVATION THEREOF. Spiritual heat is
from no other source than the sun of the spiritual world; for there is
in that world a sun proceeding from the Lord, who is in the midst of it;
and as it is from the Lord, it is in its essence pure love. This sun
appears fiery before the angels, just as the sun of our world appears
before men. The reason of its appearing fiery is, because love is
spiritual fire. From that sun proceed both heat and light; but as that
sun is pure love, the heat thence derived in its essence is love, and
the light thence derived in its essence is wisdom; hence it is manifest
what is the source of spiritual heat, and that spiritual heat is love.
But we will also briefly explain the source of spiritual cold. It is
from the sun of the natural world, and its heat and light. The sun of
the natural world was created that its heat and light might receive in
them spiritual heat and light, and by means of the atmospheres might
convey spiritual heat and light even to ultimates in the earth, in order
to produce effects of ends, which are of the Lord in his sun, and also
to clothe spiritual principles with suitable garments, that is, with
materials, to operate ultimate ends in nature. These effects are
produced when spiritual heat is joined to natural heat; but the contrary
comes to pass when natural heat is separated from spiritual heat, as is
the case with those who love natural things, and reject spiritual: with
such, spiritual heat becomes cold. The reason why these two loves, which
from creation are in agreement, become thus opposite, is, because in
such case the dominant heat becomes the servant, and _vice versa_; and
to prevent this effect, spiritual heat, which from its lineage is lord,
then recedes; and in those subjects, spiritual heat grows cold, because
it becomes opposite. From these considerations it is manifest that
spiritual cold is the privation of spiritual heat. In what is here said,
by heat is meant love; because that heat living in subjects is felt as
love. I have heard in the spiritual world, that spirits merely natural
grow intensely cold while they apply themselves to the side of some
angel who is in a state of love; and that the case is similar in regard
to the infernal spirits, while heat flows into them out of heaven; and
that nevertheless among themselves, when the heat of heaven is removed
from them, they are inflamed with great heat.

236. II. Spiritual cold in marriages is a disunion of souls and a
disjunction of minds, whence come indifference, discord, contempt,
disdain, and aversion; from which, in several cases, at length comes
separation as to bed, chamber, and house. That these effects take place
with married partners, while their primitive love is on the decline, and
becomes cold, is too well known to need any comment. The reason is,
because conjugial cold above all others resides in human minds; for the
essential conjugial principle is inscribed on the soul, to the end that
a soul may be propagated from a soul, and the soul of the father into
the offspring. Hence it is that this cold originates there, and
successively goes downward into the principles thence derived, and
infects them; and thus changes the joys and delights of the primitive
love into what is sad and undelightful.

237. III. THERE ARE SEVERAL SUCCESSIVE CAUSES OF COLD, SOME INTERNAL,
SOME EXTERNAL, AND SOME ACCIDENTAL. That there are several causes of
cold in marriages, is known in the world; also that they arise from many
external causes; but it is not known that the origins of the causes lie
concealed in the inmost principles, and that from these they descend
into the principles thence derived, until they appear in externals; in
order therefore that it may be known that external causes are not causes
in themselves, but derived from causes in themselves, which, as was
said, are in inmost principles, we will first distribute the causes
generally into internal and external, and afterwards will particularly
examine them.

238. IV. INTERNAL CAUSES OF COLD ARE FROM RELIGION. That the very origin
of conjugial love resides in the inmost principles of man, that is, in
his soul, is demonstrable to every one from the following considerations
alone; that the soul of the offspring is from the father, which is known
from the similitude of inclinations and affections, and also from the
general character of the countenance derived from the father and
remaining with very remote posterity; also from the propagative faculty
implanted in souls from creation; and moreover by what is analogous
thereto in the subjects of the vegetable kingdom, in that there lies hid
in the inmost principles of germination the propagation of the seed
itself, and thence of the whole, whether it be a tree, a shrub, or a
plant. This propagative or plastic force in seeds in the latter kingdom,
and in souls in the other, is from no other source than the conjugial
sphere, which is that of good and truth, and which perpetually emanates
and flows in from the Lord the Creator and Supporter of the universe;
concerning which sphere, see above, n. 222-225; and from the endeavour
of those two principles, good and truth, therein, to unite into a one.
This conjugial endeavour remains implanted in souls, and conjugial love
exists by derivation from it as its origin. That this same marriage,
from which the above universal sphere is derived, constitutes the church
with man, has been abundantly shewn above in the chapter ON THE MARRIAGE
OF GOOD AND TRUTH, and frequently elsewhere. Hence there is all the
evidence of rational demonstration, that the origin of the church and of
conjugial love are in one place of abode, and in a continual embrace;
but on this subject see further particulars above, n. 130, where it was
proved, that conjugial love is according to the state of the church with
man; thus that it is grounded in religion, because religion constitutes
this state. Man also was created with a capacity of becoming more and
more interior, and thereby of being introduced or elevated nearer and
nearer to that marriage, and thus into love truly conjugial, and this
even so far as to perceive a state of its blessedness. That religion is
the only means of introduction and elevation, appears clearly from what
was said above, namely, that the origin of the church and of conjugial
love are in the same place of abode, and in mutual embrace there, and
that hence they must needs be conjoined.

239. From what has been said above it follows, that where there is no
religion, there is no conjugial love; and that where there is no
conjugial love, there is cold. That conjugial cold is the privation of
that love, maybe seen above, n. 235; consequently that conjugial cold is
also a privation of a state of the church, or of religion. Sufficient
evidence of the truth of this may be deduced from the general ignorance
that now prevails concerning love truly conjugial. In these times, who
knows, and who is willing to acknowledge, and who will not be surprised
to hear, that the origin of conjugial love is deduced hence? But the
only cause and source of this ignorance is, that, notwithstanding there
is religion, still there are not the truths of religion; and what is
religion without truths? That there is a want of the truths of religion,
is fully shown in the APOCALYPSE REVEALED; see also the MEMORABLE
RELATION, n. 566 of that work.

240. V. OF INTERNAL CAUSES OF COLD THE FIRST IS THE REJECTION OF
RELIGION BY EACH OF THE PARTIES. Those who reject the holy things of the
church from the face to the hinder part of the head, or from the breast
to the back, have not any good love; if any proceeds apparently from the
body, still there is not any in the spirit. With such persons goods
place themselves on the outside of evils, and cover them, as raiment
glittering with gold covers a putrid body. The evils which reside
within, and are covered, are in general hatreds, and thence intestine
combats against everything spiritual; for all things of the church which
they reject, are in themselves spiritual; and as love truly conjugial is
the fundamental love of all spiritual loves, as was shewn above, it is
evident that interior hatred is contrary to it, and that the interior or
real love with such is in favor or the opposite, which is the love of
adultery; therefore such persons, more than others, will be disposed to
ridicule this truth, that every one has conjugial love according to the
state of the church; yea, they will possibly laugh at the very mention
of love truly conjugial; but be it so; nevertheless they are to be
pardoned, because it is as impossible for them to distinguish in thought
between the marriage embrace and the adulterous, as it is for a camel to
go through the eye of a needle. Such persons, as to conjugial love, are
starved with cold more than others. If they keep to their married
partners, it is only on account of some of the external causes mentioned
above, n. 153, which withhold and bind them. Their interiors of the soul
and thence of the mind are more and more closed, and in the body are
stopped up; and in this case even the love of the sex is thought little
of, or becomes insanely lascivious in the interiors of the body, and
thence in the lowest principles of their thought. It is these who are
meant in the MEMORABLE RELATION, n. 79, which they may read if they
please.

241. VI. OF INTERNAL CAUSES OF COLD THE SECOND IS, THAT ONE OF THE
PARTIES HAS RELIGION AND NOT THE OTHER. The reason of this is, because
the souls must of course disagree; for the soul of one is open to the
reception of conjugial love, while the soul of the other is closed to
it. It is closed with the party that has not religion, and it is open
with the one that has; hence such persons cannot live together
harmoniously; and when once conjugial love is banished, there ensues
cold; but this is with the party that has no religion. This cold cannot
be dissipated except by the reception of a religion agreeing with that
of the other party, if it be true; otherwise, with the party that has no
religion, there ensues cold, which descends from the soul into the body,
even to the cuticles; in consequence of which he can no longer look his
married partner directly in the face, or accost her in a communion of
respirations, or speak to her except in a subdued tone of voice, or
touch her with the hand, and scarcely with the back; not to mention the
insanities which, proceeding from that cold, make their way into the
thoughts, which they do not make known; and this is the reason why such
marriages dissolve of themselves. He raised two fresh legions in his
own province. Pompey had formed a legion in the north of Italy, within
Caesar's boundaries, for service in Spain.

Caesar requested Pompey to lend him this legion for immediate purposes;
and Pompey, who was still on good terms with Caesar, recognized the
importance of the occasion, and consented without difficulty.

[Sidenote: B.C. 53.] Thus amply reinforced, Caesar, before the grass
had begun to grow, took the field against the tribes which were openly
disaffected. The first business was to punish the Belgians, who had
attacked Cicero. He fell suddenly on the Nervii with four legions,
seized their cattle, wasted their country, and carried off thousands
of them to be sold into slavery.
Returning to Amiens, he again called the chiefs about him, and, the
Seine tribes refusing to put in an appearance, he transferred the council
to Paris, and, advancing by rapid marches, he brought the Senones
and Carnutes to pray for pardon.[2] He then turned on the Treveri and
their allies, who, under Ambiorix, had destroyed Sabinus. Leaving
Labienus with the additional legions to check the Treveri, he went himself
into Flanders, where Ambiorix was hiding among the rivers and
marshes.

He threw bridges over the dikes, burnt the villages, and carried off an
enormous spoil, of cattle and, alas! of men. To favor and enrich the
tribes that submitted after a first defeat, to depopulate the determinately
rebellious by seizing and selling as slaves those who had forfeited a
right to his protection, was his uniform and, as the event proved,
entirely successful policy. The persuasions of the Treveri had failed
with the nearer German tribes; but some of the Suevi, who had
never seen the Romans, were tempted to adventure over and try their
fortunes; and the Treveri were waiting for them, to set on Labienus,
in Caesar's absence. Labienus went in search of the Treveri, tempted
them into an engagement by a feigned flight, killed many of them, and
filled his camp with prisoners. Their German allies retreated again
across the river, and the patriot chiefs, who had gone with Induciomarus,
concealed themselves in the forests of Westphalia.
Caesar thought it desirable to renew the admonition which he had given
the Germans two years before, and again threw a bridge over the
Rhine at the same place where he had made the first, but a little
higher up the stream.

Experience made the construction more easy. The bridge was begun and
finished in a few days, but this time the labor was thrown away. The
operation itself lost its impressiveness by repetition, and the
barrenness of practical results was more evident than before. The
Sueves, who had gone home, were far away in the interior. To lead the
heavily armed legions in pursuit of wild light-footed marauders, who
had not a town which could be burned, or a field of corn which could
be cut for food, was to waste their strength to no purpose, and to prove
still more plainly that in their own forests they were beyond the
reach of vengeance. Caesar drew back again, after a brief visit to his
allies the Ubii, cut two hundred feet of the bridge on the German
side, and leaving the rest standing with a guard to defend it, he went
in search of Ambiorix, who had as yet eluded him, in the Ardennes.
Ambiorix had added treachery to insurrection, and as long as he was
free and unpunished the massacred legion had not been fully
avenged. Caesar was particularly anxious to catch him, and once had found
the nest warm which Ambiorix had left but a few moments before.

In the pursuit he came again to Tongres, to the fatal camp which Sabinus
had deserted and in which the last of the legionaries had killed each
other, rather than degrade the Roman name by allowing themselves
to be captured. The spot was fated, and narrowly escaped being the
scene of a second catastrophe as frightful as the first.

The entrenchments were standing as they were left, ready to be occupied.
Caesar, finding himself encumbered by his heavy baggage in the
pursuit of Ambiorix, decided to leave it there with Quintus Cicero and
the 14th legion. He was going himself to scour Brabant and
East Flanders as far as the Scheldt. In seven days he promised to return,
and meanwhile he gave Cicero strict directions to keep the legion within
the lines, and not to allow any of the men to stray. It happened
that after Caesar recrossed the Rhine two thousand German horse had
followed in bravado, and were then plundering between Tongres and
the river. Hearing that there was a rich booty in the camp, that
Caesar was away, and only a small party had been left to guard it,
they decided to try to take the place by a sudden stroke. Cicero,
seeing no sign of an enemy, had permitted his men to disperse in
foraging parties. The Germans were on them before they could recover
their entrenchments, and they had to form at a distance and
defend themselves as they could. The gates of the camp were open, and
the enemy were actually inside before the few maniples who were
left there were able to collect and resist them.

Fortunately Sextius Bacillus, the same officer who had so brilliantly
distinguished himself in the battle with the Nervii, and had since been
badly wounded, was lying sick in his tent, where he had been for
five days, unable to touch food. Hearing the disturbance, Bacillus
sprang out, snatched a sword, rallied such men as he could find,
and checked the attack for a few minutes. Other officers rushed to his
help, and the legionaries having their centurions with them recovered
their steadiness. Sextius Bacillus was again severely hurt, and fainted,
but he was carried off in safety. Some of the cohorts who were outside,
and had been for a time cut off, made their way into the camp to join
the defenders, and the Germans, who had come without any fixed
purpose, merely for plunder, gave way and galloped off again. They
left the Romans, however, still in the utmost consternation. The
scene and the associations of it suggested the most gloomy anticipations.
They thought that German cavalry could never be so far from the Rhine,
unless their countrymen were invading in force behind them. Caesar,
it was supposed, must have been surprised and destroyed, and they and
every Roman in Gaul would soon share the same fate. Brave as they were,
the Roman soldiers seem to have been curiously liable to panics of
this kind. The faith with which they relied upon their general avenged
itself through the completeness with which they were accustomed to
depend upon him. He returned on the day which he had fixed, and not
unnaturally was displeased at the disregard of his orders.
He did not, or does not in his Commentaries, professedly blame Cicero.
But the Ciceros perhaps resented the loss of confidence which one
of them had brought upon himself. Quintus Cicero cooled in his zeal, and
afterward amused the leisure of his winter quarters with composing
worthless dramas.

Ambiorix had again escaped, and was never taken. The punishment fell on
his tribe. The Eburones were completely rooted out. The turn of the
Carnutes and Senones came next. The people themselves were spared; but
their leader, a chief named Acco, who was found to have instigated the
revolt, was arrested and executed.

Again the whole of Gaul settled into seeming quiet; and Caesar went to
Italy, where the political frenzy was now boiling over.

[1] Caesar says their trenches were fifteen miles long. This is,
perhaps, a mistake of the transcriber. A Roman camp did not usually cover
more than a few acres.

[2] People about Sens, Melun, and Chartres.

CHAPTER XVIII.

[Sidenote: B.C. 55.] The conference at Lucca and the Senate's
indifference had determined Cicero to throw in his lot with the trimmers.
He had remonstrated with Pompey on the imprudence of prolonging
Caesar's command. Pompey, he thought, would find out in time that
he had made Caesar too strong for him; but Pompey had refused to
listen, and Cicero had concluded that he must consider his own interests.
His brother Quintus joined the army in Gaul to take part in the invasion
of Britain, and to share the dangers and the honors of the winter which
followed it. Cicero himself began a warm correspondence with Caesar,
and through Quintus sent continued messages to him. Literature was a
neutral ground on which he could approach his political enemy without
too open discredit, and he courted eagerly the approval of a critic
whose literary genius he esteemed as highly as his own. Men of genuine
ability are rarely vain of what they can do really well. Cicero admired
himself as a statesman with the most unbounded enthusiasm. He was
proud of his verses, which were hopelessly commonplace.
In the art in which he was without a rival he was modest and diffident.
He sent his various writings for Caesar's judgment. "Like the traveller
who has overslept himself," he said, "yet by extraordinary exertions
reaches his goal sooner than if he had been earlier on the road, I will
follow your advice and court this man. I have been asleep too long.
I will correct my slowness with my speed; and as you say he approves
my verses, I shall travel not with a common carriage, but with a
four-in-hand of poetry." [1]
"What does Caesar say of my poems?" he wrote again. "He tells me in one
of his letters that he has never read better Greek. At one place he
writes [Greek: rathumotera] [somewhat careless].

This is his word. Tell me the truth, Was it the matter which did
not please him, or the style?" "Do not be afraid," he added with
candid simplicity; "I shall not think a hair the worse of myself." [2]

His affairs were still in disorder. Caesar had now large sums at his
disposition. Cicero gave the highest proof of the sincerity of
his conversion by accepting money from him. "You say," he observed in
another letter, "that Caesar shows every day more marks of his
affection for you.
It gives me infinite pleasure. I can have no second thoughts in
Caesar's affairs. I act on conviction, and am doing but my duty; but I
am inflamed with love for him." [3]
With Pompey and Crassus Cicero seemed equally familiar. When their
consulship was over, their provinces were assigned as had been
determined.
Pompey had Spain, with six legions. He remained himself at Rome,
sending lieutenants in charge of them. Crassus aspired to equal the
glory of his colleagues in the open field. He had gained some successes
in the war with the slaves which persuaded him that he too could be a
conqueror; and knowing as much of foreign campaigning as the clerks
in his factories, he intended to use Syria as a base of operations
against the Parthians, and to extend the frontier to the Indus. The Senate
had murmured, but Cicero had passionately defended Crassus;[4] and
as if to show publicly how entirely he had now devoted himself to
the cause of the "Dynasts," he invited Crassus to dine with him the
day before his departure for the East.

The position was not wholly pleasant to Cicero. "Self-respect in
speech, liberty in choosing the course which we will pursue, is all
gone," he wrote to Lentulus Spinther--"gone not more from me than
from us all. We must assent, as a matter of course, to what a few
men say, or we must differ from them to no purpose.--The relations of
the Senate, of the courts of justice, nay, of the whole Commonwealth are
changed.--The consular dignity of a firm and courageous statesman
can no longer be thought of. It has been lost by the folly of those
who estranged from the Senate the compact order of the equites and a
very distinguished man [Caesar]." [5] And again: "We must go with the
times. Those who have played a great part in public life have never been
able to adhere to the same views on all occasions. The art of navigation
lies in trimming to the storm. When you can reach your harbor by
altering your course, it is a folly to persevere in struggling against
the wind. Were I entirely free I should still act as I am doing; and
when I am invited to my present attitude by the kindness of one set
of men, and am driven to it by the injurious conduct of the other, I
am content to do what I conceive will conduce at once to my own advantage
and the welfare of the State.-- Caesar's influence is enormous. His wealth
is vast. I have the use of both, as if they were my own. Nor could I have
crushed the conspiracy of a set of villains to ruin me, unless, in addition
to the defences which I always possessed, I had secured the goodwill of
the men in power." [6]
[Sidenote: B.C. 54.] Cicero's conscience could not have been easy when
he was driven to such laborious apologies. He spoke often of intending
to withdraw into his family, and devoting his time entirely to literature;
but he could not bring himself to leave the political ferment; and he
was possessed besides with a passionate desire to revenge himself on
those who had injured him.

An opportunity seemed to present itself. The persons whom he hated most,
after Clodius, were the two consuls Gabinius and Piso, who had
permitted his exile. They had both conducted themselves abominably
in the provinces, which they had bought, he said, at the price of his
blood. Piso had been sent to Macedonia, where he had allowed his army
to perish by disease and neglect. The frontiers had been overrun with
brigands, and the outcries of his subjects had been audible even
in Rome against his tyranny and incapacity.

Gabinius, in Syria, had been more ambitious, and had exposed himself to
an indignation more violent because more interested. At a hint from
Pompey, he had restored Ptolemy to Egypt on his own authority and without
waiting for the Senate's sanction, and he had snatched for himself
the prize for which the chiefs of the Senate had been contending. He
had broken the law by leading his legions over the frontier. He had
defeated the feeble Alexandrians, and the gratified Ptolemy had
rewarded him with the prodigious sum of ten thousand talents--a
million and a half of English money. While he thus enriched himself he
had irritated the knights, who might otherwise have supported him,
by quarrelling with the Syrian revenue farmers, and, according to
popular scandal, he had plundered the province worse than it had
been plundered even by the pirates.

When so fair a chance was thrown in his way, Cicero would have been
more than human if he had not availed himself of it. He moved in the
Senate for the recall of the two offenders, and in the finest of his
speeches he laid bare their reputed iniquities. His position was a
delicate one, because the senatorial party, could they have had their
way, would have recalled Caesar also.

Gabinius was Pompey's favorite, and Piso was Caesar's father- in-law.
Cicero had no intention of quarrelling with Caesar; between his invectives,
therefore, he was careful to interweave the most elaborate compliments
to the conqueror of Gaul. He dwelt with extraordinary clearness on the
value of Caesar's achievements. The conquest of Gaul, he said, was
not the annexation of a province. It was the dispersion of a cloud
which had threatened Italy from the days of Brennus. To recall Caesar
would be madness. He wished to remain only to complete his work;
the more honor to him that he was willing to let the laurels fade which
were waiting for him at Rome, before he returned to wear them. There
were persons who would bring him back, because they did not love him.
They would bring him back only to enjoy a triumph. Gaul had been
the single danger to the Empire. Nature had fortified Italy by the
Alps. The mountain-barrier alone had allowed Rome to grow to its present
greatness, but the Alps might now sink into the earth, Italy had no more
to fear.[7]
The orator perhaps hoped that so splendid a vindication of Caesar in the
midst of his worst enemies might have purchased pardon for his
onslaught on the baser members of the "Dynastic" faction. He found
himself mistaken.
His eagerness to revenge his personal wrongs compelled him to drink the
bitterest cup of humiliation which had yet been offered to him. He gained
his immediate purpose. The two governors were recalled in disgrace, and
Gabinius was impeached under the new Julian law for having restored
Ptolemy without orders, and for the corrupt administration of his
province.

Cicero would naturally have conducted the prosecution; but pressure of
some kind was laid on, which compelled him to stand aside. The result
of the trial on the first of the two indictments was another of those
mockeries of justice which made the Roman law-courts the jest of mankind.
Pompey threw his shield over his instrument. He used his influence
freely. The Egyptian spoils furnished a fund to corrupt the judges.

The speech for the prosecution was so weak as to invite a failure, and
Gabinius was acquitted by a majority of purchased votes. "You ask me
how I endure such things," Cicero bitterly wrote, in telling the story
to Atticus; "well enough, by Hercules, and I am entirely pleased with
myself.
We have lost, my friend, not only the juice and blood, but even the
color and shape, of a commonwealth. No decent constitution exists
in which I can take a part. How can you put up with such a state of
things? you will say.
Excellently well. I recollect how public affairs went awhile ago, when I
was myself in office, and how grateful people were to me. I am not
distressed now, that the power is with a single man. Those are
miserable who could not bear to see me successful. I find much to console
me." [8] "Gabinius is acquitted," he wrote to his brother.--"The
verdict is so infamous that it is thought he will be convicted
on the other charge; but, as you perceive, the constitution, the
Senate, the courts, are all nought.
There is no honor in any one of us.--Some persons, Sallust among
them, say that I ought to have prosecuted him. I to risk my credit
with such a jury!
what if I had acted, and he had escaped then! but other motives influenced
me. Pompey would have made a personal quarrel of it with me. He would
have come into the city.[9]--He would have taken up with Clodius
again.

I know that I was wise, and I hope that you agree with me. I owe Pompey
nothing, and he owes much to me; but in public matters (not to put
it more strongly) he has not allowed me to oppose him; and when I was
flourishing and he was less powerful than he is now, he let me see what
he could do.
Now when I am not even ambitious of power, and the constitution is
broken down, and Pompey is omnipotent, why should I contend with him?
Then, says Sallust, I ought to have pleased Pompey by defending Gabinius,
as he was anxious that I should. A nice friend Sallust, who would have
me push myself into dangerous quarrels, or cover myself with eternal
infamy!" [10]
Unhappy Cicero, wishing to act honorably, but without manliness to face
the consequences! He knew that it would be infamous for him to defend
Gabinius, yet at the second trial Cicero, who had led the attack on him
in the Senate, and had heaped invectives on him, the most bitter which
he ever uttered against man, nevertheless actually did defend
Gabinius.
Perhaps he consoled himself with the certainty that his eloquence would
be in vain, and that his extraordinary client this time could not
escape conviction. Any way, he appeared at the bar as Gabinius's
counsel. The Syrian revenue farmers were present, open-mouthed with
their accusations.
Gabinius was condemned, stripped of his spoils, and sent into banishment.

Cicero was left with his shame. Nor was this the worst. There were still
some dregs in the cup, which he was forced to drain. Publius Vatinius
was a prominent leader of the military democratic party, and had
often come in collision with Cicero.

He had been tribune when Caesar was consul, and had stood by him against
the Senate and Bibulus. He had served in Gaul in Caesar's first
campaigns, and had returned to Rome, at Caesar's instance, to enter
for higher office. He had carried the praetorship against Cato; and
Cicero in one of his speeches had painted him as another Clodius
or Catiline. When the praetorship was expired, he was prosecuted for
corruption; and Cicero was once more compelled to appear on the other
side, and defend him, as he had done Gabinius. Caesar and Pompey, wishing
perhaps to break completely into harness the brilliant but still half
unmanageable orator, had so ordered, and Cicero had complied.
He was ashamed, but he had still his points of satisfaction. It was a
matter of course that, as an advocate, he must praise the man whom, a
year before, he had spattered with ignominy; but he had the pleasure
of feeling that he was revenging himself on his conservative allies,
who led the prosecution.
"Why I praised Vatinius," he wrote to Lentulus, "I must beg you not to
ask either in the case of this or of any other criminal. I put it to
the judges that since certain noble lords, my good friends, were too
fond of my adversary [Clodius], and in the Senate would go apart with him
under my own eyes, and would treat him with warmest affection, they must
allow me to have my Publius [Vatinius], since they had theirs [Clodius],
and give them a gentle stab in return for their cuts at me." [11] Vatinius
was acquitted. Cicero was very miserable. "Gods and men approved,"
he said; but his own conscience condemned him, and at this time his one
consolation, real or pretended, was the friendship of Caesar. "Caesar's
affectionate letters," he told his brother, "are my only pleasure; I
attach little consequence to his promises; I do not thirst for honors,
or regret my past glory.

I value more the continuance of his good-will than the prospect of
anything which he may do for me. I am withdrawing from public
affairs, and giving myself to literature. But I am broken-hearted,
my dear brother;--I am broken-hearted that the constitution is gone,
that the courts of law are naught; and that now at my time of life,
when I ought to be leading with authority in the Senate, I must be
either busy in the Forum pleading, or occupying myself with my books
at home. The ambition of my boyhood--
Aye to be first, and chief among my peers--
is all departed. Of my enemies, I have left some unassailed, and
some I even defend. Not only I may not think as I like, but I may
not hate as I like,[12] and Caesar is the only person who loves me
as I should wish to be loved, or, as some think, who desires to
love me." [13]
[Sidenote: B.C. 53.] The position was the more piteous, because
Cicero could not tell how events would fall out after all. Crassus
was in the East, with uncertain prospects there. Caesar was in the
midst of a dangerous war, and might be killed or might die. Pompey
was but a weak vessel; a distinguished soldier, perhaps, but without
the intellect or the resolution to control a proud, resentful, and
supremely unscrupulous aristocracy. In spite of Caesar's victories,
his most envenomed enemy, Domitius Ahenobarbus, had succeeded after
all in carrying one of the consulships for the year 54.
The popular party had secured the other, indeed; but they had
returned Appius Claudius, Clodius's brother, and this was but a
poor consolation.
In the year that was to follow, the conservatives had bribed to an
extent which astonished the most cynical observers.XXII. OF ACCIDENTAL CAUSES OF COLD THE THIRD IS, AFFIRMATION ON THE
PART OF THE WIFE, AND HER TALKING INCESSANTLY ABOUT LOVE. With the
angels in heaven there is no refusal and repugnance on the part of the
wives, as there is with some wives on earth: with the angels in heaven
also the wives converse about love, and are not silent as some wives on
earth; but the causes of these differences I am not allowed to declare,
because it would be unbecoming; nevertheless they are declared in four
MEMORABLE RELATIONS at the close of the chapters, by the angels' wives,
who freely speak of them to their husbands, by the three in the hall
over which there was a golden shower, and by the seven who were sitting
in a rosary. These memorable relations are adduced, to the end that
every thing may be explained that relates to conjugial love, which is
the subject here treated of both in general and in particular.

259. XXIII. OF ACCIDENTAL CAUSES OF COLD THE FOURTH IS, THE MAN'S
CONTINUALLY THINKING THAT HIS WIFE IS WILLING; AND ON THE OTHER HAND THE
WIFE'S THINKING THAT THE MAN IS NOT WILLING. That the latter
circumstance is a cause of love's ceasing with wives, and the former a
cause of cold with men, is too obvious to need any comment. For that the
man who thinks that his wife, when in his sight by day, and when lying
at his side by night, is desirous or willing, should grow cold to the
extremities, and on the other hand that the wife, who thinks that the
man is able and not willing, should lose her love, are circumstances
among many others well known to husbands who have considered the arcana
relating to conjugial love. These circumstances are adduced also, to the
end that this work may be perfected, and THE CONJUGIAL LOVE AND ITS
CHASTE DELIGHTS may be completed.

260. XXIV. AS COLD IS IN THE MIND IT IS ALSO IN THE BODY; AND ACCORDING
TO THE INCREASE OF THAT COLD, THE EXTERNALS ALSO OF THE BODY ARE CLOSED.
It is believed at the present day that the mind of man (_homo_) is in
the head, and nothing of it in the body, when yet the soul and the mind
are both in the head and in the body; for the soul and the mind are the
man (_homo_), since both constitute the spirit which lives after death;
and that this spirit is in a perfect human form, has been fully shewn in
the treatises we have published. Hence, as soon as a man thinks
anything, he can in an instant utter it by means of his bodily mouth,
and at the same time represent it by gesture; and as soon as he wills
anything, he can in an instant bring it into act and effect by his
bodily members: which could not be the case unless the soul and the mind
were together in the body, and constituted his spiritual man. From these
considerations it may be seen, that while conjugial love is in the mind,
it is similar to itself in the body; and since love is heat, that it
opens the externals of the body from the interiors; but on the other
hand, that the privation thereof, which is cold, closes the externals of
the body from the interiors: hence it is manifest what is the cause of
the faculty (of conjugial love) with the angels enduring for ever, and
what is the cause of its failing with men who are cold.

       *       *       *       *       *

261. To the above I shall add THREE MEMORABLE RELATIONS. FIRST. In the
superior northern quarter near the east in the spiritual world, there
are places of instruction for boys, for youths, for men, and also for
old men: into these places all who die infants are sent and are educated
in heaven; so also all who arrive fresh from the world, and desire
information about heaven and hell, are sent to the same places. This
tract is near the east, that all may be instructed by influx from the
Lord; for the Lord is the east, because he is in the sun there, which
from him is pure love; hence the heat from that sun in its essence is
love, and the light from it in its essence is wisdom. These are inspired
into them from the Lord out of that sun; and they are inspired according
to reception, and reception is according to the love of growing wise.
After periods of instruction, those who are made intelligent are sent
forth thence, and are called disciples of the Lord. They are sent forth
first into the west, and those who do not remain there, into the south,
and some through the south into the east, and are introduced into the
societies where they are to reside. On a time, while I was meditating
respecting heaven and hell, I began to desire a universal knowledge of
the state of each, being aware, that whoever knows universals, may
afterwards comprehend particulars, because the latter are contained in
the former, as parts in a whole. In this desire I looked to the above
tract in the northern quarter near the east, where were the places of
instruction, and went there by a way then open to me. I entered one of
the colleges, where there were some young men, and addressed the chief
teachers there who gave instruction, and asked them whether they were
acquainted with the universals respecting heaven and hell. They replied,
that they knew some little; "but if we look," said they, "towards the
east to the Lord, we shall receive illustration and knowledge." They did
so, and said, "There are three universals of hell, which are
diametrically opposite to the universals of heaven. The universals of
hell are these three loves; the love of dominion grounded in self-love,
the love of possessing the goods of others grounded in the love of the
world, and adulterous love. The universals of heaven opposite to these
are the three following loves; the love of dominion grounded in the love
of use, the love of possessing worldly goods grounded in the love of
performing uses therewith, and love truly conjugial." Hereupon, after
expressing my good wishes towards them, I took my leave, and returned
home. When I was come home, it was said to me from heaven, "Examine
those three universals above and beneath, and afterwards we shall see
them in your hand." It was said _in the hand_, because whatever a man
examines intellectually, appears to the angels as if inscribed on his
hands.

262. After this I examined the first universal love of hell, which is
the love of dominion grounded in self-love, and afterwards the universal
love of heaven corresponding to it, which is the love of dominion
grounded in the love of uses; for I was not allowed to examine one love
without the other, because, being opposites, the understanding does not
perceive the one without the other; wherefore that each may be
perceived, they must be set in opposition to each other; for a beautiful
and handsome face is rendered conspicuous by contrasting it with an ugly
and deformed one. While I was considering the love of dominion grounded
in self-love, I perceived that this love was in the highest degree
infernal, and consequently prevailed with those who are in the deepest
hell; and that the love of dominion grounded in the love of uses was in
the highest degree heavenly, and consequently prevailed with those who
are in the highest heaven. The love of dominion grounded in self-love is
in the highest degree infernal, because to exercise dominion from
self-love, is to exercise it from _proprium_, and a man's _proprium_
from his birth is essential evil, which is diametrically opposite to the
Lord; wherefore the more persons who are under the influence of such
evil, advance therein, the more they deny God and the holy things of the
church, and worship themselves and nature. Let such persons, I entreat
them, examine that evil in themselves, and they will see this to be the
case. This love also is of such a nature, that in proportion as it is
left unrestrained, which is the case so long as it is not checked by
impossibilities, in the same proportion it rushes impetuously from step
to step, even to the highest, and there also finds no bounds, but is sad
and sorrowful because there is no higher step for it to ascend. This
love with statesmen is so intense that they wish to be kings and
emperors, and if it were possible, to have dominion over all things of
the world, and to be called kings of kings and emperors of emperors;
while the same love with the clergy is so intense that they wish to be
gods and, as far as is possible, to have dominion over all things of
heaven, and to be called gods of gods. That neither of these acknowledge
any God, will be seen in what follows. On the other hand, those who
desire to exercise dominion from the love of uses, do not desire it from
themselves, but from the Lord; since the love of uses is from the Lord,
and is the Lord himself: these regard dignities only as means to the
performance of uses, setting uses far above dignities; whereas the
former set dignities far above uses.

263. While I was meditating on these things, an angel from the Lord said
to me, "You shall presently see, and be convinced by ocular
demonstration, what is the nature and quality of that infernal love."
Then suddenly the earth opened on the left, and I saw a devil ascending
from hell, with a square cap on his head let down over his forehead even
to his eyes: his face was full of pimples as of a burning fever, his
eyes fierce and firy, his breast swelling immensely; from his mouth he
belched smoke like a furnace, his loins seemed all in a blaze, instead
of feet he had bony ankles without flesh, and from his body exhaled a
stinking and filthy heat. On seeing him I was alarmed, and cried out,
"Approach no nearer; tell me, whence are you?" He replied in a hoarse
tone of voice, "I am from below, where I am with two hundred in the most
supereminent of all societies. We are all emperors of emperors, king of
kings, dukes of dukes, and princes of princes; no one in our society is
barely an emperor, a king, a duke, or a prince. We sit there on thrones
of thrones, and despatch thence mandates through the whole world and
beyond it." I then said to him, "Do you not see that you are insane from
the phantasy of super-eminence?" and he replied, "How can you say so,
when we absolutely seem to ourselves, and are also acknowledged by each
other, to have such distinction?" On hearing this, I was unwilling to
repeat my charge of insanity, as he was insane from phantasy; and I was
informed that this devil, during his abode in the world, had been only a
house-steward, and at that time he was so lifted up in spirit, that he
despised all mankind in comparison with himself, and indulged in the
phantasy that he was more worthy than a king, and even than an emperor;
in consequence of which proud conceit, he had denied God, and had
regarded all the holy things of the church as of no concern to himself,
but of some to the stupid multitude. At length I asked him, "How long do
you two hundred thus glory among yourselves?" He replied "to eternity;
but such of us as torture others for denying our super-eminence, sink
under ground; for we are allowed to glory, but not to do mischief to any
one." I asked him again, "Do you know what befalls those who sink under
ground?" He said, "They sink down into a certain prison, where they are
called viler than the vile, or the vilest, and are set to work." I then
said to him. "Take heed therefore, lest you also should sink down."

264. After this the earth again opened, but now on the right; and I saw
another devil rising thence, who had on his head a kind of turban,
wrapped about with spires as of a snake, the head of which stood out
from the crown; his face was leprous from the forehead to the chin, and
so were his hands; his loins were naked and as black as soot, through
which was discernible in dusky transparence the fire as of a furnace;
and the ankles of his feet were like two vipers. The former devil, on
seeing him, fell on his knees, and adored him. On my asking why he did
so, he said, "He is the God of heaven and earth, and is omnipotent." I
then asked the other, "What do you say to this?" he replied, "What shall
I say? I have all power over heaven and hell; the lot of all souls is in
my hand." Again I enquired, "How can he, who is emperor of emperors, so
submit himself, and how can you receive adoration?" he answered, "He is
still my servant; what is an emperor before God? the thunder of
excommunication is in my right hand." I then said to him, "How can you
be so insane? In the world you were only a canon; and because you were
infected with the phantasy that you also had the keys of heaven, and
thence the power of binding and loosing, you have inflamed your spirit
to such a degree of madness, that you now believe yourself to be very
God." Upon this he swore with indignation that it was so, and said, "The
Lord has not any power in heaven, because he has transferred it all to
us. We have only to give the word of command, and heaven and hell
reverently obey us. If we send any one to hell, the devils immediately
receive him; and so do the angels receive those whom we send to heaven."
I asked further, "How many are there in your society?" he said, "Three
hundred; and we are all gods there; but I am god of gods." After this
the earth opened beneath the feet of each, and they sank down into their
respective hells; and I saw that beneath their hells were workhouses,
into which those who injure others would fall; for every one in hell is
left to his phantasy, and is also permitted to glory in it; but he is
not allowed to injure another. The reason why such are there, is,
because a man is then in his spirit; and the spirit, after it is
separated from the body, comes into the full liberty of acting according
to its affections and consequent thoughts. I was afterwards permitted to
look into their hells: that which contained the emperors of emperors and
kings of kings, was full of all uncleanness; and the inhabitants
appeared like various kinds of wild beasts, with fierce eyes; and so it
was in the other, which contained the gods and the god of gods: in it
there appeared the direful birds of night, which are called _ochim_ and
_ijim_, flying about them. The images of their phantasies were presented
to me under this appearance. From these circumstances it was manifest,
what is the nature and quality of political and ecclesiastical
self-love; that the latter would make its votaries desirous of being
gods, while the former would make them desirous of being emperors; and
that under the influence of such loves men wish and strive to attain the
objects of their desires, so far as they are left without restraint.

265. Afterwards a hell was opened, where I saw two men, one sitting on a
bench, holding his feet in a basket full of serpents which seemed to be
creeping upwards by his breast even to his neck; and the other sitting
on a blazing ass, at whose sides red serpents were creeping, raising
their heads and necks, and pursuing the rider. I was told that they had
been popes who had compelled emperors to resign their dominions, and had
ill-treated them both in word and deed at Rome, whither they went to
supplicate and adore them; and that the basket in which were the
serpents, and the blazing ass with snakes at his sides, were
representations of their love of dominion grounded on self-love, and
that such appearances are seen only by those who look at them from a
distance. There were some canons present, whom I asked whether those had
really been popes? They said, that they were acquainted with them, and
knew that they had been such.

266. After beholding these sad and hideous spectacles, I looked around,
and saw two angels in conversation standing near me. One wore a woollen
robe that shone bright with flaming purple, and under it a vest of fine
bright linen; the other had on similar garments of scarlet, together
with a turban studded on the right side with carbuncles. I approached
them, and, greeting them with a salutation of peace, respectfully asked
them, "For what purpose are you here below?" They replied, "We have let
ourselves down from heaven by the Lord's command, to speak with you
respecting the blessed lot of those who are desirous to have dominion
from the love of uses. We are worshipers of the Lord. I am prince of a
society; my companion is chief priest of the same." The prince moreover
said, "I am the servant of my society, because I serve it by doing
uses:" the other said, "I am minister of the church there, because in
serving them I minister holy things to the uses of their souls. We both
are in perpetual joys grounded in the eternal happiness which is in them
from the Lord. All things in our society are splendid and magnificent;
they are splendid from gold and precious stones, and magnificent from
palaces and paradises. The reason of this is, because our love of
dominion is not grounded in self-love, but in the love of uses: and as
the love of uses is from the Lord, therefore all good uses in the
heavens are splendid and refulgent; and as all in our society are in
this love, therefore the atmosphere appears golden from the light which
partakes of the sun's flame-principle, and the sun's flame-principle
corresponds to that love." As they said this, they appeared to me to be
encompassed with such a sphere, from which an aromatic odor issued that
was perceivable by the senses. I mentioned this circumstance to them,
and intreated them to continue their discourse respecting the love of
uses; and they proceeded thus: "The dignities which we enjoy, we indeed
sought after and solicited for no other end than that we might be
enabled more fully to perform uses, and to extend them more widely. We
are also encompassed with honor, and we accept it, not for ourselves,
but for the good of the society; for the brethren and consociates, who
form the commonalty of the society, scarcely know but that the honors of
our dignities are in ourselves, and consequently that the uses which we
perform are from ourselves; but we feel otherwise, being sensible that
the honors of the dignities are out of ourselves, and that they are as
the garments with which we are clothed; but that the uses which we
perform, from the love of them, are within us from the Lord: and this
love receives its blessedness from communication by uses with others;
and we know from experience, that so far as we do uses from the love
thereof, so far that love increases, and with it wisdom, whereby
communication is effected; but so far as we retain uses in ourselves,
and do not communicate them, so far blessedness perishes: and in such
case use becomes like food stored up in the stomach, which, not being
dispersed, affords no nourishment to the body and its parts, but remains
undigested, and thereby causes loathing: in a word, the whole heaven is
nothing but a continent of use, from first principles to last. What is
use but the actual love of our neighbor? and what holds the heavens
together with this love?" On hearing this I asked, "How can any one know
whether he performs uses from self-love, or from the love of uses? every
man, both good and bad, performs uses, and that from some love. Suppose
that in the world there be a society composed of mere devils, and
another composed of mere angels; I am of opinion that the devils in
their society, from the fire of self-love, and the splendor of their own
glory, would do as many uses as the angels in their society; who then
can know from what love, and from what origin uses flow?" To this the
two angels replied, "Devils do uses for the sake of themselves and of
reputation, that they may be raised to honors or may gain wealth; but
angels do not do uses from such motives, but for the sake of uses from
the love thereof. A man cannot discern the true quality of those uses;
but the Lord discerns it. Every one who believes in the Lord, and shuns
evils as sins, performs uses from the Lord; but every one who neither
believes in the Lord, nor shuns evils as sins, does uses from self and
for the sake of self. This is the difference between the uses done by
devils and those done by angels." Having said this, the two angels
departed; and I saw them from afar carried in a firy chariot like Elias,
and conveyed into their respective heavens.

267. THE SECOND MEMORABLE RELATION. Not long after this interview with
the angels, I entered a certain grove, and while I was walking there, I
meditated on those who are in the concupiscence and consequent phantasy
of possessing the things of the world; and then at some distance from me
I saw two angels in conversation, and by turns looking at me; I
therefore went nearer to them, and as I approached they thus accosted
me: "We have perceived in ourselves that you are meditating on what we
are conversing about, or that we are conversing on what you are
meditating about, which is a consequence of the reciprocal communication
of affections." I asked therefore what they were conversing about? they
replied, "About phantasy, concupiscence, and intelligence; and just now
about those who delight themselves in the vision and imagination of
possessing whatever the world contains." I then entreated them to favor
me with their sentiments on those three subjects,--concupiscence,
phantasy, and intelligence. They began by saying, "Every one is by birth
interiorly in concupiscence, but by education exteriorly in
intelligence; and no one is in intelligence, still less in wisdom,
interiorly, thus as to his spirit, but from the Lord: for every one is
withheld from the concupiscence of evil, and held in intelligence,
according as he looks to the Lord, and is at the same time in
conjunction with him; without this, a man is mere concupiscence; yet
still in externals, or as to the body, he is in intelligence arising
from education; for a man lusts after honors and wealth, or eminence and
opulence, and in order to attain them, it is necessary that he appear
moral and spiritual, thus intelligent and wise; and he learns so to
appear from infancy. This the reason why, as soon as he comes among men,
or into company, he inverts his spirit, and removes it from
concupiscence, and speaks and acts from the fair and honorable maxims
which he has learnt from infancy, and retains in the bodily memory: and
he is particularly cautious, lest anything of the wild concupiscence
prevalent in his spirit should discover itself. Hence every man who is
not interiorly led by the Lord, is a pretender, a sycophant, a
hypocrite, and thereby an apparent man, and yet not a man; of whom it
may be said, that his shell or body is wise, and his kernel or spirit
insane; also that his external is human, and his internal bestial. Such
persons, with the hinder part of the head look upwards, and with the
fore part downwards; thus they walk as if oppressed with heaviness, with
the head hanging down and the countenance prone to the earth; and when
they put off the body, and become spirits, and are thereby set at
liberty from external restraints, they become the madnesses of their
respective concupiscences. Those who are in self-love desire to domineer
over the universe, yea, to extend its limits in order to enlarge their
dominion, of which they see no end: those who are in the love of the
world desire to possess whatever the world contains, and are full of
grief and envy in case any of its treasures are hid and concealed from
them by others: therefore to prevent such persons from becoming mere
concupiscences, and thereby no longer men, they are permitted in the
spiritual world to think from a fear of the loss of reputation, and
thereby of honor and gain, and also from a fear of the law and its
penalties, and also to give their mind to some study or work whereby
they are kept in externals and thus in a state of intelligence, however
wild and insane they may be interiorly." After this I asked them,
whether all who are in any concupiscence, are also in the phantasy
thereof; they replied, that those are in the phantasy of their
respective concupiscences, who think interiorly in themselves, and too
much indulge their imagination by talking with themselves; for these
almost separate their spirit from connection with the body, and by
vision overflow the understanding, and take a foolish delight as if they
were possessed of the universe and all that it contains: into this
delirium every man comes after death, who has abstracted his spirit from
the body, and has not wished to recede from the delight of the delirium
by thinking at all religiously respecting evils and falses, and least of
all respecting the inordinate love of self as being destructive of love
to the Lord, and respecting the inordinate love of the world, as being
destructive of neighborly love.

268. After this the two angels and also myself were seized with a desire
of seeing those who from worldly love are in the visionary concupiscence
or phantasy of possessing all wealth; and we perceived that we were
inspired with this desire to the end that such visionaries might be
known. Their dwellings were under the earth of our feet, but above hell:
we therefore looked at each other and said, "Let us go." There was an
opening, and in it a ladder by which we descended; and we were told that
we must approach them from the east, lest we should enter into the mist
of their phantasy, whereby our understanding and at the same time our
sight would be obscured; and lo! there appeared a house built of reeds,
and consequently full of chinks, standing in a mist, which continually
issued like smoke through the chinks of three of the walls. We entered,
and saw perhaps fifty here and fifty there sitting on benches, with
their faces turned from the east and south, and looking towards the west
and north. Before each person there was a table, on which were large
purses, and by the purses a great quantity of gold coin: so we asked
them, "Is that the wealth of all the persons in the world?" they
replied, "Not of all in the world, but of all in the kingdom." The sound
of their voice was hissing; and they had round faces, which glistened
like the shell of a snail, and the pupils of their eyes in a green plane
as it were shot forth lightning, which was an effect of the light of
phantasy. We stood in the midst of them, and said, "You believe that you
possess all the wealth of the kingdom;" they replied, "We do possess
it." We then asked, "Which of you?" they said, "Every one;" and we
asked, "How every one? there are many of you:" they said, "Every one of
us knows that all which another has is his own. No one is allowed to
think, and still less to say, 'Mine are not thine;' but every one may
think and say, 'Thine are mine.'" The coin on the tables appeared, even
to us, to be pure gold; but when we let in light from the east, we saw
that they were little grains of gold, which they had magnified to such a
degree by a union of their common phantasy. They said, that every one
that enters ought to bring with him some gold, which they cut into small
pieces, and these again into little grains, and by the unanimous force
of their phantasy they increase them into larger coin. We then said,
"Were you not born men of reason; whence then have you this visionary
infatuation?" they said, "We know that it is an imaginary vanity; but as
it delights the interiors of our minds, we enter here and are delighted
as with the possession of all things: we continue in this place,
however, only a few hours, at the end of which we depart; and as often
as we do so we again become of sound mind; yet still our visionary
delight alternately succeeds and occasions our alternate entrance into
and departure from these habitations: thus we are alternately wise and
foolish; we also know that a hard lot awaits those who by cunning rob
others of their goods." We inquired, "What lot?" they said, "They are
swallowed up and are thrust naked into some infernal prison, where they
are kept to hard labor for clothes and food, and afterwards for some
pieces of coin of trifling value, which they collect, and in which they
place the joy of their hearts; but if they do any harm to their
companions, they are fined a part of their coin."

269. Afterwards we ascended from these hells to the south, where we had
been before, and the angels related there several interesting
particulars respecting concupiscence not visionary or phantastic, in
which all men are born; namely, that while they are in it, they are like
persons infatuated, and yet seem to themselves to be most eminently
wise; and that from this infatuation they are alternately let into the
rational principle which is in their externals; in which state they see,
acknowledge, and confess their insanity; but still they are very
desirous to quit their rational and enter their insane state; and also
do let themselves into it, as into a free and delightful state
succeeding a forced and undelightful one; thus it is concupiscence and
not intelligence that interiorly pleases them. There are three universal
loves which form the constituent principles of every man by creation:
neighbourly love, which also is the love of doing uses; the love of the
world, which also is the love of possessing wealth; and the love of
self, which also is the love of bearing rule over others. Neighbourly
love, or the love of doing uses, is a spiritual love; but the love of
the world, or the love of possessing wealth, is a material love; whereas
the love of self, or the love of bearing rule over others, is a
corporeal love. A man is a man while neighbourly love, or the love of
doing uses, constitutes the head, the love of the world the body, and
the love of self the feet; whereas if the love of the world constitutes
the head, the man is as it were hunched-backed; but when the love of
self constitutes the head, he is like a man standing not on his feet,
but on the palms of his hands with his head downwards and his haunches
upwards. When neighbourly love constitutes the head, and the two other
loves in order constitute the body and feet, the man appears from heaven
of an angelic countenance, with a beautiful rainbow about his head;
whereas if the love of the world constitutes the head, he appears from
heaven of a pale countenance like a corpse, with a yellow circle about
his head; but if the love of self constitutes the head, he appears from
heaven of a dusky countenance, with a white circle about his head.
Hereupon I asked, "What do the circles about the head represent?" they
replied, "They represent intelligence; the white circle about the head
of the dusky countenance represents, that his intelligence is in
externals, or about him, but insanity is in his internals, or in him. A
man also who is of such a quality and character, is wise while in the
body, but insane while in the spirit; and no man is wise in spirit but
from the Lord, as is the case when he is regenerated and created again
or anew by him." As they said this, the earth opened to the left, and
through the opening I saw a devil rising with a white lucid circle
around his head, and I asked him, Who he was? He said, "I am Lucifer,
the son of the morning: and because I made myself like the Most High, I
was cast down." Nevertheless he was not Lucifer, but believed himself to
be so. I then said, "Since you were cast down, how can you rise again
out of hell?" he replied, "There I am a devil, but here I am an angel of
light: do you not see that my head is surrounded by a lucid sphere? you
shall also see, if you wish, that I am super-moral among the moral,
super-rational among the rational, yea, super-spiritual among the
spiritual: I can also preach; yea, I have preached." I asked him, "What
have you preached?" he said, "Against fraudulent dealers and adulterers,
and against all infernal loves; on this occasion too I, Lucifer, called
myself a devil, and denounced vengeance against myself as a devil; and
therefore I was extolled to the skies with praises. Hence it is that I
am called the son of the morning; and, what I myself was surprised at,
while I was in the pulpit, I thought no other than that I was speaking
rightly and properly; but I discovered that this arose from my being in
externals, which at that time were separated from my internals: but
although I discovered this, still I could not change myself, because
through my haughtiness I did not look to God." I next asked him, "How
could you so speak, when you are yourself a fraudulent dealer, an
adulterer, and a devil?" He answered, "I am one character when I am in
externals or in the body, and another when in internals or in the
spirit; in the body I am an angel, but in the spirit a devil; for in the
body I am in the understanding, but in the spirit I am in the will; and
the understanding carries me upwards, whereas the will carries me
downwards. When I am in the understanding my head is surrounded by a
white belt, but when the understanding submits itself entirely to the
will, and becomes subservient to it, which is our last lot, the belt
grows black and disappears; and when this is the case, we cannot again
ascend into this light." Afterwards he spoke of his twofold state, the
external and the internal, more rationally than any other person; but on
a sudden when he saw the angels attendant on me, his face and voice were
inflamed, and he became black, even as to the belt round his head, and
he sunk down into hell through the opening from which he arose. The
bystanders, from what they had seen, came to this conclusion, that a man
is such as his love, and not such as his understanding is; since the
love easily draws over the understanding to its side, and enslaves it. I
then asked the angels, "Whence have devils such rationality?" They said,
"It is from the glory of self-love; for self-love is surrounded by
glory, and glory elevates the understanding even into the light of
heaven; for with every man the understanding is capable of being
elevated according to knowledges, but the will only by a life according
to the truths of the church and of reason: hence even atheists, who are
in the glory of reputation arising from self-love, and thence in a high
conceit of their own intelligence, enjoy a more sublime rationality than
many others; this, however, is only when they are in the thought of the
understanding, and not when they are in the affection of the will. The
affection of the will possesses a man's internal, whereas the thought of
the understanding possesses his external." The angel further declared
the reason why every man is constituted of the three loves above
mentioned; namely, the love of use, the love of the world, and the love
of self; which is, that he may think from God, although as from himself.
He also said, that the supreme principles in a man are turned upwards to
God, the middle outwards to the world, and the lowest downwards to self;
and since the latter are turned downwards, a man thinks as from himself,
when yet it is from God.

270. THE THIRD MEMORABLE RELATION. One morning on awaking from sleep my
thoughts were deeply engaged on some arcana of conjugial love, and at
length on this, "_In what region of the human mind does love truly
conjugial reside, and thence in what region does conjugial cold
reside_?" I knew that there are three regions of the human mind, one
above the other, and that in the lowest region dwells natural love; in
the superior, spiritual love; and in the supreme, celestial love; and
that in each region there is a marriage of good and truth; and good is
of love, and truth is of wisdom; that in each region there is a marriage
of love and wisdom; and that this marriage is the same as the marriage
of the will and the understanding, since the will is the receptacle of
love, and the understanding the receptacle of wisdom. While I was thus
deeply engaged in thought, lo! I saw two swans flying towards the north,
and presently two birds of paradise flying towards the south, and also
two turtle doves flying in the east: as I was watching their flight, I
saw that the two swans bent their course from the north to the east, and
the two birds of paradise from the south, also that they united with the
two doves in the east, and flew together to a certain lofty palace
there, about which there were olives, palms, and beeches. The palace had
three rows of windows, one above the other; and while I was making my
observations, I saw the swans fly into the palace through open windows
in the lowest row, the birds of paradise through others in the middle
row, and the doves through others in the highest. When I had observed
this, an angel presented himself, and said, "Do you understand what you
have seen?" I replied, "In a small degree." He said, "That palace
represents the habitations of conjugial love, such as are in human
minds. Its highest part, into which the doves flew, represents the
highest region of the mind, where conjugial love dwells in the love of
good with its wisdom; the middle part, into which the birds of paradise
flew, represents the middle region, where conjugial love dwells in the
love of truth with its intelligence: and the lowest part, into which the
swans flew, represents the lowest region of the mind, where conjugial
love dwells in the love of what is just and right with its knowledge.
The three pairs of birds also signify these things; the pair of turtle
doves signifies conjugial love of the highest region, the pair of birds
of paradise conjugial love of the middle region, and the pair of swans
conjugial love of the lowest region. Similar things are signified by the
three kinds of trees about the palace, the olives, palms, and beeches.
We in heaven call the highest region of the mind celestial, the middle
spiritual, and the lowest natural; and we perceive them as stories in a
house, one above another, and an ascent from one to the other by steps
as by stairs; and in each part as it were two apartments, one for love,
the other for wisdom, and in front as it were a chamber, where love with
its wisdom, or good with its truth, or, what is the same, the will with
its understanding, consociate in bed. In that palace are presented as in
an image all the arcana of conjugial love." On hearing this, being
inflamed with a desire of seeing it, I asked whether anyone was
permitted to enter and see it, as it was a representative palace? He
replied, "None but those who are in the third heaven, because to them
every representative of love and wisdom becomes real: from them I have
heard what I have related to you, and also this particular, that love
truly conjugial dwells in the highest region in the midst of mutual
love, in the marriage-chamber or apartment of the will, and also in the
midst of the perceptions of wisdom in the marriage-chamber or apartment
of the understanding, and that they consociate in bed in the chamber
which is in front, in the east." I also asked, "Why are there two
marriage-chambers?" He said, "The husband is in the marriage-chamber of
the understanding, and the wife in that of the will." I then asked,
"Since conjugial love dwells there, where then does conjugial cold
dwell?" He replied, "It dwells also in the supreme region, but only in
the marriage-chamber of the understanding, that of the will being closed
there: for the understanding with its truths, as often as it pleases,
can ascend by a winding staircase into the highest region into its
marriage-chamber; but if the will with the good of its love does not
ascend at the same time into the consociate marriage-chamber, the latter
is closed, and cold ensues in the other: this is _conjugial cold_. The
understanding, while such cold prevails towards the wife, looks
downwards to the lowest region, and also, if not prevented by fear,
descends to warm itself there at an illicit fire." Having thus spoken,
he was about to recount further particulars respecting conjugial love
from its images in that palace; but he said, "Enough at this time;
inquire first whether what has been already said is above the level of
ordinary understandings; if it is, what need of saying more? but if not,
more will be discovered."

       *       *       *       *       *

ON THE CAUSES OF APPARENT LOVE, FRIENDSHIP, AND FAVOR IN MARRIAGES.

271. Having treated of the causes of cold and separation, it follows
from order that the causes of apparent love, friendship, and favor in
marriages, should also be treated of; for it is well known, that
although cold separates the minds (_animos_) of married partners at the
present day, still they live together, and have children; which would
not be the case, unless there were also apparent loves, alternately
similar to or emulous of the warmth of genuine love. That these
appearances are necessary and useful, and that without them there would
be no houses, and consequently no societies, will be seen in what
follows. Moreover, some conscientious persons may be distressed with the
idea, that the disagreement of mind subsisting between them and their
married partners, and the internal alienation thence arising, may be
their own fault, and may be imputed to them as such, and on this account
they are grieved at the heart; but as it is out of their power to
prevent internal disagreements, it is enough for them, by apparent love
and favor, from conscientious motives to subdue the inconveniences which
might arise: hence also friendship may possibly return, in which
conjugial love lies concealed on the part of such, although not on the
part of the other. But this subject, like the foregoing, from the great
variety of its matter, shall be treated of in the following distinct
articles: I. _In the natural world almost all are capable of being
joined together as to external, but not as to internal affections, if
these disagree and are apparent._ II. _In the spiritual world all are
joined together according to internal, but not according to external
affections, unless these act in unity with the internal._ III. _It is
the external affections, according to which matrimony is generally
contracted in the world._ IV. _But in case they are not influenced by
internal affections, which conjoin minds, the bonds of matrimony are
loosed in the house._ V. _Nevertheless those bonds must continue in the
world till the decease of one of the parties._ VI. _In cases of
matrimony, in which the internal affections do not conjoin, there are
external affections, which assume a semblance of the internal and tend
to consociate._ VII. _Hence come apparent love, friendship, and favor
between married partners._ VIII. _These appearances are assumed
conjugial semblances, and they are commendable, because useful and
necessary._ IX. _These assumed conjugial semblances, in the case of a
spiritual man (homo) conjoined to a natural, are founded in justice and
judgement._ X. _For various reasons these assumed conjugial semblances
with natural men are founded in prudence._ XI. _They are for the sake of
amendment and accommodation._ XII. _They are for the sake of preserving
order in domestic affairs, and for the sake of mutual aid._ XIII. _They
are for the sake of unanimity in the care of infants and the education
of children._ XIV. _They are for the sake of peace in the house._ XV.
_They are for the sake of reputation out of the house._ XVI. _They are
for the sake of various favors expected from the married partner, or
from his or her relations; and thus from the fear of losing such
favors._ XVII. _They are for the sake of having blemishes excused, and
thereby of avoiding disgrace._ XVIII. _They are for the sake of
reconciliation._ XIX. _In case favor does not cease with the wife, when
faculty ceases with the man, there may exist a friendship resembling
conjugial friendship, when the parties grow old._ XX. _There are various
kinds of apparent love and friendship between married partners, one of
whom is brought under the yoke, and therefore is subject to the other._
XXI. _In the world there are infernal marriages between persons who
interiorly are the most inveterate enemies, and exteriorly are as the
closest friends._ We proceed to an explanation of each article.

272. I. IN THE NATURAL WORLD ALMOST ALL ARE CAPABLE OF BEING JOINED
TOGETHER AS TO EXTERNAL, BUT NOT AS TO INTERNAL AFFECTIONS, IF THESE
DISAGREE AND ARE APPARENT. The reason of this is, because in the world
every one is clothed with a material body, and this is overcharged with
lusts, which are in it as dregs that fall to the bottom, when the must
of the wine is clarified. Such are the constituent substances of which
the bodies of men in the world are composed. Hence it is that the
internal affections, which are of the mind, do not appear; and in many
cases, scarce a grain of them transpires; for the body either absorbs
them, and involves them in its dregs, or by simulation which has been
learned from infancy conceals them deeply from the sight of others; and
by these means the man puts himself into the state of every affection
which he observes in another, and allures his affection to himself, and
thus they unite. The reason why they unite is, because every affection
has its delight, and delights tie minds together. But it would be
otherwise if the internal affections, like the external, appeared
visibly in the face and gesture, and were made manifest to the hearing
by the tone of the speech; or if their delights were sensible to the
nostrils or smell, as they are in the spiritual world: in such case, if
they disagreed so as to be discordant, they would separate minds from
each other, and according to the perception of antipathy, the minds
would remove to a distance. From these considerations it is evident,
that in the natural world almost all are capable of being joined
together as to external, but not as to internal affections, if these
disagree and are apparent.

273. II. IN THE SPIRITUAL WORLD ALL ARE CONJOINED ACCORDING TO INTERNAL,
BUT NOT ACCORDING TO EXTERNAL AFFECTIONS, UNLESS THESE ACT IN UNITY WITH
THE INTERNAL. This is, because in the spiritual world the material body
is rejected, which could receive and bring forth the forms of all
affections, as we have said just above; and a man (_homo_) when stripped
of that body is in his internal affections, which his body had before
concealed: hence it is, that in the spiritual world similarities and
dissimilarities, or sympathies and antipathies, are not only felt, but
also appear in the face, the speech, and the gesture; wherefore in that
world similitudes are conjoined, and dissimilitudes separated. This is
the reason why the universal heaven is arranged by the Lord according to
all the varieties of the affections of the love of good and truth, and,
on the contrary, hell according to all the varieties of the love of what
is evil and false. As angels and spirits, like men in the world, have
internal and external affections, and as, in the spiritual world, the
internal affections cannot be concealed by the external, they therefore
transpire and manifest themselves: hence with angels and spirits both
the internal and external affections are reduced to similitude and
correspondence; after which their internal affections are, by the
external, imaged in their faces, and perceived in the tone of their
speech; they also appear in their behaviour and manners. Angels and
spirits have internal and external affections, because they have minds
and bodies; and affections with the thoughts thence derived belong to
the mind, and sensations with the pleasures thence derived to the body.
It frequently happens in the world of spirits, that friends meet after
death, and recollect their friendships in the former world, and on such
occasions believe that they shall live on terms of friendship as
formerly; but when their consociation, which is only of the external
affections, is perceived in heaven, a separation ensues according to
their internal; and in this case some are removed from the place of
their meeting into the north, some into the west, and each to such a
distance from the other, that they can no longer see or know each other;
for in the places appointed for them to remain at, their faces are
changed so as to become the image of their internal affections. From
these considerations it is manifest, that in the spiritual world all are
conjoined according to internal affections, and not according to
external, unless these act in unity with the internal.

274. III. IT IS THE EXTERNAL AFFECTIONS ACCORDING TO WHICH MATRIMONY IS
GENERALLY CONTRACTED IN THE WORLD. The reason of this is, because the
internal affections are seldom consulted; and even if they are, still
their similitude is not seen in the woman; for she, by a peculiar
property with which she is gifted from her birth, withdraws the internal
affections into the inner recesses of her mind. There are various
external affections which induce men to engage in matrimony. The first
affection of this age is an increase of property by wealth, as well with
a view to becoming rich as for a plentiful supply of the comforts of
life; the second is a thirst after honors, with a view either of being
held in high estimation or of an increase of fortune: besides these,
there are various allurements and concupiscences which do not afford an
opportunity of ascertaining the agreement of the internal affections.
From these few considerations it is manifest, that matrimony is
generally contracted in the world according to external affections.

275. IV. BUT IN CASE THEY ARE NOT INFLUENCED BY INTERNAL AFFECTIONS,
WHICH CONJOIN MINDS, THE BONDS OF MATRIMONY ARE LOOSED IN THE HOUSE. It
is said _in the house_, because it is done privately between the
parties; as is the case when the first warmth, excited during courtship
and breaking out into a flame as the nuptials approach, successively
abates from the discordance of the internal affections, and at length
passes off into cold. It is well known that in this case the external
affections, which had induced and allured the parties to matrimony,
disappear, so that they no longer effect conjunction. That cold arises
from various causes, internal, external, and accidental, all which
originate in a dissimilitude of internal inclinations, was proved in the
foregoing chapter. From these considerations the truth of what was
asserted is manifest, that unless the external affections are influenced
by internal, which conjoin minds, the bonds of matrimony are loosed in
the house.

276. V. NEVERTHELESS THOSE BONDS MUST CONTINUE IN THE WORLD TILL THE
DECEASE OF ONE OF THE PARTIES. This proposition is adduced to the intent
that to the eye of reason it may more evidently appear how necessary,
useful, and true it is, that where there is not genuine conjugial love,
it ought still to be assumed, that it may appear as if there were. The
case would be otherwise if the marriage contract was not to continue to
the end of life, but might be dissolved at pleasure as was the case with
the Israelitish nation, who claimed to themselves the liberty of putting
away their wives for every cause. This is evident from the following
passage in Matthew: "_The pharisees came, and said unto Jesus, Is it
lawful for a man to put away his wife for every cause? And when Jesus
answered, that it is not lawful to put away a wife and to marry another,
except on account of whoredom, they replied that nevertheless Moses
commanded to give a bill of divorce and to put her away; and the
disciples said, If the case of a man with his wife be so it is not
expedient to marry_," xix. 3-10. Since therefore the covenant of
marriage is for life, it follows that the appearances of love and
friendship between married partners are necessary. That matrimony, when
contracted, must continue till the decease of one of the parties, is
grounded in the divine law, consequently also in rational law, and
thence in civil law: in the divine law, because, as said above, it is
not lawful to put away a wife and marry another, except for whoredom; in
rational law, because it is founded upon spiritual, for divine law and
rational are one law; from both these together, or by the latter from
the former, it may be abundantly seen what enormities and destructions
of societies would result from the dissolving of marriage, or the
putting away of wives, at the good pleasure of the husbands, before
death. Those enormities and destructions of societies may in some
measure be seen in the MEMORABLE RELATION respecting the origin of
conjugial love, discussed by the spirits assembled from the nine
kingdoms, n. 103-115; to which there is no need of adding further
reasons. But these causes do not operate to prevent the permission of
separations grounded in their proper causes, respecting which see above,
n. 252-254; and also of concubinage, respecting which see the second
part of this work.

277. VI. IN CASE OF MATRIMONY IN WHICH THE INTERNAL AFFECTIONS DO NOT
CONJOIN, THERE ARE EXTERNAL AFFECTIONS WHICH ASSUME A SEMBLANCE OF THE
INTERNAL AND TEND TO CONSOLIDATE. By internal affections we mean the
mutual inclinations which influence the mind of each of the parties from
heaven; whereas by external affections we mean the inclinations which
influence the mind of each of the parties from the world. The latter
affections or inclinations indeed equally belong to the mind, but they
occupy its inferior regions, whereas the former occupy the superior: but
since both have their allotted seat in the mind, it may possibly be
believed that they are alike and agree; yet although they are not alike,
still they can appear so: in some cases they exist as agreements, and in
some as insinuating semblances. There is a certain communion implanted
in each of the parties from the earliest time of the marriage-covenant,
which, notwithstanding their disagreement in minds (_animis_) still
remains implanted; as a communion of possessions, and in many cases a
communion of uses, and of the various necessities of the house, and
thence also a communion of thoughts and of certain secrets; there is
also a communion of bed, and of the love of children: not to mention
several others, which, as they are inscribed on the conjugial covenant,
are also inscribed on their minds. Hence originate especially those
external affections which resemble the internal; whereas those which
only counterfeit them are partly from the same origin and partly from
another; but on the subject of each more will be said in what follows.

278. VII. HENCE COME APPARENT LOVE, FRIENDSHIP, AND FAVOR BETWEEN
MARRIED PARTNERS. Apparent loves, friendships, and favors between
married partners, are a consequence of the conjugial covenant being
ratified for the term of life, and of the conjugial communion thence
inscribed on those who ratify it; whence spring external affections
resembling the internal, as was just now indicated: they are moreover a
consequence of their causes, which are usefulness and necessity: from
which in part exist conjunctive external affections, or their
counterfeit, whereby external love and friendship appear as internal.

279. VIII. THESE APPEARANCES ARE ASSUMED CONJUGIAL SEMBLANCES; AND THEY
ARE COMMENDABLE, BECAUSE USEFUL AND NECESSARY. They are called assumed
semblances, because they exist with those who disagree in mind, and who
from such disagreement are interiorly in cold: in this case, when they
still appear to live united, as duty and decency require, their kind
offices to each other may be called assumed conjugial semblances; which,
as being commendable for the sake of uses, are altogether to be
distinguished from hypocritical semblances; for hereby all those good
things are provided for, which are commemorated in order below, from
article XI-XX. They are commendable for the sake of necessity, because
otherwise those good things would be unattained; and yet the parties are
enjoined by a covenant and compact to live together, and hence it
behoves each of them to consider it a duty to do so.

280. IX. THESE ASSUMED CONJUGIAL SEMBLANCES, IN THE CASE OF A SPIRITUAL
MAN (_homo_) CONJOINED TO A NATURAL, ARE FOUNDED IN JUSTICE AND
JUDGEMENT. The reason of this is, because the spiritual man, in all he
does, acts from justice and judgement; wherefore he does not regard
these assumed semblances as alienated from their internal affections,
but as connected with them; for he is in earnest, and respects amendment
as an end; and if he does not obtain this, he respects accommodation for
the sake of domestic order, mutual aid, the care of children, and peace
and tranquillity. To these things he is led from a principle of justice;
and from a principle of judgement he gives them effect. The reason why a
spiritual man so lives with a natural one is, because a spiritual man
acts spiritually, even with a natural man.

281. X. FOR VARIOUS REASONS, THESE ASSUMED CONJUGIAL SEMBLANCES WITH
NATURAL MEN ARE FOUNDED IN PRUDENCE. In the case of two married partners
of whom one is spiritual and the other natural, (by the spiritual we
mean the one that loves spiritual things, and thereby is wise from the
Lord, and by the natural, the one that loves only natural things, and
thereby is wise from himself,) when they are united in marriage,
conjugial love with the spiritual partner is heat, and with the natural
is cold. It is evident that heat and cold cannot remain together, also
that heat cannot inflame him that is in cold, unless the cold be first
dispersed, and that cold cannot flow into him that is in heat, unless
the heat be first removed: hence it is that inward love cannot exist
between married partners, one of whom is spiritual and the other
natural; but that a love resembling inward love may exist on the part of
the spiritual partner, as was said in the foregoing article; whereas
between two natural married partners no inward love can exist, since
each is cold; and if they have any heat, it is from something unchaste;
nevertheless such persons may live together in the same house, with
separate minds (_animis_), and also assume looks of love and friendship
towards each other, notwithstanding the disagreement of their minds
(_mentes_): in such case, the external affections, which for the most
part relate to wealth and possessions, or to honor and dignities, may as
it were be kindled into a flame; and as such enkindling induces fear for
their loss, therefore assumed conjugial semblances are in such cases
necessities, which are principally those adduced below in articles
XV.-XVII. The rest of the causes adduced with these may have somewhat in
common with those relating to the spiritual man; concerning which see
above, n. 280; but only in case the prudence with the natural man is
founded in intelligence.

282. XI. THEY ARE FOR THE SAKE OF AMENDMENT AND ACCOMMODATION. The
reason why assumed conjugial semblances, which are appearances of love
and friendship subsisting between married partners who disagree in mind,
are for the sake of amendment, is because a spiritual man (_homo_)
connected with a natural one by the matrimonial covenant, intends
nothing else but amendment of life; which he effects by judicious and
elegant conversation, and by favors which soothe and flatter the temper
of the other; but in case these things prove ineffectual, he intends
accommodation, for the preservation of order in domestic affairs, for
mutual aid, and for the sake of the infants and children, and other
similar things; for, as was shown above, n. 280, whatever is said and
done by a spiritual man (_homo_) is founded in justice and judgement.
But with married partners, neither of whom is spiritual, but both
natural, similar conduct may exist, but for other ends; if for the sake
of amendment and accommodation, the end is, either that the other party
may be reduced to a similitude of manners, and be made subordinate to
his desires, or that some service may be made subservient to his own, or
for the sake of peace within the house, of reputation out of it, or of
favors hoped for by the married partner or his relations; not to mention
other ends: but with some these ends are grounded in the prudence of
their reason, with some in natural civility, with some in the delights
of certain cupidities which have been familiar from the cradle, the loss
of which is dreaded; besides several ends, which render the assumed
kindnesses as of conjugial love more or less counterfeit. There may also
be kindnesses as of conjugial love out of the house, and none within;
those however respect as an end the reputation of both parties; and if
they do not respect this, they are merely deceptive.

283. XII. THEY ARE FOR THE SAKE OF PRESERVING ORDER IN DOMESTIC AFFAIRS,
AND FOR THE SAKE OF MUTUAL AID. Every house in which there are children,
their instructors, and other domestics, is a small society resembling a
large one. The latter also consists of the former, as a whole consists
of its parts, and thereby it exists; and further, as the security of a
large society depends on order, so does the security of this small
society; wherefore as it behoves public magistrates to see and provide
that order may exist and be preserved in a compound society, so it
concerns married partners in their single society. But there cannot be
this order if the husband and wife disagree in their minds (_animis_);
for thereby mutual counsels and aids are drawn different ways, and are
divided like their minds, and thus the form of the small society is rent
asunder; wherefore to preserve order, and thereby to take care of
themselves and at the same time of the house, or of the house and at the
same time of themselves, lest they should come to hurt and fall to ruin,
necessity requires that the master and mistress agree, and act in unity;
and if, from the difference of their minds (_mentium_) this cannot be
done so well as it might, both duty and propriety require that it be
done by representative conjugial friendship. That hereby concord is
established in houses for the sake of necessity and consequent utility,
is well known.

284. XIII. THEY ARE FOR THE SAKE OF UNANIMITY IN THE CARE OF INFANTS AND
THE EDUCATION OF CHILDREN. It is very well known that assumed conjugial
semblances, which are appearances of love and friendship resembling such
as are truly conjugial, exist with married partners for the sake of
infants and children. The common love of the latter causes each married
partner to regard the other with kindness and favor. The love of infants
and children with the mother and the father unite as the heart and lungs
in the breast. The love of them with the mother is as the heart, and the
love towards them with the father is as the lungs. The reason of this
comparison is, because the heart corresponds to love, and the lungs to
the understanding; and love grounded in the will belongs to the mother,
and love grounded in the understanding to the father. With spiritual men
(_homines_) there is conjugial conjunction by means of that love
grounded in justice and judgement; in justice, because the mother had
carried them in her womb, had brought them forth with pain, and
afterwards with unwearied care suckles, nourishes, washes, dresses, and
educates them, (and in judgement, because the father provides for their
instruction in knowledge, intelligence, and wisdom).

285. XIV. THEY ARE FOR THE SAKE OF PEACE IN THE HOUSE. Assumed conjugial
semblances, or external friendships for the sake of domestic peace and
tranquillity, relate principally to the men, who, from their natural
characteristic, act from the understanding in whatever they do; and the
understanding, being exercised in thought, is engaged in a variety of
objects which disquiet, disturb, and distract the mind; wherefore if
there were not tranquillity at home, it would come to pass that the
vital spirits of the parties would grow faint, and their interior life
would as it were expire, and thereby the health of both mind and body
would be destroyed. The dreadful apprehension of these and several other
dangers would possess the minds of the men, unless they had an asylum
with their wives at home for appeasing the disturbances arising in their
understandings. Moreover peace and tranquillity give serenity to their
minds, and dispose them to receive agreeably the kind attentions of
their wives, who spare no pains to disperse the mental clouds which they
are very quick-sighted to observe in their husbands: moreover, the same
peace and tranquillity make the presence of their wives agreeable. Hence
it is evident, that an assumed semblance of love, as if it was truly
conjugial, for the sake of peace and tranquillity at home, is both
necessary and useful. It is further to be observed, that with the wives
such semblances are not assumed as with the men; but if they appear to
resemble them, they are the effect of real love, because wives are born
loves of the understanding of the men; wherefore they accept kindly the
favors of their husbands, and if they do not confess it with their lips,
still they acknowledge it in heart.

286. XV. THEY ARE FOR THE SAKE OF REPUTATION OUT OF THE HOUSE. The
fortunes of men in general depend on their reputation for justice,
sincerity, and uprightness; and this reputation also depends on the
wife, who is acquainted with the most familiar circumstances of her
husband's life; therefore if the disagreements of their minds should
break out into open enmity, quarrels, and threats of hatred, and these
should be noised abroad by the wife and her friends, and by the
domestics, they would easily be turned into tales of scandal, which
would bring disgrace and infamy upon the husband's name. To avoid such
mischiefs, he has no other alternative than either to counterfeit
affection for his wife, or that they be separated as to house.

287. XVI. THEY ARE FOR THE SAKE OF VARIOUS FAVORS EXPECTED FROM THE
MARRIED PARTNER, OR FROM HIS OR HER RELATIONS, AND THUS FROM THE FEAR OF
LOSING SUCH FAVORS. This is the case more especially in marriages where
the rank and condition of the parties are dissimilar, concerning which,
see above, n. 250; as when a man marries a wealthy wife who stores up
her money in purses, or her treasures in coffers; and the more so if she
boldly insists that the husband is bound to support the house out of his
own estate and income: that hence come forced likenesses of conjugial
love, is generally known. The case is similar where a man marries a
wife, whose parents, relations, and friends, are in offices of dignity,
in lucrative business, and in employments with large salaries, who have
it in their power to better her condition: that this also is a ground of
counterfeit love, as if it were conjugial, is generally known. It is
evident that in both cases it is the fear of the loss of the above
favors that is operative.

288. XVII. THEY ARE FOR THE SAKE OF HAVING BLEMISHES EXCUSED, AND
THEREBY OF AVOIDING DISGRACE. There are several blemishes for which
conjugial partners fear disgrace, some criminal, some not. There are
blemishes of the mind and of the body slighter than those mentioned in
the foregoing chapter n. 252 and 253, which are causes of separation;
wherefore those blemishes are here meant, which, to avoid disgrace, are
buried in silence by the other married partner. Besides these, in some
cases there are contingent crimes, which, if made public, are subject to
heavy penalties; not to mention a deficiency of that ability which the
men usually boast of. That excuses of such blemishes, in order to avoid
disgrace, are the causes of counterfeit love and friendship with a
married partner, is too evident to need farther confirmation.

289. XVIII. THEY ARE FOR THE SAKE OF RECONCILIATION. That between
married partners who have mental disagreements from various causes,
there subsist alternate distrust and confidence, alienation and
conjunction, yea, dispute and compromise, thus reconciliation; and also
that apparent friendships promote reconciliation, is well known in the
world. There are also reconciliations which take place after partings,
which are not so alternate and transitory.

290. XIX. IN CASE FAVOR DOES NOT CEASE WITH THE WIFE, WHEN FACULTY
CEASES WITH THE MAN, THERE MAY EXIST A FRIENDSHIP RESEMBLING CONJUGIAL
FRIENDSHIP WHEN THE PARTIES GROW OLD. The primary cause of the
separation of minds (_animorum_) between married partners is a falling
off of favor on the wife's part in consequence of the cessation of
ability on the husband's part, and thence a falling off of love; for
just as heats communicate with each other, so also do colds. That from a
falling off of love on the part of each, there ensues a cessation of
friendship, and also of favor, if not prevented by the fear of domestic
ruin, is evident both from reason and experience. In case therefore the
man tacitly imputes the causes to himself, and still the wife perseveres
in chaste favor towards him, there may thence result a friendship,
which, since it subsists between married partners, appears to resemble
conjugial love. That a friendship resembling the friendship of that
love, may subsist between married partners, when old, experience
testifies from the tranquillity, security, loveliness, and abundant
courtesy with which they live, communicate, and associate together.

291. XX. THERE ARE VARIOUS KINDS OF APPARENT LOVE AND FRIENDSHIP BETWEEN
MARRIED PARTNERS, ONE OF WHOM IS BROUGHT UNDER THE YOKE, AND THEREFORE
IS SUBJECT TO THE OTHER. It is no secret in the world at this day, that
as the first fervor of marriage begins to abate, there arises a
rivalship between the parties respecting right and power; respecting
right, in that according to the statutes of the covenant entered into,
there is an equality, and each has dignity in the offices of his or her
function; and respecting power, in that it is insisted on by the men,
that in all things relating to the house, superiority belongs to them,
because they are men, and inferiority to the women because they are
women. Such rivalships, at this day familiar, arise from no other source
than a want of conscience respecting love truly conjugial, and of
sensible perception respecting the blessedness of that love; in
consequence of which want, lust takes the place of that love, and
counterfeits it; and, on the removal of genuine love, there flows from
this lust a grasping for power, in which some are influenced by the
delight of the love of domineering, which in some is implanted by artful
women before marriage, and which to some is unknown. Where such grasping
prevails with the men, and the various turns of rivalship terminate in
the establishment of their sway, they reduce their wives either to
become their rightful property, or to comply with their arbitrary will,
or into a state of slavery, every one according to the degree and
qualified state of that grasping implanted and concealed in himself; but
where such grasping prevails with the wives, and the various turns of
rivalship terminate in establishing their sway, they reduce their
husbands either into a state of equality of right with themselves, or of
compliance with their arbitrary will, or into a state of slavery: but as
when the wives have obtained the sceptre of sway, there remains with
them a desire which is a counterfeit of conjugial love, and is
restrained both by law and by the fear of legitimate separation, in case
they extend their power beyond the rule of right into what is contrary
thereto, therefore they lead a life in consociation with their husbands.
But what is the nature and quality of the love and friendship between a
ruling wife and a serving husband, and also between a ruling husband and
a serving wife, cannot be briefly described; indeed, if their
differences were to be specifically pointed out and enumerated, it would
occupy several pages; for they are various and diverse--various
according to the nature of the grasping for power prevalent with the
men, and in like manner with the wives; and diverse in regard to the
differences subsisting in the men and the women; for such men have no
friendship of love but what is infatuated, and such wives are in the
friendship of spurious love grounded in lust. But by what arts wives
procure to themselves power over the men, will be shewn in the following
article.

292. XXI. IN THE WORLD THERE ARE INFERNAL MARRIAGES BETWEEN PERSONS WHO
INTERIORLY ARE THE MOST INVETERATE ENEMIES, AND EXTERIORLY ARE AS THE
CLOSEST FRIENDS. I am indeed forbidden by the wives of this sort, in the
spiritual world, to present such marriages to public view; for they are
afraid lest their art of obtaining power over the men should at the same
time be divulged, which yet they are exceedingly desirous to have
concealed: but as I am urged by the men in that world to expose the
causes of the intestine hatred and as it were fury excited in their
hearts against their wives, in consequence of their clandestine arts, I
shall be content with adducing the following particulars. The men said,
that unwittingly they contracted a terrible dread of their wives, in
consequence of which they were constrained to obey their decisions in
the most abject manner, and be at their beck more than the vilest
servants, so that they lost all life and spirit; and that this was the
case not only with those who were in inferior stations of life, but also
with those who were advanced in high dignities, yea with brave and
famous generals: they also said, that after they had contracted this
dread, they could not help on every occasion expressing themselves to
their wives in a friendly manner, and doing what was agreeable to their
humors, although they cherished in their hearts a deadly hatred against
them; and further, that their wives still behaved courteously to them
both in word and deed, and complaisantly attended to some of their
requests. Now as the men themselves greatly wondered, whence such an
antipathy could arise in their internals, and such an apparent sympathy
in their externals, they examined into the causes thereof from some
women who were acquainted with the above secret art. From this source of
information they learned, that women (_mulieres_) are skilled in a
knowledge which they conceal deeply in their own minds, whereby, if they
be so disposed, they can subject the men to the yoke of their authority;
and that this is effected in the case of ignorant wives, sometimes by
alternate quarrel and kindness, sometimes by harsh and unpleasant looks,
and sometimes by other means; but in the case of polite wives, by urgent
and persevering petitions, and by obstinate resistance to their husbands
in case they suffer hardships from them, insisting on their right of
equality by law, in consequence of which they are firm and resolute in
their purpose; yea, insisting that if they should be turned out of the
house, they would return at their pleasure, and would be urgent as
before; for they know that the men by their nature cannot resist the
positive tempers of their wives but that after compliance they submit
themselves to their disposal; and that in this case the wives make a
show of all kinds of civility and tenderness to their husbands subjected
to their sway. The genuine cause of the dominion which the wives obtain
by this cunning is, that the man acts from the understanding and the
woman from the will, and that the will can persist, but not so the
understanding. I have been told, that the worst of this sort of women,
who are altogether a prey to the desire of dominion, can remain firm in
their positive humors even to the last struggle for life. I have also
heard the excuses pleaded by such women (_mulieres_) for entering upon
the exercise of this art; in which they urged that they would not have
done so unless they had foreseen supreme contempt and future rejection,
and consequent ruin on their part, if they should be subdued by their
husbands: and that thus they had taken up these their arms from
necessity. To this excuse they add this admonition for the men; to leave
their wives their own rights, and while they are in alternations of
cold, not to consider them as beneath their maid-servants: they said
also that several of their sex, from their natural timidity, are not in
a state of exercising the above art; but I added, from their natural
modesty. From the above considerations it may now be known what is meant
by infernal marriages in the world between persons who interiorly are
the most inveterate enemies, and exteriorly are like the most attached
friends.

       *       *       *       *       *

293. To the above I will add TWO MEMORABLE RELATIONS. FIRST. Some time
ago as I was looking through a window to the east, I saw seven women
sitting in a garden of roses at a certain fountain, and drinking the
water. I strained my eye-sight greatly to see what they were doing, and
this effort of mine affected them; wherefore one of them beckoned me,
and I immediately quitted the house and came to them. When I joined
them, I courteously inquired whence they were. They said, "We are wives,
and are here conversing respecting the delights of conjugial love, and
from much consideration we conclude, that they are also the delights of
wisdom." This answer so delighted my mind (_animum_), that I seemed to
be in the spirit, and thence in perception more interior and more
enlightened than on any former occasion; wherefore I said to them, "Give
me leave to propose a few questions respecting those satisfactions." On
their consenting, I asked, "How do you wives know that the delights of
conjugial love are the same as the delights of wisdom?" They replied,
"We know it from the correspondence of our husbands' wisdom with our own
delights of conjugial love; for the delights of this love with ourselves
are exalted and diminished and altogether qualified, according to the
wisdom of our husbands." On hearing this, I said, "I know that you are
affected by the agreeable conversation of your husbands and their
cheerfulness of mind, and that you derive thence a bosom delight; but I
am surprised to hear you say, that their wisdom produces this effect;
but tell me what is wisdom, and what wisdom (produces this effect)?" To
this the wives indignantly replied, "Do you suppose that we do not know
what wisdom is, and what wisdom (produces that effect), when yet we are
continually reflecting upon it as in our husbands, and learn it daily
from their mouths? For we wives think of the state of our husbands from
morning to evening; there is scarcely an hour in the day, in which our
intuitive thought is altogether withdrawn from them, or is absent; on
the other hand, our husbands think very little in the day respecting our
state; hence we know what wisdom of theirs it is that gives us delight.
Our husbands call that wisdom spiritual rational, and spiritual moral.
Spiritual rational wisdom, they say, is of the understanding and
knowledges, and spiritual moral wisdom of the will and life; but these
they join together and make a one, and insist that the satisfactions of
this wisdom are transferred from their minds into the delights in our
bosoms, and from our bosoms into theirs, and thus return to wisdom their
origin." I then asked, "Do you know anything more respecting the wisdom
of your husbands which gives you delight?" They said, "We do. There is
spiritual wisdom, and thence rational and moral wisdom. Spiritual wisdom
is to acknowledge the Lord the Saviour as the God of heaven and earth,
and from Him to procure the truths of the church, which is effected by
means of the Word and of preachings derived therefrom, whence comes
spiritual rationality; and from Him to live according to those truths,
whence comes spiritual morality. These two our husbands call the wisdom
which in general operates to produce love truly conjugial. We have heard
from them also that the reason of this is, because, by means of that
wisdom, the interiors of their minds and thence of their bodies are
opened, whence there exists a free passage from first principles even to
last for the stream of love; on the flow, sufficiency, and virtue of
which conjugial love depends and lives. The spiritual rational and moral
wisdom of our husbands, specifically in regard to marriage, has for its
end and object to love the wife alone, and to put away all concupiscence
for other women; and so far as this is effected, so far that love is
exalted as to degree, and perfected as to quality; and also so far we
feel more distinctly and exquisitely the delights in ourselves
corresponding to the delights of the affections and the satisfactions of
the thoughts of our husbands." I inquired afterwards, whether they knew
how communication is effected. They said, "In all conjunction by love
there must be action, reception, and reaction. The delicious state of
our love is acting or action, the state of the wisdom of our husbands is
recipient or reception, and also is reacting or reaction according to
perception; and this reaction we perceive with delights in the breast
according to the state continually expanded and prepared to receive
those things which in any manner agree with the virtue belonging to our
husbands, thus also with the extreme state of love belonging to
ourselves, and which thence proceed." They said further, "Take heed lest
by the delights which we have mentioned, you understand the ultimated
delights of that love: of these we never speak, but of our bosom
delights, which always correspond with the state of the wisdom of our
husbands." After this there appeared at a distance as it were a dove
flying with the leaf of a tree in its mouth: but as it approached,
instead of a dove I saw it was a little boy with a paper in his hand: on
coming to us he held it out to me, and said, "Read it before these
Maidens of the fountain." I then read as follows, "Tell the inhabitants
of your earth, that there is a love truly conjugial having myriads of
delights, scarce any of which are as yet known to the world; but they
will be known, when the church betroths herself to her Lord, and is
married." I then asked, "Why did the little boy call you Maidens of the
fountain?" They replied, "We are called maidens when we sit at this
fountain; because we are affections of the truths of the wisdom of our
husbands, and the affection of truth is called a maiden; a fountain also
signifies the true of wisdom, and the bed of roses, on which we sir, the
delights thereof." Then one of the seven wove a garland of roses, and
sprinkled it with water of the fountain, and placed it on the boy's cap
round his little head, and said, "Receive the delights of intelligence;
know that a cap signifies intelligence; and a garland from this rose-bed
delights." The boy thus decorated then departed, and again appeared a
distance like a flying dove, but now with a coronet on his head.

294. THE SECOND MEMORABLE RELATION. After some days I again saw the
seven wives in a garden of roses, but not in the same as before. Its
magnificence was such as I had never before seen: it was round, and the
roses in it formed as it were a rainbow. The roses or flowers of a
purple color formed its outermost circle, others of a yellow golden
color formed the next interior circle, within this were others of a
bright blue, and the inmost of a shining green; and within this rainbow
rose-bed was a small lake of limpid water. These seven wives, who were
called the Maidens of the fountain, as they were sitting there seeing me
again at the window, called me to them; and when I was come they said,
"Did you ever see anything more beautiful upon the earth?" I replied,
"Never." They then said, "Such scenery is created instantaneously by the
Lord, and represents something new on the earth; for every thing created
by the Lord is representative: but what is this? tell, if you can: we
say it is the delights of conjugial love." On hearing this, I said,
"What! the delights of conjugial love, respecting which you before
conversed with so much wisdom and eloquence! After I had left you, I
related your conversation to some wives in our country, and said, 'I now
know from instruction that you have bosom delights arising from your
conjugial love, which you can communicate to your husbands according to
their wisdom, and that on this account you look at your husbands with
the eyes of your spirit from morning to evening, and study to bend and
draw their minds (_animos_) to become wise, to the end that you may
secure those delights.' I mentioned also that by wisdom you understand
spiritual rational and moral wisdom, and in regard to marriage, the
wisdom to love the wife alone, and to put away all concupiscence for
other women: but to these things the wives of our country answered with
laughter, saying, 'What is all this but mere idle talk? We do not know
what conjugial love is. If our husbands possess any portion of it, still
we do not; whence then come its delights to us? yea, in regard to what
you call ultimate delights, we at times refuse them with violence, for
they are unpleasant to us, almost like violations: and you will see, if
you attend to it, no sign of such love in our faces: wherefore you are
trifling or jesting, if you also assert, with those seven wives, that we
think of our husbands from morning to evening, and continually attend to
their will and pleasure in order to catch from them such delights.' I
have retained thus much of what they said, that I might relate it to
you; since it is repugnant, and also in manifest contradiction, to what
I heard from you near the fountain, and which I so greedily imbibed and
believed." To this the wives sitting in the rose garden replied,
"Friend, you know not the wisdom and prudence of wives; for they totally
hide it from the men, and for no other end than that they may be loved:
for every man who is not spiritually but only naturally rational and
moral, is cold towards his wife; and the cold lies concealed in his
inmost principles. This is exquisitely and acutely observed by a wise
and prudent wife; who so far conceals her conjugial love, and withdraws
it into her bosom, and there hides it so deeply that it does not at all
appear in her face, in the tone of her voice, or in her behaviour. The
reason of this is, because so far as it appears, so far the conjugial
cold of the man diffuses itself from the inmost principles of his mind,
where it resides, into its ultimates, and occasions in the body a total
coldness, and a consequent endeavour to separate from bed and chamber."
I then asked, "Whence arises that which you call conjugial cold?" They
replied, "From the insanity of the men in regard to spiritual things;
and every one who is insane in regard to spiritual things; in his inmost
principles is cold towards his wife, and warm towards harlots; and since
conjugial love and adulterous love are opposite to each other, it
follows that conjugial love becomes cold when illicit love is warm; and
when cold prevails with the man, he cannot endure any sense of love, and
thus not any allusion thereto, from his wife; therefore the wife so
wisely and prudently conceals that love; and so far as she conceals it
by denying and refusing it, so far the man is cherished and recruited by
the influent meretricious sphere. Hence it is, that the wife of such a
man has no bosom delights such as we have, but only pleasures, which, on
the part of the man, ought to be called the pleasures of insanity,
because they are the pleasures of illicit love. Every chaste wife loves
her husband, even if he be unchaste; but since wisdom is alone recipient
of that love, therefore she exerts all her endeavours to turn his
insanity into wisdom, that is, to prevent his lusting after other women
besides herself. This she does by a thousand methods, being particularly
cautious lest any of them should be discovered by the man; for she is
well aware that love cannot be forced, but that it is insinuated in
freedom; wherefore it is given to women to know from the sight, the
hearing, and the touch, every state of the mind of their husbands; but
on the other hand it is not given to the men to know any state of the
mind of their wives. A chaste wife can look at her husband with an
austere countenance, accost him with a harsh voice, and also be angry
and quarrel, and yet in her heart cherish a soft and tender love towards
him; but such anger and dissimulation have for their end wisdom, and
thereby the reception of love with the husband: as is manifest from the
consideration, that she can be reconciled in an instant. Besides, wives
use such means of concealing the love implanted in their inmost heart,
with a view to prevent conjugial cold bursting forth with the man, and
extinguishing the fire of his adulterous heat, and thus converting him
from green wood into a dry stick." When the seven wives had expressed
these and many more similar sentiments, their husbands came with
clusters of grapes in their hands, some of which were of a delicate, and
some of a disagreeable flavor; upon which the wives said, "Why have you
also brought bad or wild grapes?" The husbands replied, "Because we
perceived in our souls, with which yours are united, that you were
conversing with that man respecting love truly conjugial, that its
delights are the delights of wisdom, and also respecting adulterous
love, that its delights are the pleasures of insanity. The latter are
the disagreeable or wild grapes; the former are those of delicate
flavor." They confirmed what their wives had said, and added that, "in
externals, the pleasures of insanity appear like the delights of wisdom,
but not so in internals; just like the good and bad grapes which we have
brought; for both the chaste and the unchaste have similar wisdom in
externals, but altogether dissimilar in internals." After this the
little boy came again with a piece of paper in his hand, and held it out
to me, saying, "Read this;" and I read as follows: "Know that the
delights of conjugial love ascend to the highest heaven, and both in the
way thither and also there, unite with the delights of all heavenly
loves, and thereby enter into their happiness, which endures for ever;
because the delights of that love are also the delights of wisdom: and
know also, that the pleasures of illicit love descend even to the lowest
hell, and, both in the way thither and also there, unite with the
pleasures of all infernal loves, and thereby enter into their
unhappiness, which consists in the wretchedness of all heart-delights;
because the pleasures of that love are the pleasures of insanity." After
this the husbands departed with their wives, and accompanied the little
boy as far as to the way of his ascent into heaven; and they knew that
the society from which he was sent was a society of the new heaven, with
which the new church in the world will be conjoined.

       *       *       *       *       *

ON BETROTHINGS AND NUPTIALS.

295. The subject of betrothings and nuptials, and also of the rites and
ceremonies attending them, is here treated of principally from the
reason of the understanding; for the object of this book is that the
reader may see truths rationally, and thereby give his consent, for thus
his spirit is convinced; and those things in which the spirit is
convinced, obtain a place above those which, without consulting reason,
enter from authority and the faith of authority; for the latter enter
the head no further than into the memory, and there mix themselves with
fallacies and falses; thus they are beneath the rational things of the
understanding. From these any one may seem to converse rationally, but
he will converse preposterously; for in such case he thinks as a crab
walks, the sight following the tail: it is otherwise if he thinks from
the understanding; for then the rational sight selects from the memory
whatever is suitable, whereby it confirms truth viewed in itself. This
is the reason why in this chapter several particulars are adduced which
are established customs, as that the right of choice belongs to the men,
that parents ought to be consulted, that pledges are to be given, that
the conjugial covenant is to be settled previous to the nuptials, that
it ought to be performed by a priest, also that the nuptials ought to be
celebrated; besides several other particulars, which are here mentioned
in order that every one may rationally see that such things are assigned
to conjugial love, as requisite to promote and complete it. The articles
into which this section is divided are the following; I. _The right of
choice belongs to the man, and not to the woman._ II. _The man ought to
court and intreat the woman respecting marriage with him, and not the
woman the man._ III. _The woman ought to consult her parents, or those
who are in the place of parents, and then deliberate with herself,
before she consents._ IV. _After a declaration of consent, pledges are
to be given._ V. _Consent is to be secure and established by solemn
betrothing._ VI. _By betrothing, each party is prepared for conjugial
love._ VII. _By betrothing, the mind of the one is united to the mind of
the other, so as to effect a marriage of the spirit previous to a
marriage of the body._ VIII. _This is the case with those who think
chastely of marriages: but it is otherwise with those who think
unchastely of them._ IX. _Within the time of betrothing, it is not
allowable to be connected corporeally._ X. _When the time of betrothing
is completed, the nuptials ought to take place._ XI. _Previous to the
celebration of the nuptials, the conjugial covenant is to be ratified in
the presence of witnesses._ XII. _The marriage is to be consecrated by a
priest._ XIII. _The nuptials are to be celebrated with festivity._ XIV.
_After the nuptials, the marriage of the spirit is made also the
marriage of the body, and thereby a full marriage._ XV. _Such is the
order of conjugial love with its modes from its first heat to its first
torch._ XVI. _Conjugial love precipitated without order and the modes
thereof, burns up the marrows and is consumed._ XVII. _The states of the
minds of each of the parties proceeding in successive order, flow into
the state of marriage; nevertheless in one manner with the spiritual and
in another with the natural._ XVIII. _There are successive and
simultaneous orders, and the latter is from the former and according to
it._ We proceed to an explanation of each article.

296. I. THE RIGHT OF CHOICE BELONGS TO THE MAN, AND NOT TO THE WOMAN.
This is because the man is born to be understanding, but the woman to be
love; also because with the men there generally prevails a love of the
sex, but with the women a love of one of the sex; and likewise because
it is not unbecoming for men to speak openly about love, as it is for
women; nevertheless women have the right of selecting one of their
suitors. In regard to the first reason, that the right of choice belongs
to the men, because they are born to understanding, it is grounded in
the consideration that the understanding can examine agreements and
disagreements, and distinguish them, and from judgement choose that
which is suitable: it is otherwise with the women, because they are born
to love, and therefore have no such discrimination; and consequently
their determinations to marriage would proceed only from the
inclinations of their love; if they have the skill of distinguishing
between men and men, still their love is influenced by appearances. In
regard to the other reason, that the right of choice belongs to the men,
and not to the women, because with men there generally prevails a love
of the sex, and with women a love of one of the sex, it is grounded in
the consideration, that those in whom a love of the sex prevails, can
freely look around and also determine: it is otherwise with women, in
whom is implanted a love for one of the sex. If you wish for a proof of
this, ask, if you please, the men you meet, what their sentiments are
respecting monogamical and polygamical unions; and you will seldom meet
one who will not reply in favor of the polygamical; and this also is a
love of the sex: but ask the women their sentiments on the subject, and
almost all, except the vilest of the sex, will reject polygamical
unions; from which consideration it follows, that with the women there
prevails a love of one of the sex, thus conjugial love. In regard to the
third reason, that it is not unbecoming for men to speak openly about
love, whereas it is for women, it is self-evident; hence also it
follows, that declaration belongs to the men, and therefore so does
choice. That women have the right of selecting in regard to their
suitors, is well known; but this species of selection is confined and
limited, whereas that of the men is extended and unlimited.

297. II. THE MAN OUGHT TO COURT AND INTREAT THE WOMAN RESPECTING
MARRIAGE WITH HIM, AND NOT THE WOMAN THE MAN. This naturally follows the
right of choice; and besides, to court and intreat women respecting
marriage is in itself honorable and becoming for men, but not for women.
If women were to court and entreat the men, they would not only be
blamed, but, after intreaty, they would be reputed as vile, or after
marriage as libidinous, with whom there would be no association but what
was cold and fastidious; wherefore marriages would thereby be converted
into tragic scenes. Wives also take it as a compliment to have it said
of them, that being conquered as it were, they yielded to the pressing
intreaties of the men. Who does not foresee, that if the women courted
the men, they would seldom be accepted? They would either be indignantly
rejected, or be enticed to lasciviousness, and also would dishonor their
modesty. Moreover, as was shewn above, the men have not any innate love
of the sex; and without love there is no interior pleasantness of life:
wherefore to exalt their life by that love, it is incumbent on the men
to compliment the women; courting and intreating them with civility,
courtesy, and humility, respecting this sweet addition to their life.
The superior comeliness of the female countenance, person, and manners,
above that of the men, adds itself as a proper object of desire.

298. III. THE WOMAN OUGHT TO CONSULT HER PARENTS, OR THOSE WHO ARE IN
THE PLACE OF PARENTS, AND THEN DELIBERATE WITH HERSELF, BEFORE SHE
CONSENTS. The reason why parents are to be consulted is, because they
deliberate from judgement, knowledge, and love; from _judgement_,
because they are in an advanced age, which excels in judgement, and
discerns what is suitable and unsuitable: from _knowledge_, in respect
to both the suitor and their daughter; in respect to the suitor they
procure information, and in respect to their daughter they already know;
wherefore they conclude respecting both with united discernment: from
_love_, because to consult the good of their daughter, and to provide
for her establishment, is also to consult and provide for their own and
for themselves.

299. The case would be altogether different, if the daughter consents of
herself to her urgent suitor, without consulting her parents, or those
who are in their place; for she cannot from judgement, knowledge, and
love, make a right estimate of the matter which so deeply concerns her
future welfare: she cannot from _judgement_, because she is as yet in
ignorance as to conjugial life, and not in a state of comparing reasons,
and discovering the morals of men from their particular tempers; nor
from _knowledge_, because she knows few things beyond the domestic
concerns of her parents and of some of her companions; and is
unqualified to examine into such things as relate to the family and
property of her suitor: nor from _love_, because with daughters in their
first marriageable age, and also afterwards, this is led by the
concupiscences originating in the senses, and not as yet by the desires
originating in a refined mind. The daughter ought nevertheless to
deliberate on the matter with herself, before she consents, lest she
should be led against her will to form a connection with a man whom she
does not love; for by so doing, consent on her part would be wanting;
and yet it is consent that constitutes marriage, and initiates the
spirit into conjugial love; and consent against the will, or extorted,
does not initiate the spirit, although it may the body; and thus it
converts chastity, which resides in the spirit, into lust; whereby
conjugial love in its first warmth is vitiated.

300. IV. AFTER A DECLARATION OF CONSENT, PLEDGES ARE TO BE GIVEN. By
pledges we mean presents, which, after consent, are confirmations,
testifications, first favors, and gladnesses. Those presents are
_confirmations_, because they are certificates of consent on each side;
wherefore, when two parties consent to anything, it is customary to say,
"Give me a token;" and of two, who have entered into a marriage
engagement, and have secured it by presents, that they are
pledged, thus confirmed. They are _testifications_, because those
pledges are continual visible witnesses of mutual love; hence also they
are memorials thereof; especially if they be rings, perfume-bottles or
boxes, and ribbons, which are worn in sight. In such things there is a
sort of representative image of the minds (_animorum_) of the bridegroom
and the bride. Those pledges are _first favors_, because conjugial love
engages for itself everlasting favor; whereof those gifts are the first
fruits. That they are the _gladnesses_ of love, is well known, for the
mind is exhilarated at the sight of them; and because love is in them,
those favors are dearer and more precious than any other gifts, it being
as if their hearts were in them. As those pledges are securities of
conjugial love, therefore presents after consent were in use with the
ancients; and after accepting such presents the parties were declared to
be bridegroom and bride. But it is to be observed that it is at the
pleasure of the parties to bestow those presents either before or after
the act of betrothing; if before, they are confirmations and
testifications of consent to betrothing; if after it, they are also
confirmations and testifications of consent to the nuptial tie.

301. V. CONSENT IS TO BE SECURED AND ESTABLISHED BY SOLEMN BETROTHING.
The reasons for betrothings are these: 1. That after betrothing the
souls of the two parties may mutually incline towards each other. 2.
That the universal love for the sex may be determined to one of the sex.
3. That the interior affections may be mutually known, and by
applications in the internal cheerfulness of love, may be conjoined. 4.
That the spirits of both parties may enter into marriage, and be more
and more consociated. 5. That thereby conjugial love may advance
regularly from its first warmth even to the nuptial flame. Consequently:
6. That conjugial love may advance and grow up in just order from its
spiritual origin. The state of betrothing may be compared to the state
of spring before summer; and the internal pleasantness of that state to
the flowering of trees before fructification. As the beginning and
progressions of conjugial love proceed in order for the sake of their
influx into the effective love, which commences at the nuptials,
therefore, there are also betrothings in the heavens.

302. VI. BY BETROTHING EACH PARTY IS PREPARED FOR CONJUGIAL LOVE. That
the mind or spirit of one of the parties is by betrothing prepared for
union with the mind or spirit of the other, or what is the same, that
the love of the one is prepared for union with the love of the other,
appears from the arguments just adduced. Besides which it is to be
noted, that on love truly conjugial is inscribed this order, that it
ascends and descends; it ascends from its first heat progressively
upwards towards the souls of the parties, with an endeavour to effect
their conjunction, and this by continual interior openings of their
minds; and there is no love which strives more intensely to effect such
openings, or which is more powerful and expert in opening the interiors
of minds, than conjugial love; for the soul of each of the parties
intends this: but at the same moments in which that love ascends towards
the soul, it descends also towards the body, and thereby clothes itself.
It is however to be observed, that conjugial love is such in its descent
as it is in the height to which it ascends: if it ascends high, it
descends chaste; but if not, it descends unchaste: the reason of this
is, because the lower principles of the mind are unchaste, but its
higher are chaste; for the lower principles of the mind adhere to the
body, but the higher separate themselves from them: but on this subject
see further particulars below, n. 305. From these few considerations it
may appear, that, by betrothing, the mind of each of the parties is
prepared for conjugial love, although in a different manner according to
the affections.

303. VII. BY BETROTHING THE MIND OF ONE IS UNITED TO THE MIND OF THE
OTHER, SO AS TO EFFECT A MARRIAGE OF THE SPIRIT, PREVIOUS TO A MARRIAGE
OF THE BODY. As this follows of consequence from what was said above, n.
301, 302, we shall pass it by, without adducing any further
confirmations from reason.

304. VIII. THIS IS THE CASE WITH THOSE WHO THINK CHASTELY OF MARRIAGES;
BUT IT IS OTHERWISE WITH THOSE WHO THINK UNCHASTELY OF THEM. With the
chaste, that is, with those who think religiously of marriages, the
marriage of the spirit precedes, and that of the body is subsequent; and
these are those with whom love ascends towards the soul, and from its
height thence descends; concerning whom see above, n. 302. The souls of
such separate themselves from the unlimited love for the sex, and devote
themselves to one, with whom they look for an everlasting and eternal
union and its increasing blessednesses, as the cherishers of the hope
which continually recreates their mind; but it is quite otherwise with
the unchaste, that is, with those who do not think religiously of
marriages and their holiness. With these there is a marriage of the
body, but not of the spirit: if, during the state of betrothment, there
be any appearance of a marriage of the spirit, still, if it ascends by
an elevation of the thoughts concerning it, it nevertheless falls back
again to the concupiscences which arise from the flesh in the will; and
thus from the unchaste principles therein it precipitates itself into
the body, and defiles the ultimates of its love with an alluring ardor;
and as, in consequence of this ardor, it was in the beginning all on
fire, so its fire suddenly goes out, and passes off into the cold of
winter; whence the failing (of power) is accelerated. The state of
betrothing with such scarcely answers any other purpose, than that they
may fill their concupiscences with lasciviousness, and thereby
contaminate the conjugial principle of love.

305. IX. WITHIN THE TIME OF BETROTHING IT IS NOT ALLOWABLE TO BE
CONNECTED CORPOREALLY. For thus the order which is inscribed on
conjugial love, perishes. For in human minds there are three regions, of
which the highest is called the celestial, the middle the spiritual, and
the lowest the natural. In this lowest man is born; but he ascends into
the next above it, the spiritual, by a life according to the truths of
religion, and into the highest by the marriage of love and wisdom. In
the lowest or natural region, reside all the concupiscences of evil and
lasciviousness; but in the superior or spiritual region, there are no
concupiscences of evil and lasciviousness; for man is introduced into
this region by the Lord, when he is re-born; but in the supreme or
celestial region, there is conjugial chastity in its love: into this
region a man is elevated by the love of uses; and as the most excellent
uses are from marriages, he is elevated into it by love truly conjugial.
From these few considerations, it may be seen that conjugial love, from
the first beginnings of its warmth, is to be elevated out of the lowest
region into a superior region, that it may become chaste, and that
thereby from a chaste principle it may be let down through the middle
and lowest regions into the body; and when this is the case, this lowest
region is purified from all that is unchaste by this descending chaste
principle: hence the ultimate of that love becomes also chaste. Now if
the successive order of this love is precipitated by connections of the
body before their time, it follows, that the man acts from the lowest
region, which is by birth unchaste; and it is well known, that hence
commences and arises cold in regard to marriage, and disdainful neglect
in regard to a married partner. Nevertheless events of various kinds
take place in consequence of hasty connections; also in consequence of
too long a delay, and too quick a hastening, of the time of betrothing;
but these, from their number and variety, can hardly be adduced.

306. X. WHEN THE TIME OF BETROTHING IS COMPLETED, THE NUPTIALS OUGHT TO
TAKE PLACE. There are some customary rites which are merely formal, and
others which at the same time are also essential: among the latter are
nuptials; and that they are to be reckoned among essentials, which are
to be manifested in the customary way, and to be formally celebrated, is
confirmed by the following reasons: 1. That nuptials constitute the end
of the foregoing state, into which the parties were introduced by
betrothing, which principally was a state of the spirit, and the
beginning of the following state, into which they are to be introduced
by marriage, which is a state of the spirit and body together; for the
spirit then enters into the body, and there becomes active: wherefore on
that day the parties put off the state and also the name of bridegroom
and bride, and put on the state and name of married partners and
consorts. 2. That nuptials are an introduction and entrance into a new
state, which is that a maiden becomes a wife, and a young man a husband,
and both one flesh; and this is effected while love by ultimates unites
them. That marriage actually changes a maiden into a wife, and a young
man into a husband, was proved in the former part of this work; also
that marriage unites two into one human form, so that they are no longer
two but one flesh. 3. That nuptials are the commencement of an entire
separation of the love of the sex from conjugial love, which is effected
while, by a full liberty of connection, the knot is tied by which the
love of the one is devoted to the love of the other. 4. It appears as if
nuptials were merely an interval between those two states, and thus that
they are mere formalities which may be omitted: but still there is also
in them this essential, that the new state above-mentioned is then to be
entered upon from covenant, and that the consent of the parties is to be
declared in the presence of witnesses, and also to be consecrated by a
priest; besides other particulars which establish it. As nuptials
contain in them essentials, and as marriage is not legitimate till after
their celebration, therefore also nuptials are celebrated in the
heavens; see above, n. 21, and also, n. 27-41.

307. XI. PREVIOUS TO THE CELEBRATION OF THE NUPTIALS, THE CONJUGIAL
COVENANT IS TO BE RATIFIED IN THE PRESENCE OF WITNESSES. It is expedient
that the conjugial covenant be ratified before the nuptials are
celebrated, in order that the statutes and laws of love truly conjugial
may be known, and that they may be remembered after the nuptials; also
that the minds of the parties may be bound to just marriage: for after
some introductory circumstances of marriage, the state which preceded
betrothing returns at times, in which state remembrance fails and
forgetfulness of the ratified covenant ensues; yea, it may be altogether
effaced by the allurements of the unchaste to criminality; and if it is
then recalled into the memory, it is reviled: but to prevent these
transgressions, society has taken upon itself the protection of that
covenant, and has denounced penalties on the breakers of it. In a word,
the ante-nuptial covenant manifests and establishes the sacred decrees
of love truly conjugial, and binds libertines to the observance of them.
Moreover, by this covenant, the right of propagating children, and also
the right of the children to inherit the goods of their parents, become
legitimate.

308. XII. MARRIAGE IS TO BE CONSECRATED BY A PRIEST. The reason of this
is, because marriages, considered in themselves, are spiritual, and
thence holy; for they descend from the heavenly marriage of good and
truth, and things conjugial correspond to the divine marriage of the
Lord and the church; and hence they are from the Lord himself, and
according to the state of the church with the contracting parties. Now,
as the ecclesiastical order on the earth administer the things which
relate to the Lord's priestly character, that is, to his love, and thus
also those which relate to blessing, it is expedient that marriages be
consecrated by his ministers; and as they are then the chief witnesses,
it is expedient that the consent of the parties to the covenant be also
heard, accepted, confirmed, and thereby established by them.

309. XIII. THE NUPTIALS ARE TO BE CELBRATED WITH FESTIVITY. The reasons
are, because ante-nuptial love, which was that of the bridegroom and the
bride, on this occasion descends into their hearts, and spreading itself
thence in every direction into all parts of the body, the delights of
marriage are made sensible, whereby the minds of the parties are led to
festive thoughts and also let loose to festivities so far as is
allowable and becoming; to favor which, it is expedient that the
festivities of their minds be indulged in company, and they themselves
be thereby introduced into the joys of conjugial love.

310. XIV. AFTER THE NUPTIALS, THE MARRIAGE OF THE SPIRIT IS MADE ALSO
THE MARRIAGE OF THE BODY, AND THEREBY A FULL MARRIAGE. All things which
a man does in the body, flow in from his spirit; for it is well known
that the mouth does not speak of itself, but that it is the thinking
principle of the mind which speaks by it; also that the hands do not act
and the feet walk of themselves, but that it is the will of the mind
which performs those operations by them; consequently, that the mind
speaks and acts by its organs in the body: hence it is evident, that
such as the mind is, such are the speech of the mouth and the actions of
the body. From these premises it follows as a conclusion that the mind,
by a continual influx, arranges the body so that it may act similarly
and simultaneously with itself; wherefore the bodies of men viewed
interiorly are merely forms of their minds exteriorly organized to
effect the purposes of the soul. These things are premised, in order
that it may be perceived why the minds or spirits are first to be united
as by marriage, before they are also further united in the body; namely,
that while the marriages become of the body, they may also be marriages
of the spirit; consequently, that married partners may mutually love
each other from the spirit, and thence from the body. From this ground
let us now take a view of marriage. When conjugial love unites the minds
of two persons, and forms them into a marriage, in such case it also
unites and forms their bodies into a marriage; for, as we have said, the
form of the mind is also interiorly the form of the body; only with this
difference, that the latter form is outwardly organized to effect that
to which the interior form of the body is determined by the mind. But
the mind formed from conjugial love is not only interiorly in the whole
body, round about in every part, but moreover is interiorly in the
organs appropriated to generation, which in their region are situated
beneath the other regions of the body, and in which are terminated the
forms of the mind with those who are united in conjugial love:
consequently the affections and thoughts of their minds are determined
thither; and the activities of such minds differ in this respect from
the activities of minds arising from other loves, that the latter loves
do not reach thither. The conclusion resulting from these considerations
is, that such as conjugial love is in the minds or spirits of two
persons, such is it interiorly in those its organs. But it is
self-evident that a marriage of the spirit after the nuptials becomes
also a marriage of the body, thus a full marriage, consequently, if a
marriage in the spirit is chaste, and partakes of the sanctity of
marriage, it is chaste also, and partakes of its sanctity, when it is in
its fulness in the body; and the case is reversed if a marriage in the
spirit is unchaste.

311. XV. SUCH IS THE ORDER OF CONJUGIAL LOVE WITH ITS MODES FROM ITS
FIRST HEAT TO ITS FIRST TORCH. It is said from its first heat to its
first torch, because vital heat is love, and conjugial heat or love
successively increases, and at length as it were into a flame or torch.
We have said "to its first torch," because we mean the first state after
the nuptials, when that love burns; but what its quality becomes after
this torch, in the marriage itself, has been described in the preceding
chapters; but in this part we are explaining its order from the
beginning of its career to this its first goal. That all order proceeds
from first principles to last, and that the last become the first of
some following order, also that all things of the middle order are the
last of a prior and the first of a following order, and that thus ends
proceed continually through causes into effects, may be sufficiently
confirmed and illustrated to the eye of reason from what is known and
visible in the world; but as at present we are treating only of the
order in which love proceeds from its first starting-place to its goal,
we shall pass by such confirmation and illustration, and only observe on
this subject, that such as the order of this love is from its first heat
to its first torch, such it is in general, and such is its influence in
its progression afterwards; for in this progression it unfolds itself,
according to the quality of its first heat: if this heat was chaste, its
chasteness is strengthened as it proceeds; but if it was unchaste, its
unchasteness increases as it advances, until it is deprived of all that
chasteness which, from the time of betrothing, belonged to it from
without, but not from within.

312. XVI. CONJUGIAL LOVE PRECIPITATED WITHOUT ORDER AND THE MODES
THEREOF, BURNS UP THE MARROWS AND IS CONSUMED. So it is said by some in
the heavens; and by the marrows they mean the interiors of the mind and
body. The reason why these are burnt up, that is, consumed, by
precipitated conjugial love is, because that love in such case begins
from a flame which eats up and corrupts those interiors, in which as in
its principles conjugial love should reside, and from which it should
commence. This comes to pass if the man and woman without regard to
order precipitate marriage, and do not look to the Lord, and consult
their reason, but reject betrothing and comply merely with the flesh:
from the ardor of which, if that love commences, it becomes external and
not internal, thus not conjugial; and such love may be said to partake
of the shell, not of the kernel; or may be called fleshly, lean, and
dry, because emptied of its genuine essence. See more on this subject
above n. 305.

313. XVII. THE STATES OF THE MINDS OF EACH OF THE PARTIES PROCEEDING IN
SUCCESSIVE ORDER, FLOW INTO THE STATE OF MARRIAGE; NEVERTHELESS IN ONE
MANNER WITH THE SPIRITUAL AND IN ANOTHER WITH THE NATURAL. That the last
state is such as that of the successive order from which it is formed
and exists, is a rule, which from its truth must be acknowledged by the
learned; for thereby we discover what influx is, and what it effects. By
influx we mean all that which precedes, and constitutes what follows,
and by things following in order constitutes what is last; as all that
which precedes with a man, and constitutes his wisdom; or all that which
precedes with a statesman, and constitutes his political skill; or all
that which precedes with a theologian, and constitutes his erudition; in
like manner all that which proceeds from infancy, and constitutes a man;
also what proceeds in order from a seed and a twig, and makes a tree,
and afterwards what proceeds from a blossom, and makes its fruit; in
like manner all that which precedes and proceeds with a bridegroom and
bride, and constitutes their marriage: this is the meaning of influx.
That all those things which precede in minds form series, which collect
together, one next to another, and one after another, and that these
together compose a last or ultimate, is as yet unknown in the world; but
as it is a truth from heaven, it is here adduced for it explains what
influx effects, and what is the quality of the last or ultimate, in
which the above-mentioned series successively formed co-exist. From
these considerations it may be seen that the states of the minds of each
of the parties proceeding in successive order flow into the state of
marriage. But married partners after marriage are altogether ignorant of
the successive things which are insinuated into, and exist in their
minds (_animis_) from things antecedent; nevertheless it is those things
which give form to conjugial love, and constitute the state of their
minds; from which state they act the one with the other. The reason why
one state is formed from one order with such as are spiritual, and from
another with such as are natural, is, because the spiritual proceed in a
just order, and the natural in an unjust order; for the spiritual look
to the Lord, and the Lord provides and leads the order; whereas the
natural look to themselves, and thence proceed in an inverted order;
wherefore with the latter the state of marriage is inwardly full of
unchasteness; and as that unchasteness abounds, so does cold; and as
cold abounds so do the obstructions of the inmost life, whereby its vein
is closed and its fountain dried.

314. XVIII. THERE ARE SUCCESSIVE AND SIMULTANEOUS ORDER, AND THE LATTER
IS FROM THE FORMER AND ACCORDING TO IT. This is adduced as a reason
tending to confirm what goes before. It is well known that there exist
what is successive and what is simultaneous; but it is unknown that
simultaneous order is grounded in successive, and is according to it;
yet how things successive enter into things simultaneous, and what order
they form therein, it is very difficult to present to the perception,
since the learned are not in possession of any ideas that can elucidate
the subject; and as the first idea respecting this arcanum cannot be
suggested in few words, and to treat this subject at large would
withdraw the mind from a more comprehensive view of the subject of
conjugial love, it may suffice for illustration to quote what we have
adduced in a compendium respecting those two orders, the successive and
the simultaneous, and respecting the influx of the former into the
latter, in THE DOCTRINE OF THE NEW JERUSALEM RESPECTING THE SACRED
SCRIPTURE, where are these words: "There are in heaven and in the world
successive order and simultaneous order. In successive order one thing
follows after another from the highest to the lowest; but in
simultaneous order one thing is next to another from the inmost to the
outermost. Successive order is like a column with steps from the highest
to the lowest; but simultaneous order is like a work cohering from the
centre to the surface. Successive order becomes in the ultimate
simultaneous in this manner; the highest things of successive order
become the inmost of simultaneous, and the lowest things of successive
order become the outermost of simultaneous; comparatively as when a
column of steps subsides, it becomes a body cohering in a plane. Thus
what is simultaneous is formed from what is successive; and this in all
things both of the spiritual and of the natural world." See n. 38, 65,
of that work; and several further observations on this subject in the
ANGELIC WISDOM RESPECTING THE DIVINE LOVE AND DIVINE WISDOM, n. 205-229.
The case is similar with successive order leading to marriage, and with
simultaneous order in marriage; namely, that the latter is from the
former, and according to it. He that is acquainted with the influx of
successive order into simultaneous, may comprehend the reason why the
angels can see in a man's hand all the thoughts and intentions of his
mind, and also why wives, from their husbands' hands on their bosoms,
are made sensible of their affections; which circumstance has been
occasionally mentioned in the MEMORABLE RELATIONS. The reason of this
is, because the hands are the ultimates of man, wherein the
deliberations and conclusions of his mind terminate, and there
constitute what is simultaneous: therefore also in the Word, mention is
made of a thing's being inscribed on the hands.

       *       *       *       *       *

315. To the above I shall add TWO MEMORABLE RELATIONS. FIRST. On a
certain time I saw not far from me a meteor--a cloud divided into
smaller clouds, some of which were of an azure color, some opaque, and
as it were in collision together. They were streaked with translucent
irradiations of light, which at one time appeared sharp like the points
of swords, at another, blunt like broken swords. The streaks sometimes
darted out forwards, at others they drew themselves in again, exactly
like combatants; thus those different colored lesser clouds appeared to
be at war together; but it was only their manner of sporting with each
other. And as this meteor appeared at no great distance from me, I
raised my eyes, and looking attentively, I saw boys, youths, and old
men, entering a house which was built of marble, on a foundation of
porphyry; and it was over this house that the phenomenon appeared. Then
addressing myself to one that was entering, I asked, "What house is
this?" He answered, "It is a gymnasium, where young persons are
initiated into various things relating to wisdom." On hearing this, I
went in with them, being then in the spirit, that is, in a similar state
with men of the spiritual world, who are called spirits and angels; and
lo! in the gymnasium there were in front a desk, in the middle, benches,
at the sides round about, chairs, and over the entrance, an orchestra.
The desk was for the young men that were to give answers to the problem
at that time to be proposed, the benches were for the audience, the
chairs at the sides were for those who on former occasions had given
wise answers, and the orchestra was for the seniors, who were
arbitrators and judges: in the middle of the orchestra was a pulpit,
where there sat a wise man, whom they called the head master, who
proposed the problems to which the young men gave their answers from the
desk. When all were assembled, this man arose from the pulpit and said,
"Give an answer now to this problem, and solve it if you can, WHAT IS
THE SOUL, AND WHAT IS ITS QUALITY?" On hearing this problem all were
amazed, and made a muttering noise; and some of the company on the
benches exclaimed, "What mortal man, from the age of Saturn to the
present time, has been able by any rational thought to see and ascertain
what the soul is, still less what is its quality? Is not this subject
above the sphere of all human understanding?" But it was replied from
the orchestra, "It is not above the understanding, but within it and in
its view; only let the problem be answered." Then the young men, who
were chosen on that day to ascend the desk, and give an answer to the
problem, arose. They were five in number, who had been examined by the
seniors, and found to excel in sagacity, and were then sitting on
couches at the sides of the desk. They afterwards ascended in the order
in which they were seated; and every one, when he ascended, put on a
silken tunic of an opaline color, and over it a robe of soft wool
interwoven with flowers, and on his head a cap, on the crown of which
was a bunch of roses encircled with small sapphires. The first youth
thus clad ascended the desk, and thus began: "What the soul is, and what
is its quality, has never been revealed to any one since the day of
creation, being an arcanum in the treasuries of God alone; but this has
been discovered, that the soul resides in a man as a queen; yet where
her palace is, has been a matter of conjecture among the learned. Some
have supposed it to be in a small tubercle between the cerebrum and the
cerebellum, which is called the pineal gland: in this they have fixed
the soul's habitation, because the whole man is ruled from those two
brains, and they are regulated by that tubercle; therefore whatever
regulates the brains, regulates also the whole man from the head to the
heel." He also added, "Hence this conjecture appeared as true or
probable to many in the world; but in the succeeding age it was rejected
as groundless." When he had thus spoken, he put off the robe, the tunic,
and the cap, which the second of the selected speakers put on, and
ascended the desk. His sentiments concerning the soul are as follows:
"In the whole heaven and the whole world it is unknown what the soul is,
and what is its quality; it is however known that there is a soul, and
that it is in man; but in what part of him is a matter of conjecture.
This is certain, that it is in the head, since the head is the seat
where the understanding thinks, and the will intends; and in front in
the face of the head are man's five sensories, receiving life from the
soul alone which resides in the head; but in what particular part of the
head the soul has its more immediate residence, I dare not take upon me
to say; yet I agree with those who fix its abode in the three ventricles
of the brain, sometimes inclining to the opinion of those who fix it in
the _corpora striata_ therein, sometimes to theirs who fix it in the
medullary substance of each brain, sometimes to theirs who fix it in the
cortical substance, and sometimes to theirs who fix it in the _dura
mater_; for arguments, and those too of weight, have not been wanting in
the support of each of these opinions. The arguments in favor of the
three ventricles of the brain have been, that those ventricles are the
recipients of the animal spirits and of all the lymphs of the brain: the
arguments in favor of the _corpora striata_ have been, that these bodies
constitute the marrow, through which the nerves are emitted, and by
which each brain is continued into the spine; and from the spine and the
marrow there is an emanation of fibres serving for the contexture of the
whole body: the arguments in favor of the medullary substance of each
brain have been, that this substance is a collection and congeries of
all the fibres, which are the rudiments or beginnings of the whole man:
the arguments in favor of the cortical substance have been, that in that
substance are contained the prime and ultimate ends, and consequently
the principles of all the fibres, and thereby of all the senses and
motions: the arguments in favor of the _dura mater_ have been, that it
is the common covering of each brain, and hence by some kind of
continuous principle extends itself over the heart and the viscera of
the body. As to myself, I am undetermined which of these opinions is the
most probable, and therefore I leave the matter to your determination
and decision." Having thus concluded he descended from the desk, and
delivered the tunic, the robe, and the cap, to the third, who mounting
into the desk began as follows: "How little qualified is a youth like
myself for the investigation of so sublime a theorem! I appeal to the
learned who are here seated at the sides of the gymnasium; I appeal to
you wise ones in the orchestra; yea, I appeal to the angels of the
highest heaven, whether any person, from his own rational light, is able
to form any idea concerning the soul; nevertheless I, like others, can
guess about the place of its abode in man; and my conjecture is, that it
is in the heart and thence in the blood; and I ground my conjecture on
this circumstance, that the heart by its blood rules both the body and
the head; for it sends forth a large vessel called the _aorta_ into the
whole body, and vessels called the carotids into the whole head; hence
it is universally agreed, that the soul from the heart by means of the
blood supports, nourishes, and vivifies the universal organical system
both of the body and the head. As a further proof of this position it
may be urged, that in the Sacred Scripture frequent mention is made of
the soul and the heart; as where it is said, Thou shalt love God from
the whole soul and the whole heart; and that God creates in man a new
soul and a new heart, Deut. vi. 5; chap. x. 12; chap. xi. 13; chap.
xxvi. 16; Jerem. xxxii. 41; Matt, xxii. 37; Mark xii. 30, 33; Luke x.
27; and in other places: it is also expressly said, that the blood is
the soul of the flesh, Levit. xvii. 11, 14." At these words, the cry of
"Learned! learned!" was heard in the assembly, and was found to proceed
from some of the canons. After this a fourth, clad in the garments of
the former speaker, ascended the desk, and thus began: "I also am
inclined to suspect that not a single person can be found of so subtle
and refined a genius as to be able to discover what the soul is, and
what is its quality; therefore I am of opinion, that in attempting to
make the discovery, subtlety will be spent in fruitless labor;
nevertheless from my childhood I have continued firm in the opinion of
the ancients, that the soul of man is in the whole of him, and in every
part of the whole, and thus that it is in the head and in all its parts,
as well as in the body and in all its parts; and that it is an idle
conceit of the moderns to fix its habitation in any particular part, and
not in the body throughout; besides, the soul is a spiritual substance,
of which there cannot be predicated either extension or place, but
habitation and impletion; moreover, when mention is made of the soul,
who does not conceive life to be meant? and is not life in the whole and
in every part?" These sentiments were favorably received by a great part
of the audience. After him the fifth rose, and, being adorned with the
same insignia, thus delivered himself from the desk: "I will not waste
your time and my own in determining the place of the soul's residence,
whether it be in some particular part of the body, or in the whole; but
from my mind's storehouse I will communicate to you my sentiments on the
subject, What is the soul, and what is its quality? No one conceives of
the soul but as of a pure somewhat, which may be likened to ether, or
air, or wind, containing a vital principle, from the rationality which
man enjoys above the beasts. This opinion I conceive to be founded on
the circumstance, that when a man expires, he is said to breathe forth
or emit his soul or spirit; hence also the soul which lives after death
is believed to be such a breath or vapor animated by some principle of
thinking life, which is called the soul; and what else can the soul be?
But as I heard it declared from the orchestra, that this problem
concerning the soul, its nature and quality, is not above the
understanding, but is within it and in its view, I intreat and beseech
you, who have made this declaration, to unfold this eternal arcanum
yourselves." Then the elders in the orchestra turned their eyes towards
the head master, who had proposed the problem, and who understood by
their signs that they wished him to descend and teach the audience: so
he instantly quitted the pulpit, passed through the auditory, and
entered the desk, and there, stretching out his hand, he thus began:
"Let me bespeak your attention: who does not believe the soul to be the
inmost and most subtle essence of man? and what is an essence without a
form, but an imaginary entity? wherefore the soul is a form, and a form
whose qualities and properties I will now describe. It is a form of all
things relating to love, and of all things relating to wisdom. All
things relating to love are called affections, and those relating to
wisdom are called perceptions. The latter derived from the former and
thereby united with them constitute one form, in which are contained
innumerable things in such an order, series, and coherence, that they
may be called a one; and they may be called a one also for this reason,
because nothing can be taken away from it, or added to it, but the
quality of the form is changed. What is the human soul but such a form?
are not all things relating to love and all things relating to wisdom
essentials of that form? and are not these things appertaining to a man
in his soul, and by derivation from the soul in his head and body? You
are called spirits and angels; and in the world you believed that
spirits and angels are like mere wind or ether, and thus mere mind and
animation; and now you see clearly that you are truly, really, and
actually men, who, during your abode in the world, lived and thought in
a material body, and knew that a material body does not live and think,
but a spiritual substance in that body; and this substance you called
the soul, whose form you then were ignorant of, but now have seen and
continue to see. You all are souls, of whose immortality you have heard,
thought, said, and written so much; and because you are forms of love
and wisdom from God, you can never die. The soul therefore is a human
form, from which the smallest thing cannot be taken away, and to which
the smallest thing cannot be added; and it is the inmost of all the
forms of the whole body: and since the forms which are without receive
from the inmost both essence and form, therefore you are souls, as you
appear to yourselves and to us: in a word, the soul is the very man
himself, because it is the inmost man; therefore its form is fully and
perfectly the human form: nevertheless it is not life, but the proximate
receptacle of life from God, and thereby the habitation of God." When he
had thus spoken, many expressed their approbation; but some said, "We
will weigh the matter." I immediately went home, and lo! over the
gymnasium, instead of the foregoing meteor, there appeared a bright
cloud, without streaks or rays that seemed to combat with each other,
and which, penetrating through the roof, entered, and illuminated the
walls; and I was informed, that they saw some pieces of writing, and
among others this, "_Jehovah God breathed into the man's nostrils the
SOUL OF LIVES, and the man became a LIVING SOUL_," Gen. ii. 7.

316. THE SECOND MEMORABLE RELATION. Some time ago, as I was walking with
my mind (_animus_) at rest, and in a state of delightful mental peace, I
saw at a distance a grove, in the midst of which was an avenue leading
to a small palace, into which maidens and youths, husbands and wives
were entering. I also went thither in spirit, and asked the keeper who
was standing at the entrance, whether I also might enter? He looked at
me; upon which I said, "Why do you look at me?" He replied, "I look at
you that I may see whether the delight of peace, which appears in your
face, partakes at all of the delight of conjugial love. Beyond this
avenue there is a little garden, and in the midst of it a house, where
there are two novitiate conjugial partners, who to-day are visited by
their friends of both sexes, coming to pay their congratulations. I do
not know those whom I admit; but I was told that I should know them by
their faces: those in whom I saw the delights of conjugial love, I was
to admit, and none else." All the angels can see from the faces of
others the delights of their hearts; and he saw the delight of that love
in my face, because I was then meditating on conjugial love. This
meditation beamed forth from my eyes, and thence entered into the
interiors of my face: he therefore told me that I might enter. The
avenue through which I entered was formed of fruit trees connected
together by their branches, which made on each side a continued
espalier. Through the avenue I entered the little garden, which breathed
a pleasant fragrance from its shrubs and flowers. The shrubs and flowers
were in pairs; and I was informed that such little gardens appear about
the houses where there are and have been nuptials, and hence they are
called nuptial gardens. I afterwards entered the house, where I saw the
two conjugial partners holding each other by the hands, and conversing
together from love truly conjugial; and as I looked, it was given me to
see from their faces the image of conjugial love, and from their
conversation the vital principle thereof. After I, with the rest of the
company, had paid them my respects, and wished them all happiness, I
went into the nuptial garden, and saw on the right side of it a company
of youths, to whom all who came out of the house resorted. The reason of
their resorting to them was, because they were conversing respecting
conjugial love, and conversation on this subject attracts to it the
minds (_animos_) of all by a certain occult power. I then listened to a
wise one who was speaking on the subject; and the sum of what I heard is
as follows: That the divine providence of the Lord is most particular
and thence most universal in respect to marriages in the heavens:
because all the felicities of heaven issue from the delights of
conjugial love, like sweet waters from the sweet source of a fountain;
and that on this account it is provided by the Lord that conjugial pairs
be born, and that these pairs be continually educated for marriage,
neither the maiden nor the youth knowing anything of the matter; and
after a stated time, when they both become marriageable, they meet as by
chance, and see each other; and that in this case they instantly know,
as by a kind of instinct, that they are pairs, and by a kind of inward
dictate think within themselves, the youth, that she is mine, and the
maiden, that he is mine; and when this thought has existed for some time
in the mind of each, they deliberately accost each other, and betroth
themselves. It is said, "as by chance," and "as by instinct," and the
meaning is, by the divine providence; since, while the divine providence
is unknown, it has such an appearance. That conjugial pairs are born and
educated to marriage, while each party is ignorant of it, he proved by
the conjugial likeness visible in the faces of each; also by the
intimate and eternal union of minds (_animorum_) and minds (_mentium_),
which could not possibly exist, as it does in heaven, without being
foreseen and provided by the Lord. When the wise one had proceeded thus
far with his discourse, and had received the applauses of the company,
he further added, that in the minutest things with man, both male and
female, there is a conjugial principle; but still the conjugial
principle with the male is different from what it is with the female;
also that in the male conjugial principle there is what is conjunctive
with the female conjugial principle, and _vice versa_, even in the
minutest things. This he confirmed by the marriage of the will and the
understanding in every individual, which two principles act together
upon the minutest things of the mind and of the body; from which
considerations it may be seen, that in every substance, even the
smallest, there is a conjugial principle; and that this is evident from
the compound substances which are made up of simple substances; as that
there are two eyes, two ears, two nostrils, two cheeks, two lips, two
arms with hands, two loins, two feet, and within in man two hemispheres
of the brain, two ventricles of the heart, two lobes of the lungs, two
kidneys, two testicles; and where there are not two, still they are
divided into two. The reason why there are two is, because the one is of
the will and the other of the understanding, which act wonderfully in
each other to present a one; wherefore the two eyes make one sight, the
two ears one hearing, the two nostrils one smell, the two lips one
speech, the two hands one labor, the two feet one pace, the two
hemispheres of the brain one habitation of the mind, the two chambers of
the heart one life of the body by the blood, the two lobes of the lungs
one respiration, and so forth; but the male and female principles,
united by love truly conjugial, constitute one life fully human. While
he was saying these things, there appeared red lightning on the right,
and white lightning on the left; each was mild, and they entered through
the eyes into the mind, and also enlightened it. After the lightning it
also thundered; which was a gentle murmur from the angelic heaven
flowing down and increasing. On hearing and seeing these things, the
wise one said, "These are to remind me to add the following
observations: that of the above pairs, the right one signifies their
good, and the left their truth; and that this is from the marriage of
good and truth, which is inscribed on man in general and in every one of
his principles; and good has reference to the will, and truth to the
understanding, and both together to a one. Hence, in heaven the right
eye is the good of vision, and the left the truth thereof; also the
right ear is the good of hearing, and the left the truth thereof; and
likewise the right hand is the good of a man's ability, and the left the
truth thereof; and in like manner in the rest of the above pairs; and
since the right and left have such significations, therefore the Lord
said, 'If thy right eye scandalize thee, pluck it out; and if thy right
hand scandalize thee, cut it off;' whereby he meant, if good becomes
evil, the evil must be cast out. This is the reason also why he said to
his disciples that they should cast the net on the right side of the
ship; and that when they did so, they took a great multitude of fishes;
whereby he meant that they should teach the good of charity, and that
thus they would collect men." When he had said these things, the two
lightnings again appeared, but milder than before; and then it was seen,
that the lightning on the left derived its whiteness from the
red-shining fire of the lightning on the right; on seeing which he said,
"This is a sign from heaven tending to confirm what I have said; because
what is firy in heaven is good, and what is white in heaven is truth;
and its being seen that the lightning on the left derived its whiteness
from the red-shining fire of the lightning on the right, is a
demonstrative sign that the whiteness of light, or light, is merely the
splendor of fire." On hearing this all went home, inflamed with the good
and truth of gladness, in consequence of the above lightnings, and of
the conversation respecting them.

       *       *       *       *       *

ON REPEATED MARRIAGES.

317. It may come to be a matter of question, whether conjugial love,
which is that of one man with one wife, after the death of one of the
parties, can be separated, or transferred, or superinduced; also whether
repeated marriages have any thing in common with polygamy, and thereby
whether they may be called successive polygamies; with several other
inquiries which often add scruples to scruples with men of a reasoning
spirit. In order therefore that those who are curious in such
researches, and who only grope in the shade respecting these marriages,
may see some light, I have conceived it would be worth while to present
for their consideration the following articles on the subject: I. _After
the death of a married partner, again to contract wedlock, depends on
the preceding conjugial love._ II. _It depends also on the state of
marriage, in which the parties had lived._ III. _With those who have not
been in love truly conjugial there is no obstacle or hindrance to their
again contracting wedlock._ IV. _Those who had lived together in love
truly conjugial are unwilling to marry again, except for reasons
separate from conjugial love._ V. _The state of the marriage of a youth
with a maiden differs from that of a youth with a widow._ VI. _The state
of the marriage of a widower with a maiden differs also from that of a
widower with a widow._ VII. _The varieties and diversities of these
marriages as to love and its attributes are innumerable._ VIII. _The
state of a widow is more grievous than that of a widower._ We proceed to
the explanation of each article.

318. I. AFTER THE DEATH OF A MARRIED PARTNER, AGAIN TO CONTRACT WEDLOCK,
DEPENDS ON THE PRECEDING CONJUGIAL LOVE. Love truly conjugial is like a
balance, in which the inclinations for repeated marriages are weighed:
so far as the preceding conjugial love had been genuine, so far the
inclination for another marriage is weak; but so far as the preceding
love had not been genuine, so far the inclination to another marriage is
usually strong. The reason of this is obvious; because conjugial love is
in a similar degree a conjunction of minds, which remains in the life of
the body of the one party after the decease of the other; and this holds
the inclination as a scale in a balance, and causes a preponderance
according to the appropriation of true love. But since the approach to
this love is seldom made at this day except for a few paces, therefore
the scale of the preponderance of the inclination generally rises to a
state of equilibrium, and from thence inclines and tends to the other
side, that is, to marriage. The contrary is the case with those, whose
preceding-love in the former marriage has not been truly conjugial,
because in proportion as that love is not genuine, there is in a like
degree a disjunction of minds, which also remains in the life of the
body of the one party after the decease of the other; and this enters
the will disjoined from that of the other, and causes an inclination for
a new connection; in favor of which the thought arising from the
inclination of the will induces the hope of a more united, and thereby a
more delightful connection. That inclinations to repeated marriages
arise from the state of the preceding love, is well known, and is also
obvious to reason: for love truly conjugial is influenced by a fear of
loss, and loss is followed by grief; and this grief and fear reside in
the very inmost principles of the mind. Hence, so far as that love
prevails, so far the soul inclines both in will and in thought, that is,
in intention, to be in the subject with and in which it was: from these
considerations it follows, that the mind is kept balancing towards
another marriage according to the degree of love in which it was in the
former marriage. Hence it is that after death the same parties are
re-united, and mutually love each other as they did in the world: but as
we said above, such love at this day is rare, and there are few who make
the slightest approach to it; and those who do not approach it, and
still more those who keep at a distance from it, as they were desirous
of separation in the matrimonial life heretofore passed, so after death
they are desirous of being united to another. But respecting both these
sorts of persons more will be said in what follows.

319. II. AFTER THE DEATH OF A MARRIED PARTNER, AGAIN TO CONTRACT
WEDLOOK, DEPENDS ALSO ON THE STATE OF MARRIAGE IN WHICH THE PARTIES HAD
LIVED. By the State of marriage here we do not mean the state of love
treated of in the foregoing article, because the latter causes an
internal inclination to marriage or from it; but we mean the state of
marriage which causes an external inclination to it or from it; and this
state with its inclinations is manifold: as, 1. If there are children in
the house, and a new mother is to be provided for them. 2. If there is a
wish for a further increase of children. 3. If the house is large and
full of servants of both sexes. 4. If the calls of business abroad
divert the mind from domestic concerns, and without a new mistress there
is reason to fear misery and misfortune. 5. If mutual aids and offices
require that married partners be engaged in various occupations and
employments. 6. Moreover it depends on the temper and disposition of the
separated partner, whether after the first marriage the other partner
can or cannot live alone, or without a consort. 7. The preceding
marriage also disposes the mind either to be afraid of married life, or
in favor of it. 8. I have been informed that polygamical love and the
love of the sex, also the lust of deflowering and the lust of variety,
have induced the minds (_animos_) of some to desire repeated marriages;
and that the minds of some have also been induced thereto by a fear of
the law and of the loss of reputation, in case they commit whoredom:
besides several other circumstances which promote external inclinations
to matrimony.

320. III. WITH THOSE WHO HAVE NOT BEEN IN LOVE TRULY CONJUGIAL, THERE IS
NO OBSTACLE OR HINDRANCE TO THEIR AGAIN CONTRACTING WEDLOCK. With those
who have not been principled in conjugial love, there is no spiritual or
internal, but only a natural or external bond; and if an internal bond
does not keep the external in its order and tenor, the latter is but
like a bundle when the bandage is removed, which flows every way
according as it is tossed or driven by the wind. The reason of this is,
because what is natural derives its origin from what is spiritual, and
in its existence is merely a mass collected from spiritual principles;
wherefore if the natural be separated from the spiritual, which produced
and as it were begot it, it is no longer kept together interiorly, but
only exteriorly by the spiritual, which encompasses and binds it in
general, and does not tie it and keep it tied together in particular.
Hence it is, that the natural principle separated from the spiritual, in
the case of two married partners, does not cause any conjunction of
minds, and consequently of wills, but only a conjunction of some
external affections, which are connected with the bodily senses. The
reason why nothing opposes and hinders such persons from again
contracting wedlock, is, because they have not been the essentials of
marriage; and hence those essentials do not at all influence them after
separation by death: therefore they are then absolutely at their own
disposal, whether they be widowers or widows, to bind their sensual
affections with whomsoever they please, provided there be no legal
impediment. Neither do they themselves think of marriages in any other
than a natural view, and from a regard to convenience in supplying
various necessities and external advantages, which after the death of
one of the parties may again be supplied by another; and possibly, if
their interior thoughts were viewed, as in the spiritual world, there
would not be found in them any distinction between conjugial unions and
extra-conjugial connections. The reason why it is allowable for these to
contract repeated marriages, is, as above-mentioned, because merely
natural connections are after death of themselves dissolved and fall
asunder; for by death the external affections follow the body, and are
entombed with it; those only remaining which are connected with internal
principles. But it is to be observed, that marriages interiorly
conjunctive can scarcely be entered into in the world, because elections
of internal likenesses cannot there be provided by the Lord as in the
heavens; for they are limited in many ways, as to equals in rank and
condition, within the country, city, and village where they live; and in
the world for the most part married partners are held together merely by
externals, and thus not by internals, which internals do not shew
themselves till some time after marriage, and are only known when they
influence the externals.

321. IV. THOSE WHO HAD LIVED TOGETHER IN LOVE TRULY CONJUGIAL ARE
UNWILLING TO MARRY AGAIN, EXCEPT FOR REASONS SEPARATE FROM CONJUGIAL
LOVE. The reasons why those who had lived in love truly conjugial, after
the death of their married partners are unwilling to marry again, are as
follow. 1. Because they were united as to their souls, and thence as to
their minds; and this union, being spiritual, is an actual junction of
the soul and mind of one of the parties to those of the other, which
cannot possibly be dissolved; that such is the nature of spiritual
conjunction, has been constantly shewn above. 2. Because they were also
united as to their bodies by the receptions of the propagation of the
soul of the husband by the wife, and thus by the insertion of his life
into hers, whereby a maiden becomes a wife; and on the other hand by the
reception of the conjugial love of the wife by the husband, which
disposes the interiors of his mind, and at the same time the interiors
and exteriors of his body, into a state receptible of love and
perceptible of wisdom, which makes him from a youth become a husband;
see above, n. 198. 3. Because a sphere of love from the wife, and a
sphere of understanding from the man, is continually flowing forth, and
because it perfects conjunctions, and encompasses them with its pleasant
influence, and unites them; see also above, n. 223. 4. Because married
partners thus united think of, and desire what is eternal, and because
on this idea their eternal happiness is founded; see n. 216. 5. From
these several considerations it is, that they are no longer two, but one
man, that is, one flesh. 6. That such a union cannot be destroyed by the
death of one of the parties, is manifest to the sight of a spirit. 7. To
the above considerations shall be added this new information, that two
such conjugial partners, after the death of one, are still not
separated; since the spirit of the deceased dwells continually with that
of the survivor, and this even to the death of the latter, when they
again meet and are reunited, and love each other more tenderly than
before, because they are then in the spiritual world. Hence flows this
undeniable consequence, that those who had lived in love truly
conjugial, are unwilling to marry again. But if they afterwards contract
something like marriage, it is for reasons separate from conjugial love,
which are all external; as in case there are young children in the
house, and the care of them requires attention; if the house is large
and full of servants of both sexes; if the calls of business abroad
divert the mind from domestic concerns; if mutual aids and offices are
necessary; with other cases of a like nature.

322. V. THE STATE OF THE MARRIAGE OF A YOUTH WITH A MAIDEN DIFFERS FROM
THAT OF A YOUTH WITH A WIDOW. By states of marriage we mean the states
of the life of each party, the husband and the wife, after the nuptials,
thus in the marriage, as to the quality of the intercourse at that time,
whether it be internal, that is of souls and minds, which is intercourse
in the principle idea, or whether it be only external, that is of minds
(_animorum_), of the senses, and of the body. The state of marriage of a
youth with a maiden is essentially itself initiatory to genuine
marriage; for between these conjugial love can proceed in its just
order, which is from its first heat to its first torch, and afterwards
from its first seed with the youth-husband, and from its first flower
with the maiden-wife, and thus generate, grow, and fructify, and
introduce itself into those successive states with both parties
mutually; but if otherwise, the youth or the maiden was not really such,
but only in external form. But between a youth and a widow there is not
such an initiation to marriage from first principles, nor a like
progression in marriage, since a widow is more at her own disposal, and
under her own jurisdiction, than a maiden; wherefore a youth addresses
himself differently to his wife if she were a widow, from what he does
if she were a maiden. But herein there is much variety and diversity;
therefore the subject is here mentioned only in a general way.

323. VI. THE STATE OF THE MARRIAGE OF A WIDOWER WITH A MAIDEN DIFFERS
ALSO FROM THAT OF A WIDOWER WITH A WIDOW. For a widower has already been
initiated into married life which a maiden has to be; and yet conjugial
love perceives and is sensible of its pleasantness and delight in mutual
initiation; a youth-husband and a maiden-wife perceive and are sensible
of things ever new in whatever occurs, whereby they are in a kind of
continual initiation and consequent amiable progression. The case is
otherwise in the state of the marriage of a widower with a maiden: the
maiden-wife has an internal inclination, whereas with the man that
inclination has passed away; but herein there is much variety and
diversity: the case is similar in a marriage between a widower and a
widow; however, except this general notion, it is not allowable to add
anything specifically.

324. VII. THE VARIETIES AND DIVERSITIES OF THESE MARRIAGES AS TO LOVE
AND ITS ATTRIBUTES ARE INNUMERABLE. There is an infinite variety of all
things, and also an infinite diversity. By varieties we here mean the
varieties between those things which are of one genus or species, also
between the genera and species; but by diversities we here mean the
diversities between those things which are opposite. Our idea of the
distinction of varieties and diversities may be illustrated as follows:
The angelic heaven, which is connected as a one, in an infinite variety,
no one there being absolutely like another, either as to souls and
minds, or as to affections, perceptions, and consequent thoughts, or as
to inclinations and consequent intentions, or as to tone of voice, face,
body, gesture, and gait, and several other particulars, and yet,
notwithstanding there are myriads of myriads, they have been and are
arranged by the Lord into one form, in which there is full unanimity and
concord; and this could not possibly be, unless they were all, with
their innumerable varieties, universally and individually under the
guidance of one: these are what we here mean by varieties. But by
diversities we mean the opposites of those varieties, which exist in
hell; for the inhabitants there are diametrically opposite to those in
heaven; and hell, which consists of such, is kept together as a one by
varieties in themselves altogether contrary to the varieties in heaven,
thus by perpetual diversities. From these considerations it is evident
what is perceived by infinite variety and infinite diversity. The case
is the same in marriages, namely, that there are infinite varieties with
those who are in conjugial love, and infinite varieties with those who
are in adulterous love; and hence, that there are infinite diversities
between the latter and the former. From these premises it follows, that
the varieties and diversities in marriages of every genus and species,
whether of a youth with a maiden, or of a youth with a widow, or of a
widower with a maiden, or of a widower with a widow exceed all number:
who can divide infinity into numbers?

325. VIII. THE STATE OF A WIDOW IS MORE GRIEVOUS THAN THAT OF A WIDOWER.
The reasons for this are both external and internal; the external are
such as all can comprehend; as: 1. That a widow cannot provide for
herself and her family the necessaries of life, nor dispose of them when
acquired, as a man can and as she previously did by and with her
husband. 2. That neither can she defend herself and her family as is
expedient; for, while she was a wife, her husband was her defence, and
as it were her arm; and while she herself was her own (defence and arm),
she still trusted to her husband. 3. That of herself she is deficient of
counsel in such things as relate to interior wisdom and the prudence
thence derived. 4. That a widow is without the reception of love, in
which as a woman she is principled; thus she is in a state contrary to
that which was innate and induced by marriage. These external reasons,
which are natural, have their origin from internal reasons also, which
are spiritual, like all other things in the world and in the body;
respecting which see above, n. 220. Those external natural reasons are
perceived from the internal spiritual reasons which proceed from the
marriage of good and truth, and principally from the following: that
good cannot provide or arrange anything but by truth; that neither can
good defend itself but by truth; consequently that truth is the defence
and as it were the arm of good; that good without truth is deficient of
counsel, because it has counsel, wisdom, and prudence by means of truth.
Now since by creation the husband is truth, and the wife the good
thereof; or, what is the same thing, since by creation the husband is
understanding, and the wife the love thereof, it is evident that the
external or natural reasons, which aggravate the widowhood of a woman,
have their origin from internal or spiritual reasons. These spiritual
reasons, together with natural, are meant by what is said of widows in
several passages in the Word; as may be seen in the APOCALYPSE REVEALED,
n. 764.

       *       *       *       *       *

326. To the above I shall add TWO MEMORABLE RELATIONS. FIRST. After the
problem concerning the soul had been discussed and solved in the
gymnasium, I saw them coming out in order: first came the chief teacher,
then the elders, in the midst of whom were the five youths who had given
the answers, and after these the rest. When they were come out they went
apart to the environs of the house, where there were piazzas surrounded
by shrubs; and being assembled, they divided themselves into small
companies, which were so many groups of youths conversing together on
subjects of wisdom, in each of which was one of the wise persons from
the orchestra. As I saw these from my apartment, I became in the spirit,
and in that state I went out to them, and approached the chief teacher,
who had lately proposed the problem concerning the soul. On seeing me,
he said. "Who are you? I was surprised as I saw you approaching in the
way, that at one instant you came into my sight, and the next instant
went out of it; or that at one time I saw you, and suddenly I did not
see you: assuredly you are not in the same state of life that we are."
To this I replied, smiling, "I am neither a player nor a _vertumnus_;
but I am alternate, at one time in your light, and at another in your
shade; thus both a foreigner and a native." Hereupon the chief teacher
looked at me, and said, "You speak things strange and wonderful: tell me
who you are." I said, "I am in the world in which you have been, and
from which you have departed, and which is called the natural world; and
I am also in the world into which you have come, and in which you are,
which is called the spiritual world. Hence I am in a natural state, and
at the same time in a spiritual state; in a natural state with men of
the earth and in a spiritual state with you; and when I am in the
natural state, you do not see me, but when I am in the spiritual state,
you do; that such should be my condition, has been granted me by the
Lord. It is known to you, illustrious sir, that a man of the natural
world does not see a man of the spiritual world, nor _vice versa_;
therefore when I let my spirit into the body, you did not see me; but
when I let it out of the body, you did see me. You have been teaching in
the gymnasium, that you are souls, and that souls see souls, because
they are human forms; and you know, that when you were in the natural
world, you did not see yourself or your souls in your bodies; and this
is a consequence of the difference between what is spiritual and what is
natural." When he heard of the difference between what is spiritual and
what is natural, he said, "What do you mean by that difference? is it
not like the difference between what is more or less pure? for what is
spiritual but that which is natural in a higher state of purity?" I
replied, "The difference is of another kind; it is like that between
prior and posterior, which bear no determinate proportion to each other:
for the prior is in the posterior as the cause is in the effect; and the
posterior is derived from the prior as the effect from its cause: hence,
the one does not appear to the other." To this the chief teacher
replied, "I have meditated and ruminated upon this difference, but
heretofore in vain; I wish I could perceive it." I said, "You shall not
only perceive the difference between what is spiritual and what is
natural, but shall also see it." I then proceeded as follows: "You
yourself are in a spiritual state with your associate spirits, but in a
natural state with me; for you converse with your associates in the
spiritual language, which is common to every spirit and angel, but with
me in my mother tongue; for every spirit and angel, when conversing with
a man, speaks his peculiar language; thus French with a Frenchman,
English with an Englishman, Greek with a Greek, Arabic with an Arabian,
and so forth. That you may know therefore the difference between what is
spiritual and what is natural in respect to languages, make this
experiment; withdraw to your associates, and say something there: then
retain the expressions, and return with them in your memory, and utter
them before me." He did so, and returned to me with those expressions in
his mouth, and uttered them; and they were altogether strange and
foreign, such as do not occur in any language of the natural world. By
this experiment several times repeated, it was made very evident that
all the spiritual world have the spiritual language, which has in it
nothing that is common to any natural language, and that every man comes
of himself into the use of that language after his decease. At the same
time also he experienced, that the sound of the spiritual language
differs so far from the sound of natural language, that a spiritual
sound, though loud, could not at all be heard by a natural man, nor a
natural sound by a spirit. Afterwards I requested the chief teacher and
the bystanders to withdraw to their associates, and write some sentence
or other on a piece of paper, and then return with it to me, and read
it. They did so, and returned with the paper in their hand; but when
they read it, they could not understand any part of it, as the writing
consisted only of some letters of the alphabet, with turns over them,
each of which was significative of some particular sense and meaning:
because each letter of the alphabet is thus significative, it is evident
why the Lord is called Alpha and Omega. On their repeatedly withdrawing,
and writing in the same manner, and returning to me, they found that
their writing involved and comprehended innumerable things which no
natural writing could possibly express; and they were given to
understand, that this was in consequence of the spiritual man's thoughts
being incomprehensible and ineffable to the natural man, and such as
cannot flow and be brought into any other writing or language. Then as
some present were unwilling to comprehend that spiritual thought so far
exceeds natural thought, as to be respectively ineffable, I said to
them, "Make the experiment; withdraw into your spiritual society, and
think on some subject, and retain your thoughts, and return, and express
them before me." They did so; but when they wanted to express the
subject thought of, they were unable; for they did not find any idea of
natural thought adequate to any idea of spiritual thought, consequently
no words expressive of it; for ideas of thought are constituent of the
words of language. This experiment they repeated again and again;
whereby they were convinced that spiritual ideas are supernatural,
inexpressible, ineffable, and incomprehensible to the natural man; and
on account of this their super-eminence, they said, that spiritual
ideas, or thoughts, as compared with natural, were ideas of ideas, and
thoughts of thoughts; and that therefore they were expressive of
qualities of qualities, and affections of affections; consequently that
spiritual thoughts were the beginnings and origins of natural thoughts:
hence also it was made evident that spiritual wisdom was the wisdom of
wisdom, consequently that it was imperceptible to any wise man in the
natural world. It was then told them from the third heaven, that there
is a wisdom still interior and superior, which is called celestial,
bearing a proportion to spiritual wisdom like that which spiritual
wisdom bears to natural, and that these descend by an orderly influx
according to the heavens from the divine wisdom of the Lord, which is
infinite.

327. After this I said to the by-standers, "You have seen from these
three experimental proofs what is the difference between spiritual and
natural, and also the reason why the natural man does not appear to the
spiritual, nor the spiritual to the natural, although they are
consociated as to affections and thoughts, and thence as to presence.
Hence it is that, as I approached, at one time you, Sir, (addressing the
chief teacher), saw me, and at another you did not." After this, a voice
was heard from the superior heaven to the chief teacher, saying, "Come
up hither;" and he went up: and on his return, he said, that the angels,
as well as himself, did not before know the differences between
spiritual and natural, because there had never before been an
opportunity of comparing them together, by any person's existing at the
same time in both worlds; and without such comparison and reference
those differences were not ascertainable.

328. After this we retired, and conversing again on this subject, I
said, "Those differences originate solely in this circumstance of your
existence in the spiritual world, that you are in substantials and not
in materials: and substantials are the beginning of materials. Cicero's
expressions are worth notice at a time when Asia Minor has become of
importance to England.

[3] _Pro Lege Maniliâ_. abridged.

CHAPTER XI.

[Sidenote: B.C. 64.] Among the patricians who were rising through the lower
magistracies and were aspiring to the consulship was Lucius Sergius
Catiline. Catiline, now in middle life, had when young been a
fervent admirer of Sylla, and, as has been already said, had been an
active agent in the proscription. He had murdered his brother-in-law,
and perhaps his brother, under political pretences. In an age when
licentiousness of the grossest kind was too common to attract attention,
Catiline had achieved a notoriety for infamy.
Ho had intrigued with a Vestal virgin, the sister of Cicero's wife,
Terentia. If Cicero is to be believed, he had made away with his own wife,
that he might marry Aurelia Orestilla, a woman as wicked as she was
beautiful, and he had killed his child also because Aurelia had objected
to be encumbered with a step-son. But this, too, was common in high
society in those days. Adultery and incest had become familiar
excitements. Boys of ten years old had learnt the art of poisoning their
fathers,[1] and the story of Aurelia Orestilla and Catiline had been
rehearsed a few years before by Sassia and Oppianicus at Larino.[2] Other
enormities Catiline had been guilty of which Cicero declined to mention,
lest he should show too openly what crimes might go unpunished under the
senatorial administration. But villainy, however notorious, did not
interfere with advancement in the public service. Catiline was adroit,
bold, and even captivating. He made his way into high office along the
usual gradations. He was praetor in B.C. 68. He went as governor to
Africa in the year following, and he returned with money enough, as he
reasonably hoped, to purchase the last step to the consulship. He was
impeached when he came back for extortion and oppression, under one of
the many laws which were made to be laughed at. Till his trial was
over he was disqualified from presenting himself as a candidate,
and the election for the year 65 was carried by Autronius Paetus
and Cornelius Sylla.

Two other patricians, Aurelius Cotta and Manlius Torquatus, had stood
against them.
The successful competitors were unseated for bribery; Cotta and Torquatus
took their places, and, apparently as a natural resource in the
existing contempt into which the constitution had fallen, the disappointed
candidates formed a plot to kill their rivals and their rivals' friends
in the Senate, and to make a revolution. Cneius Piso, a young nobleman
of the bluest blood, joined in the conspiracy. Catiline threw himself
into it as his natural element, and aristocratic tradition said
in later years that Caesar and Crassus were implicated also.
Some desperate scheme there certainly was, but the accounts of it are
confused: one authority says that it failed because Catiline gave the
signal prematurely; others that Caesar was to have given the
signal, and did not do it; others that Crassus's heart failed him; others
that the consuls had secret notice given to them and took precautions.
Cicero, who was in Rome at the time, declares that he never heard
of the conspiracy.[3] When evidence is inconclusive, probability
becomes argument. Nothing can be less likely than that a cautious
capitalist of vast wealth like Crassus should have connected himself
with a party of dissolute adventurers. Had Caesar committed himself,
jealously watched as he was by the aristocrats, some proofs of his
complicity would have been forthcoming. The aristocracy under the empire
revenged themselves for their ruin by charging Caesar with a share in
every combination that had been formed against them, from Sylla's time
downwards. Be the truth what it may, nothing came of this project. Piso
went to Spain, where he was killed. The prosecution of Catiline for his
African misgovernment was continued, and, strange to say, Cicero
undertook his defence. He was under no uncertainty as to Catiline's general
character, or his particular guilt in the charge brought against him. It
was plain as the sun at midday.[4] But Cicero was about to stand
himself for the consulship, the object of his most passionate
desire. He had several competitors; and as he thought well of
Catiline's prospects, he intended to coalesce with him.[5] Catiline was
acquitted, apparently through a special selection of the judges,
with the connivance of the prosecutor. The canvass was violent,
and the corruption flagrant.

[6]Cicero did not bribe himself, but if Catiline's voters would give him
a help, he was not so scrupulous as to be above taking advantage of
it.
Catiline's humor or the circumstances of the time provided him with a
more honorable support. He required a more manageable colleague than he
could have found in Cicero. Among the candidates was one of Sylla's
officers, Caius Antonius, the uncle of Marc Antony, the triumvir. This
Antonius had been prosecuted by Caesar for ill-usage of the Macedonians.
He had been expelled by the censors from the Senate for general
worthlessness; but public disgrace seems to have had no effect whatever
on the chances of a candidate for the consulship in this singular age.
Antonius was weak and vicious, and Catiline could mould him as he
pleased. He had made himself popular by his profusion when aedile in
providing shows for the mob. The feeling against the Senate was so bitter
that the aristocracy had no chance of carrying a candidate of their
own, and the competition was reduced at last to Catiline, Antonius and
Cicero. Antonius was certain of his election, and the contest lay between
Catiline and Cicero. Each of them tried to gain the support of Antonius
and his friends. Catiline promised Antonius a revolution, in which they
were to share the world between them. Cicero promised his influence to
obtain some lucrative province for Antonius to misgovern. Catiline would
probably have succeeded, when the aristocracy, knowing what to expect
if so scandalous a pair came into office, threw their weight on Cicero's
side and turned the scale. Cicero was liked among the people for his
prosecution of Verres, for his support of the Manilian law, and for the
boldness with which he had exposed patrician delinquencies. With the
Senate for him also, he was returned at the head of the poll. The proud
Roman nobility had selected a self-made lawyer as their representative.
Cicero was consul, and Antonius with him. Catiline had failed. It was
the turning-point of Cicero's life.
Before his consulship he had not irrevocably taken a side. No public
speaker had more eloquently shown the necessity for reform; no one
had denounced with keener sarcasm the infamies and follies of senatorial
favorites. Conscience and patriotism should have alike held him to the
reforming party; and political instinct, if vanity had left him the
use of his perception, would have led him in the same direction. Possibly
before he received the votes of the patricians and their clients he
had bound himself with certain engagements to them. Possibly he held
the Senate's intellect cheap, and saw the position which he could
arrive at among the aristocracy if he offered them his services. The
strongest intellect was with the reformers, and first on that
side he could never be. First among the Conservatives[7] he could easily
be; and he might prefer being at the head of a party which at heart he
despised, to working at the side of persons who must stand inevitably
above him. We may regret that gifted men should be influenced by personal
considerations, but under party government it is a fact that they
are so influenced, and will be as long as it continues.

Caesar and Pompey were soldiers. The army was democratic, and the triumph
of the democracy meant the rule of a popular general.
Cicero was a civilian, and a man of speech. In the forum and in the Curia
he knew that he could reign supreme.

Cicero had thus reached the highest step in the scale of promotion by
trimming between the rival factions. Caesar was rising simultaneously
behind him on lines of his own. In the year B.C. 65 he had been
aedile, having for his colleague Bibulus, his future companion on the
successive grades of ascent. Bibulus was a rich plebeian, whose
delight in office was the introduction which it gave him into the society
of the great; and in his politics he outdid his aristocratic patrons.
The aediles had charge of the public buildings and the games and
exhibitions in the capital. The aedileship was a magistracy through
which it was ordinarily necessary to pass in order to reach the
consulship; and as the aediles were expected to bear their own expenses,
the consulship was thus restricted to those who could afford an extravagant
outlay. They were expected to decorate the city with new ornaments,
and to entertain the people with magnificent spectacles. If they fell
short of public expectation, they need look no further for the suffrages
of their many-headed master. Cicero had slipped through the aedileship,
without ruin to himself. He was a self-raised man, known to be dependent
upon his own exertions, and liked from the willingness with which he
gave his help to accused persons on their trials. Thus no great demands
had been made upon him. Caesar, either more ambitious or less confident
in his services, raised a new and costly row of columns in front of the
Capitol. He built a temple to the Dioscuri, and he charmed the populace
with a show of gladiators unusually extensive.
Personally he cared nothing for these sanguinary exhibitions, and he
displayed his indifference ostentatiously by reading or writing
while the butchery was going forward.[8] But he required the favor
of the multitude, and then, as always, took the road which led most
directly to his end. The noble lords watched him suspiciously, and
their uneasiness was not diminished when, not content with having
produced the insignia of Marius at his aunt's funeral, he restored
the trophies for the victories over the Cimbri and Teutons, which had
been removed by Sylla. The name of Marius was growing every day more
dear to the popular party. They forgave, if they had ever resented, his
credulities. His veterans who had fought with him through his campaigns
came forward in tears to salute the honored relics of their once
glorious commander.

       As he felt the ground stronger under his feet, Caesar now began to
assume an attitude more peremptorily marked.

He had won a reputation in the Forum; he had spoken in the Senate;
he had warmly advocated the appointment of Pompey to his high
commands; and he was regarded as a prominent democratic leader.

But he had not aspired to the tribunate; he had not thrown himself into
politics with any absorbing passion. His exertions had been intermittent,
and he was chiefly known as a brilliant member of fashionable
society, a peculiar favorite with women, and remarkable for his
abstinence from the coarse debauchery which disgraced his patrician
contemporaries. He was now playing for a higher stake, and the
oligarchy had occasion to be reminded of Sylla's prophecy. In carrying
out the proscription, Sylla had employed professional assassins,
and payments had been made out of the treasury to wretches who
came to him with bloody trophies in their hands to demand the
promised fees. The time had come when these doings were to be looked into;
hundreds of men had been murdered, their estates confiscated, and their
families ruined, who had not been even ostensibly guilty of any public
crime. At Caesar's instance an inquiry was ordered. He himself was
appointed Judex Quaestionis, or chairman of a committee of
investigation; and Catiline, among others, was called to answer for
himself--a curious commentary on Caesar's supposed connection with
him.

[Sidenote: B.C. 63.] Nor did the inquisition stop with Sylla. Titus
Labienus, afterward so famous and so infamous, was then tribune of the
people. His father had been killed at the side of Saturninus and Glaucia
thirty-seven years before, when the young lords of Rome had unroofed
the senate-house, and had pelted them and their companions to death
with tiles. One of the actors in the scene, Caius Rabirius, now a very
old man, was still alive.
Labienus prosecuted him before Caesar. Rabirius was condemned, and appealed
to the people; and Cicero, who had just been made consul, spoke in his
defence. On this occasion Cicero for the first time came actively in
collision with Caesar. His language contrasted remarkably with the
tone of his speeches against Verres and for the Manilian law. It was
adroit, for he charged Marius with having shared the guilt, if guilt
there had been, in the death of those men; but the burden of what he said
was to defend enthusiastically the conservative aristocracy,
and to censure with all his bitterness the democratic reformers.
Rabirius was acquitted, perhaps justly. It was a hard thing to revive the
memory of a political crime which had been shared by the whole patrician
order after so long an interval. But Cicero had shown his new colors;
no help, it was evident, was thenceforward to be expected from him in
the direction of reform. The popular party replied in a singular manner.
The office of Pontifex Maximus was the most coveted of all the honors
to which a Roman citizen could aspire. It was held for life, it was
splendidly endowed, and there still hung about the pontificate
the traditionary dignity attaching to the chief of the once sincerely
believed Roman religion. Like other objects of ambition, the nomination
had fallen, with the growth of democracy, to the people, but
the position had always been held by some member of the old aristocracy;
and Sylla, to secure them in the possession of it, had reverted to the
ancient constitution, and had restored to the Sacred College the privilege
of choosing their head. Under the impulse which the popular party had
received from Pompey's successes, Labienus carried a vote in the assembly,
by which the people resumed the nomination to the pontificate themselves.
In the same year it fell vacant by the death of the aged Metullus Pius.
Two patricians, Quintus Catulus and Caesar's old general Servilius
Isauricus, were the Senate's candidates, and vast sums were subscribed
and spent to secure the success of one or other of the two. Caesar
came forward to oppose them. Caesar aspired to be Pontifex Maximus--Pope
of Rome--he who of all men living was the least given to illusion; he
who was the most frank in his confession of entire disbelief in the
legends which, though few credited them any more, yet almost all thought
it decent to pretend to credit. Among the phenomena of the time
this was surely the most singular. Yet Caesar had been a priest from his
boyhood, and why should he not be Pope? He offered himself to the
Comitia.
Committed as he was to a contest with the richest men in Rome, he
spent money freely.

He was in debt already for his expenses as aedile. He engaged his credit
still deeper for this new competition. The story ran that when his mother
kissed him as he was leaving his home for the Forum on the morning
of the election, he told her that he would return as pontiff, or
she would never see him more. He was chosen by an overwhelming
majority, the votes given for him being larger than the collective
numbers of the votes entered for his opponents.

[Sidenote: B.C. 63.] The election for the pontificate was on the 6th
of March, and soon after Caesar received a further evidence of popular
favor on being chosen praetor for the next year. As the liberal party
was growing in courage and definiteness, Cicero showed himself more
decidedly on the other side. Now was the time for him, highly placed as
he was, to prevent a repetition of the scandals which he had so
eloquently denounced, to pass laws which no future Verres or Lucullus
could dare to defy. Now was his opportunity to take the wind out of
the reformers' sails, and to grapple himself with the thousand forms of
patrician villainy which he well knew to be destroying the Commonwealth.
Not one such measure, save an ineffectual attempt to check election
bribery, distinguished the consulship of Cicero. His entire efforts
were directed to the combination in a solid phalanx of the equestrian and
patrician orders. The danger to society, he had come to think, was
an approaching war against property, and his hope was to unite the rich
of both classes in defence against the landless and moneyless
multitudes.[9] The land question had become again as pressing as in the
time of the Gracchi. The peasant proprietors were melting away as fast
as ever, and Rome was becoming choked with impoverished citizens, who
ought to have been farmers and fathers of families, but were degenerating
into a rabble fed upon the corn grants, and occupied with nothing but
spectacles and politics. The agrarian laws in the past had been violent,
and might reasonably be complained of; but a remedy could now be found
for this fast-increasing mischief without injury to anyone. Pompey's
victories had filled the public treasury. Vast territories abroad had
lapsed to the possession of the State; and Rullus, one of the tribunes,
proposed that part of these territories should be sold, and that out of
the proceeds, and out of the money which Pompey had sent home, farms
should be purchased in Italy and poor citizens settled upon them. Rullus's
scheme might have been crude, and the details of it objectionable; but
to attempt the problem was better than to sit still and let the
evil go unchecked. If the bill was impracticable in its existing form,
it might have been amended; and so far as the immediate effect of such
a law was concerned, it was against the interests of the democrats. The
popular vote depended for its strength on the masses of poor who were
crowded into Rome; and the tribune was proposing to weaken his own army.
But the very name of an agrarian law set patrician households in
a flutter, and Cicero stooped to be their advocate. He attacked
Rullus with brutal sarcasm. He insulted his appearance; he ridiculed
his dress, his hair, and his beard. He mocked at his bad enunciation
and bad grammar. No one more despised the mob than Cicero; but
because Rullus had said that the city rabble was dangerously powerful,
and ought to be "drawn off" to some wholesome employment, the
eloquent consul condescended to quote the words, to score a point
against his opponent; and he told the crowd that their tribune had
described a number of excellent citizens to the Senate as no better
than the contents of a cesspool.[10]
By these methods Cicero caught the people's voices.Who but the Lord enters the life of man
from a superior principle, and implants therein internal celestial joys,
and transfers them to the derivative principles which follow in order;
and the more so, while at the same time he also bestows an enduring
strength or ability? It is no proof that such love does not exist, or
cannot exist, to urge that it is not experienced in one's self, and in
this or that person.

334. Since love truly conjugial unites the souls and hearts of two
persons, therefore also it is united with friendship, and by friendship
with confidence, and makes each conjugial, and so exalts them above
other friendships and confidences, that as that love is the chief love,
so also that friendship and that confidence are the chief: that this is
the case also with ability, is plain from several reasons, some of which
are discovered in the SECOND MEMORABLE RELATION that follows this
chapter; and from this ability follows the endurance of that love. That
by love truly conjugial two consorts become one flesh, was shewn in a
separate chapter, from n. 156-183.

335. II. THUS CELESTIAL BLESSEDNESS, SPIRITUAL SATISFACTIONS, AND
NATURAL DELIGHTS, WHICH FROM THE BEGINNING WERE PROVIDED FOR THOSE WHO
ARE IN LOVE TRULY CONJUGIAL, CAN ONLY EXIST WITH ONE WIFE. They are
called celestial blessednesses, spiritual satisfactions, and natural
delights, because the human mind is distinguished into three regions, of
which the highest is called celestial, the second spiritual, and the
third natural; and those three regions, with such as are principled in
love truly conjugial, are open, and influx follows in order according to
the openings. And as the pleasantnesses of that love are most eminent in
the highest regions, they are perceived as blessednesses, and as in the
middle region they are less eminent, they are perceived as
satisfactions, and lastly, in the lowest region, as delights: that there
are such blessednesses, satisfactions, and delights, and that they are
perceived and felt, appears from the MEMORABLE RELATIONS in which they
are described. The reason why all those happinesses were from the
beginning provided for those who are principled in love truly conjugial,
is, because there is an infinity of all blessednesses in the Lord, and
he is divine love; and it is the essence of love to desire to
communicate all its goods to another whom it loves; therefore together
with man he created that love, and inserted in it the faculty of
receiving and perceiving those blessednesses. Who is of so dull and
doting an apprehension as not to be able to see, that there is some
particular love into which the Lord has collected all possible
blessings, satisfactions, and delights?

336. III. ALL THOSE THINGS CAN ONLY EXIST FROM THE LORD ALONE; AND THEY
DO NOT EXIST WITH ANY BUT THOSE WHO COME TO HIM ALONE, AND LIVE
ACCORDING TO HIS COMMANDMENTS. This has been proved above in many
places; to which proofs it may be expedient to add, that all those
blessings, satisfactions, and delights can only be given by the Lord,
and therefore no other is to be approached. What other can be
approached, when by him all things were made which are made, John i. 3;
when he is the God of heaven and earth, Matt, xxviii. 18: when no
appearance of God the father was ever seen, or his voice heard, except
through him, John i. 18; chap. v. 37; chap. xiv. 6-11? From these and
very many other passages in the Word, it is evident that the marriage of
love and wisdom, or of good and truth, from which alone all marriages
derive their origin, proceeds from him alone. Hence it follows, that the
above love with its felicities exists with none but those who come to
him; and the reason why it exists with those who live according to his
commandments, is, because he is conjoined with them by love, John xiv.
21-24.

337. IV. CONSEQUENTLY, LOVE TRULY CONJUGIAL WITH ITS FELICITIES CAN ONLY
EXIST WITH THOSE WHO ARE OF THE CHRISTIAN CHURCH. The reason why
conjugial love, such as was described in its proper chapter, n. 57-73,
and in the following chapters, thus such as it is in its essence, exists
only with those who are of the Christian church, is, because that love
is from the Lord alone, and the Lord is not so known elsewhere as that
he can be approached as God; also because that love is according to the
state of the church with every one, n. 130, and the genuine state of the
church is from no other source than from the Lord, and thus is with none
but those who receive it from him. That these two principles are the
beginnings, introductions, and establishments of that love, has been
already confirmed by such abundance of evident and conclusive reasons,
that it is altogether needless to say any thing more on the subject. The
reason why conjugial love is nevertheless rare in the Christian world,
n. 58-59, is, because few in that world approach the Lord, and among
those there are some who indeed believe the church, but do not live
accordingly; besides other circumstances which are unfolded in the
APOCALYPSE REVEALED, where the present state of the Christian church is
fully described. But nevertheless it is an established truth, that love
truly conjugial can only exist with those who are of the Christian
church; therefore also from this ground polygamy is in that church
altogether rejected and condemned: that this also is of the divine
providence of the Lord, appears very manifest to those who think justly
concerning providence.

338. V. THEREFORE A CHRISTIAN IS NOT ALLOWED TO MARRY MORE THAN ONE
WIFE. This follows as a conclusion from the confirmation of the
preceding articles; to which this is to be added, that the genuine
conjugial principle is more deeply inserted into the minds of
Christians, than of the Gentiles who have embraced polygamy; and that
hence the minds of Christians are more susceptible of that love than the
minds of polygamists; for that conjugial principle is inserted in the
interiors of the minds of Christians, because they acknowledge the Lord
and his divine principle, and in the exteriors of their minds by civil
laws.

339. VI. IF A CHRISTIAN MARRIES SEVERAL WIVES, HE COMMITS NOT ONLY
NATURAL BUT ALSO SPIRITUAL ADULTERY. That a Christian who marries
several wives, commits natural adultery, is agreeable to the Lord's
words, "_That it is not lawful to put away a wife, because from the
beginning they were created to be one flesh; and that he who putteth
away a wife without just cause, and marrieth another, committeth
adultery_." Matt. xix. 3-12; thus still more does he commit adultery who
does not put away his wife, but, while retaining her, connects himself
with another. This law enacted by the Lord respecting marriages, has its
internal ground in spiritual marriage; for whatever the Lord spoke was
in itself spiritual; which is meant by this declaration, "_The words
that I speak unto you are spirit and are life_," John vi. 63. The
spiritual (sense) contained therein is this, that by polygamical
marriage in the Christian world, the marriage of the Lord and the Church
is profaned; in like manner the marriage of good and truth; and still
more the Word, and with the Word the church; and the profanation of
those things is spiritual adultery. That the profanation of the good and
truth of the church derived from the Word corresponds to adultery, and
hence is spiritual adultery; and that the falsification of good and
truth has alike correspondence, but in a less degree, may be seen
confirmed in the APOCALYPSE REVEALED, n. 134. The reason why by
polygamical marriages among Christians the marriage of the Lord and the
church is profaned, is, because there is a correspondence between that
divine marriage and the marriages of Christians; concerning which, see
above, n. 83-102; which correspondence entirely perishes, if one wife is
joined to another; and when it perishes, the married man is no longer a
Christian. The reason why by polygamical marriages among Christians the
marriage of good and truth is profaned, is because from this spiritual
marriage are derived marriages in the world; and the marriages of
Christians differ from those of other nations in this respect, that as
good loves truth, and truth good, and are a one, so it is with a wife
and a husband; therefore if a Christian should join one wife to another,
he would rend asunder in himself that spiritual marriage; consequently
he would profane the origin of his marriage, and would thereby commit
spiritual adultery. That marriages in the world are derived from the
marriage of good and truth, may be seen above, n. 116-131. The reason
why a Christian by polygamical marriage would profane the Word and the
church, is, because the Word considered in itself is the marriage of
good and truth, and the church in like manner, so far as this is derived
from the Word; see above, n. 128-131. Now since a Christian is
acquainted with the Lord, possesses the Word, and has also the church
from the Lord by the Word, it is evident that he, much more than one who
is not a Christian, has the faculty of being capable of being
regenerated, and thereby of becoming spiritual, and also of attaining to
love truly conjugial; for these things are connected together. Since
those Christians who marry several wives, commit not only natural but
also at the same time spiritual adultery, it follows that the
condemnation of Christian polygamists after death is more grievous than
that of those who commit only natural adultery. Upon inquiring into
their state after death, I received for answer, that heaven is
altogether closed in respect to them; that they appear in hell as lying
in warm water in the recess of a bath, and that they thus appear at a
distance, although they are standing on their feet, and walking, which
is in consequence of their intestine frenzy; and that some of them are
thrown into whirlpools in the borders of the worlds.

340. VII. THE ISRAELITISH NATION WAS PERMITTED TO MARRY SEVERAL WIVES,
BECAUSE THEY HAD NOT THE CHRISTIAN CHURCH, AND CONSEQUENTLY LOVE TRULY
CONJUGIAL COULD NOT EXIST WITH THEM. There are some at this day who are
in doubt respecting the institution relative to monogamical marriages,
or those of one man with one wife, and who are distracted by opposite
reasonings on the subject; being led to suppose that because polygamical
marriages were openly permitted in the case of the Israelitish nation
and its kings, and in the case of David and Solomon, they are also in
themselves permissible to Christians; but such persons have no distinct
knowledge respecting the Israelitish nation and the Christian, or
respecting the externals and internals of the church, or respecting the
change of the church from external to internal by the Lord; consequently
they know nothing from interior judgment respecting marriages. In
general it is to be observed, that a man is born natural in order that
he may be made spiritual; and that so long as he remains natural, he is
in the night, and as it were asleep as to spiritual things; and that in
this case he does not even know the difference between the external
natural man and the internal spiritual. That the Christian church was
not with the Israelitish nation, is known from the Word; for they
expected the Messiah, as they still expect him, who was to exalt them
above all other nations and people in the world: if therefore they had
been told, and were still to be told, that the Messiah's kingdom is over
the heavens, and thence over all nations, they would have accounted it
an idle tale; hence they not only did not acknowledge Christ or the
Messiah, our Lord, when he came into the world, but also barbarously
took him away out of the world. From these considerations it is evident,
that the Christian church was not, with that nation, as neither is it at
this day; and those with whom the Christian church is not, are natural
men both externally and internally: to such persons polygamy is not
hurtful, since it is inherent in the natural man; for, in regard to love
in marriages, the natural man perceives nothing but what has relation to
lust. This is meant by these words of the Lord, "_That Moses, because of
the HARDNESS OF THEIR HEARTS, suffered them to put away their wives: but
that from the beginning it was not so_," Matt. xix. 8. He says that
Moses permitted it, in order that it may be known that it was not the
Lord (who permitted it). But that the Lord taught the internal spiritual
man, is known from his precepts, and from the abrogation of the rituals
which served only for the use of the natural man; from his precepts
respecting washing, as denoting the purification of the internal man,
Matt. xv. 1, 17-20; chap. xxiii. 25, 26; Mark vii. 14-23; respecting
adultery, as denoting cupidity of the will, Matt. v. 28; respecting the
putting away of wives, as being unlawful, and respecting polygamy, as
not being agreeable to the divine law, Matt. xix. 3-9. These and several
other things relating to the internal principle and the spiritual man,
the Lord taught, because he alone opens the internals of human minds,
and makes them spiritual, and implants these spiritual principles in the
natural, that these also may partake of a spiritual essence: and this
effect takes place if he is approached, and the life is formed according
to his command merits, which in a summary are, to believe on him, and to
shun evils because they are of and from the devil; also to do good
works, because they are of the Lord and from the Lord; and in each case
for the man to act as from himself, and at the same time to believe that
all is done by the Lord through him. The essential reason why the Lord
opens the internal spiritual man, and implants this in the external
natural man, is, because every man thinks and acts naturally, and
therefore could not perceive any thing spiritual, and receives it in his
natural principle, unless the Lord had assumed the human natural, and
had made this also divine. From these considerations now it appears a
truth that the Israelitish nation was permitted to marry several wives,
because the Christian church was not with them.

341. VIII. AT THIS DAY THE MAHOMETANS ARE PERMITTED TO MARRY SEVERAL
WIVES, BECAUSE THEY DO NOT ACKNOWLEDGE THE LORD JESUS CHRIST TO BE ONE
WITH JEHOVAH THE FATHER, AND THEREBY TO BE THE GOD OF HEAVEN AND EARTH,
AND HENCE CANNOT RECEIVE LOVE TRULY CONJUGIAL. The Mahometans, in
conformity to the religion which Mahomet gave them, acknowledge Jesus
Christ to be the Son of God and a grand prophet, and that he was sent
into the world by God the Father to teach mankind; but not that God the
Father and he are one, and that his divine and human (principle) are one
person, united as soul and body, agreeably to the faith of all
Christians as grounded in the Athanasian Creed; therefore the followers
of Mahomet could not acknowledge our Lord to be any God from eternity,
but only to be a perfect natural man; and this being the opinion
entertained by Mahomet, and thence by his disciples, and they knowing
that God is one, and that that God is he who created the universe,
therefore they could do no other than pass by our Lord in their worship;
and the more so, because they declare Mahomet also to be a grand
prophet; neither do they know what the Lord taught. It is owing to this
cause, that the interiors of their minds, which in themselves are
spiritual, could not be opened: that the interiors of the mind are
opened by the Lord alone, may be seen just above, n. 340. The genuine
cause why they are opened by the Lord, when he is acknowledged to be the
God of heaven and earth, and is approached, and with those who live
according to his commandments, is, because otherwise there is no
conjunction, and without conjunction there is no reception. Man is
receptible of the Lord's presence and of conjunction with him. To come
to him causes presence, and to live according to his commandments causes
conjunction; his presence alone is without reception, but presence and
conjunction together are with reception. On this subject I will impart
the following new information from the spiritual world. Every one in
that world, when he is thought of, is brought into view as present; but
no one is conjoined to another except from the affection of love; and
this is insinuated by doing what he requires, and what is pleasing to
him. This circumstance, which is common in the spiritual world, derives
its origin from the Lord, who, in this same manner, is present and is
conjoined. The above observations are made in order to shew, that the
Mahometans are permitted to marry several wives, because love truly
conjugial, which subsists only between one man and one wife, was not
communicable to them; since from their religious tenets they did not
acknowledge the Lord to be equal to God the Father, and so to be the God
of heaven and earth. That conjugial love with every one is according to
the state of the church, may be seen above, at n. 130, and in several
other places.

342. IX. THE MAHOMETAN HEAVEN IS OUT OF THE CHRISTIAN HEAVEN AND IS
DIVIDED INTO TWO HEAVENS, THE INFERIOR AND THE SUPERIOR; AND ONLY THOSE
ARE ELEVATED INTO THEIR SUPERIOR HEAVEN WHO RENOUNCE CONCUBINES AND LIVE
WITH ONE WIFE, AND ACKNOWLEDGE OUR LORD AS EQUAL TO GOD THE FATHER, TO
WHOM IS GIVEN DOMINION OVER HEAVEN AND EARTH. Before we speak
particularly to each of these points, it may be expedient to premise
somewhat concerning the divine providence of the Lord in regard to the
rise of Mahometanism. That this religion is received by more kingdoms
than the Christian religion, may possibly be a stumbling-block to those
who, while thinking of the divine providence, at the same time believe
that no one can be saved that is not born a Christian; whereas the
Mahometan religion is no stumbling-block to those who believe that all
things are of the divine providence. These inquire in what respect the
divine providence is manifested in the Mahometan religion; and they so
discover in it this, that the Mahometan religion acknowledges our Lord
to be the Son of God, the wisest of men, and a grand prophet, who came
into the world to instruct mankind; but since the Mahometans have made
the Koran the book of their religion, and consequently think much of
Mahomet who wrote it, and pay him a degree of worship, therefore they
think little respecting our Lord. In order to shew more fully that the
Mahometan religion was raised up by the Lord's divine providence to
destroy the idolatries of several nations, we will give a detail of the
subject, beginning with the origin of idolatries. Previous to the
Mahometan religion idolatrous worship prevailed throughout the whole
world; because the churches before the Lord's coming were all
representative; such also was the Israelitish church, in which the
tabernacle, the garments of Aaron, the sacrifices, all things belonging
to the temple at Jerusalem, and also the statutes, were representative.
The ancients likewise had the science of correspondences, which is also
the science of representations, the very essential science of the wise,
which was principally cultivated by the Egyptians, whence their
hieroglyphics were derived. From that science they knew what was
signified by animals and trees of every kind, likewise by mountains,
hills, rivers, fountains, and also by the sun, the moon, and the stars:
by means of this science also they had a knowledge of spiritual things;
since things represented, which were such as relate to the spiritual
wisdom of the angels, were the origins (of those which represent). Now
since all their worship was representative, consisting of mere
correspondences, therefore they celebrated it on mountains and hills,
and also in groves and gardens; and on this account they sanctified
fountains, and in their adorations turned their faces to the rising sun:
moreover they made graven horses, oxen, calves, and lambs; yea, birds,
fishes, and serpents; and these they set in their houses and other
places, in order, according to the spiritual things of the church to
which they corresponded, or which they represented. They also set
similar images in their temples, as a means of recalling to their
remembrance the holy things of worship which they signified. In process
of time, when the science of correspondences was forgotten, their
posterity began to worship the very graven images as holy in themselves,
not knowing that the ancients, their fathers, did not see anything holy
in them, but only that according to correspondences they represented and
thence signified holy things. Hence arose the idolatries which
overspread the whole globe, as well Asia with its islands, as Africa and
Europe. To the intent that all those idolatries might be eradicated, it
came to pass of the Lord's divine providence, that a new religion,
accommodated to the genius of the orientals, took its rise; in which
something from each testament of the Word was retained, and which taught
that the Lord had come into the world, and that he was a grand prophet,
the wisest of all, and the Son of God. This was effected by means of
Mahomet, from whom that religion took its name. From these
considerations it is manifest, that this religion was raised up of the
Lord's divine providence, and accommodated, as we have observed, to the
genius of the orientals, to the end that it might destroy the idolatries
of so many nations, and might give its professors some knowledge of the
Lord, before they came into the spiritual world, as is the case with
every one after death. This religion would not have been received by so
many nations, neither could it have eradicated their idolatries, unless
it had been made agreeable to their ideas; especially unless polygamy
had been permitted; since without such permission, the orientals would
have burned with the fire of filthy adultery more than the Europeans,
and would have perished.

343. The Mahometans also have their heaven; for all in the universe, who
acknowledge a God, and from a religious notion shuns evils as sins
against him, are saved. That the Mahometan heaven is distinguished into
two, the inferior and the superior, I have heard from themselves: and
that in the inferior heaven they live with several wives and concubines
as in the world; but that those who renounce concubines and live with
one wife, are elevated into the superior heaven. I have heard also that
it is impossible for them to think of our Lord as one with the Father;
but that it is possible for them to think of him as his equal, and that
he has dominion over heaven and earth, because he is his Son; therefore
such of them as are elevated by the Lord into their superior heaven,
hold this belief.

344. On a certain time I was led to perceive the quality of the heat of
conjugial love with polygamists. I was conversing with one who
personated Mahomet. Mahomet himself is never present, but some one is
substituted in his place, to the end that those who are lately deceased
may as it were see him. This substitute, after I had been talking with
him at a distance, sent me an ebony spoon and other things, which were
proofs that they came from him; at the same time a communication was
opened for the heat of their conjugial love in that place, which seemed
to me like the warm stench of a bath; whereupon I turned myself away,
and the communication was closed.

345. X. POLYGAMY IS LASCIVIOUSNESS. The reason of this is, because its
love is divided among several, and is the love of the sex, and the love
of the external or natural man, and thus is not conjugial love, which
alone is chaste. It is well known that polygamical love is divided among
several, and divided love is not conjugial love, which cannot be divided
from one of the sex; hence the former love is lascivious, and polygamy
is lasciviousness. Polygamical love is the love of the sex, differing
from it only in this respect, that it is limited to a number, which the
polygamist may determine, and that it is bound to the observance of
certain laws enacted for the public good; also that it is allowed to
take concubines at the same time as wives; and thus, as it is the love
of the sex, it is the love of lasciviousness. The reason why polygamical
love is the love of the external or natural man is, because it is
inherent in that man; and whatever the natural man does from himself is
evil, from which he cannot be released except by elevation into the
internal spiritual man, which is effected solely by the Lord; and evil
respecting the sex, by which the natural man is influenced, is whoredom;
but since whoredom is destructive of society, instead thereof was
induced its likeness, which is called polygamy. Every evil into which a
man is born from his parents, is implanted in his natural man, but not
any in his spiritual man; because into this he is born from the Lord.
From what has now been adduced, and also from several other reasons, it
may evidently be seen, that polygamy is lasciviousness.

346. XI. CONJUGIAL CHASTITY, PURITY, AND SANCTITY CANNOT EXIST WITH
POLYGAMISTS. This follows from what has been just now proved, and
evidently from what was demonstrated in the chapter ON THE CHASTE
PRINCIPLE AND THE NON-CHASTE; especially from these articles of that
chapter, namely, that a chaste, pure, and holy principle is predicated
only of monogamical marriages, or of the marriage of one man with one
wife, n. 141; also, that love truly conjugial is essential chastity, and
that hence all the delights of that love, even the ultimate, are chaste,
n. 143, 144; and moreover from what was adduced in the chapter ON LOVE
TRULY CONJUGIAL, namely, that love truly conjugial, which is that of one
man with one wife, from its origin and correspondence, is celestial,
spiritual, holy, and clean above every other love, n. 64. Now since
chastity, purity, and sanctity exist only in love truly conjugial, it
follows, that it neither does nor can exist in polygamical love.

347. XII. A POLYGAMIST, SO LONG AS HE REMAINS SUCH, CANNOT BECOME
SPIRITUAL. To become spiritual is to be elevated out of the natural,
that is, out of the light and heat of the world, into the light and heat
of heaven. Respecting this elevation no one knows anything but he that
is elevated; nevertheless the natural man, although not elevated,
perceives no other than that he is; because he can elevate his
understanding into the light of heaven, and think and talk spiritually,
like the spiritual man; but if the will does not at the same time follow
the understanding to its altitude, he is still not elevated; for he does
not remain in that elevation, but in a short time lets himself down to
his will, and there fixes his station. It is said the will, but it is
the love that is meant at the same time; because the will is the
receptacle of the love; for what a man loves, that he wills. From these
few considerations it may appear, that a polygamist, so long as he
remains such, or what is the same, a natural man, so long as he remains
such, cannot be made spiritual.

348. XIII. POLYGAMY IS NOT SIN WITH THOSE WHO LIVE IN IT FROM A
RELIGIOUS NOTION. All that which is contrary to religion is believed to
be sin, because it is contrary to God; and on the other hand, all that
which agrees with religion, is believed not to be sin, because it agrees
with God; and as polygamy existed with the sons of Israel from a
principle of religion, and exists at this day with the Mahometans, it
could not, and cannot, be imputed to them as sin. Moreover, to prevent
its being sin to them, they remain natural, and do not become spiritual;
and the natural man cannot see that there is any sin in such things as
belong to the received religion: this is seen only by the spiritual man.
It is on this account, that although the Mahometans are taught by the
Koran to acknowledge our Lord as the Son of God, still they do not come
to him, but to Mahomet; and so long they remain natural, and
consequently do not know that there is in polygamy any evil, or indeed
any lasciviousness. The Lord also saith, "_If ye were blind ye would not
have sin; but now ye say, We see, therefore your sin remaineth_," John
ix. 41. Since polygamy cannot convict them of sin, therefore after death
they have their heavens, n. 342, 343; and their joys there according to
life.

349. XIV. POLYGAMY IS NOT SIN WITH THOSE WHO ARE IN IGNORANCE RESPECTING
THE LORD. This is, because love truly conjugial is from the Lord alone,
and cannot be imparted by the Lord to any but those who know him,
acknowledge him, believe on him, and live the life which is from him;
and those to whom that love cannot be imparted know no other than that
the love of the sex and conjugial love are the same thing; consequently
also polygamy. Moreover, polygamists, who know nothing of the Lord,
remain natural: for a man (_homo_) is made spiritual only from the Lord;
and that is not imputed to the natural man as sin, which is according to
the laws of religion and at the same time of society: he also acts
according to his reason; and the reason of the natural man is in mere
darkness respecting love truly conjugial; and this love in excellence is
spiritual. Nevertheless the reason of polygamists is taught from
experience, that both public and private peace require that promiscuous
lust in general should be restrained, and be left to every one within
his own house: hence comes polygamy.

350. It is well known, that a man (_homo_) by birth is viler than the
beasts. All the beasts are born into the knowledges corresponding to the
love of their life; for as soon as they are born, or are hatched from
the egg, they see, hear, walk, know their food, their dam, their friends
and foes; and soon after this they show attention to the sex, and to the
affairs of love, and also to the rearing of their offspring. Man alone,
at his birth, knows nothing of this sort; for no knowledge is connate to
him; he has only the faculty and inclination of receiving those things
which relate to knowledge and love; and if he does not receive these
from others, he remains viler than a beast. That man is born in this
condition, to the end that he may attribute nothing to himself, but to
others, and at length every thing of wisdom and of the love thereof to
God alone, and may hence become an image of God, see the MEMORABLE
RELATION, n. 132-136. From these considerations it follows, that a man
who does not learn from others that the Lord has come into the world,
and that he is God, and has only acquired some knowledge respecting
religion and the laws of his country, is not in fault if he thinks no
more of conjugial love than of the love of the sex, and if he believes
polygamical love to be the only conjugial love. The Lord leads such
persons in their ignorance; and by his divine auspices providently
withdraws from the imputation of guilt those who, from a religious
notion, shun evils as sins, to the end that they may be saved; for every
man is born for heaven, and no one for hell; and every one comes into
heaven (by influence) from the Lord, and into hell (by influence) from
himself.

351. XV. OF THESE, ALTHOUGH POLYGAMISTS, SUCH ARE SAVED AS ACKNOWLEDGE A
GOD, AND FROM A RELIGIOUS NOTION LIVE ACCORDING TO THE CIVIL LAWS OF
JUSTICE. All throughout the world who acknowledge a God and live
according to the civil laws of justice from a religious notion, are
saved. By the civil laws of justice we mean such precepts as are
contained in the Decalogue, which forbid murder, theft, adultery, and
false witness. These precepts are the civil laws of justice in all the
kingdoms of the earth; for without them no kingdom could subsist. But
some are influenced in the practice of them by fear of the penalties of
the law, some by civil obedience, and some also by religion; these last
are saved, because in such case God is in them; and every one, in whom
God is, is saved. Who does not see, that among the laws given to the
sons of Israel, after they had left Egypt, were those which forbid
murder, adultery, theft, and false witness, since without those laws
their communion or society could not subsist? and yet these laws were
promulgated by Jehovah God upon Mount Sinai with a stupendous miracle:
but the cause of their being so promulgated was, that they might be also
laws of religion, and thus that the people might practise them not only
for the sake of the good of society, but also for the sake of God, and
that when they practised them from a religious notion for the sake of
God, they might be saved. From these considerations it may appear, that
the pagans, who acknowledge a God, and live according to the civil laws
of justice, are saved; since it is not their fault that they know
nothing of the Lord, consequently nothing of the chastity of the
marriage with one wife. For it is contrary to the divine justice to
condemn those who acknowledge a God, and from their religion practise
the laws of justice, which consist in shunning evils because they are
contrary to God, and in doing what is good because it is agreeable to
God.

352. XVI. BUT NONE EITHER OF THE LATTER OR OF THE FORMER CAN BE
ASSOCIATED WITH THE ANGELS IN THE CHRISTIAN HEAVENS. The reason of this
is, because in the Christian heavens there are celestial light, which is
divine truth, and celestial heat, which is divine love; and these two
discover the quality of goods and truths, and also of evils and falses;
hence, there is no communication between the Christian and the Mahometan
heavens, and in like manner between the heavens of the Gentiles. If
there were a communication, none could have been saved but those who
were in celestial light and at the same time in celestial heat from the
Lord; yea neither would these be saved if there was a conjunction of the
heavens: for in consequence of conjunction all the heavens would so far
fall to decay that the angels would not be able to subsist; for an
unchaste and lascivious principle would flow from the Mahometans into
the Christian heaven, which in that heaven could not be endured; and a
chaste and pure principle would flow from the Christians into the
Mahometan heaven, which again could not be there endured. In such case,
in consequence of communication and thence of conjunction, the Christian
angels would become natural and thereby adulterers; or if they remained
spiritual, they would be continually sensible of a lascivious principle
about them, which would intercept all the blessedness of their life. The
case would be somewhat similar with the Mahometan heaven: for the
spiritual principles of the Christian heaven would continually encompass
and torment them, and would take away all the delight of their life, and
would moreover insinuate that polygamy is sin, whereby they would be
continually eluded. This is the reason why all the heavens are
altogether distinct from each other, so that there is no connection
between them, except by an influx of light and heat from the Lord out of
the sun, in the midst of which he is: and this influx enlightens and
vivifies everyone according to his reception; and reception is according
to religion. This communication is granted, but not a communication of
the heavens with each other.

       *       *       *       *       *

353. To the above I shall add TWO MEMORABLE RELATIONS. FIRST. I was once
in the midst of the angels and heard their conversation. It was
respecting intelligence and wisdom; that a man perceives no other than
that each is in himself, and thus that whatever he thinks from his
understanding and intends from his will, is from himself; when
nevertheless not the least portion thereof is from the man, but only the
faculty of receiving the things of the understanding and the will from
God: and as every man (_homo_) is by birth inclined to love himself, it
was provided from creation, to prevent man's perishing by self-love and
the conceit of his own intelligence, that that love of the man (_vir_)
should be transferred into the wife, and that in her should be implanted
from her birth a love for the intelligence and wisdom of her husband,
and thereby a love for him; therefore the wife continually attracts to
herself her husband's conceit of his own intelligence, and extinguishes
it in him, and vivifies it in herself, and thus changes it into
conjugial love, and fills it with unbounded pleasantnesses. This is
provided by the Lord, lest the conceit of his own intelligence should so
far infatuate the man, as to lead him to believe that he has
understanding and wisdom from himself and not from the Lord, and thereby
make him willing to eat of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil,
and thence to believe himself like unto God, and also a god, as the
serpent, which was the love of his own intelligence, said and persuaded
him: wherefore the man (_homo_) after eating was cast out of paradise,
and the way to the tree of life was guarded by a cherub. Paradise,
spiritually understood, denotes intelligence; to eat of the tree of
life, in a spiritual sense, is to be intelligent and wise from the Lord;
and to eat of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil, in a spiritual
sense, is to be intelligent and wise from self.

354. The angels having finished this conversation departed; and there
came two priests, together with a man who in the world had been an
ambassador of a kingdom, and to them I related what I had heard from the
angels. On hearing this they began to dispute with each other about
intelligence and wisdom, and the prudence thence derived, whether they
are from God or from man. The dispute grew warm. All three in heart
believed that they are from man because they are in man, and that the
perception and sensation of its being so confirm it; but the priests,
who on this occasion were influenced by theological zeal, said that
there is nothing of intelligence and wisdom, and thus nothing of
prudence from man; and when the ambassador retorted, that in such case
there is nothing of thought from man, they assented to it. But as it was
perceived in heaven, that all the three were in a similar belief, it was
said to the ambassador, "Put on the garments of a priest, and believe
that you are one, and then speak." He did so; and instantly he declared
aloud that nothing of intelligence and wisdom, and consequently nothing
of prudence, can possibly exist but from God; and he proved it with his
usual eloquence full of rational arguments. It is a peculiar
circumstance in the spiritual world, that a spirit thinks himself to be
such as is denoted by the garment he wears; because in that world the
understanding clothes every one. Afterwards, a voice from heaven said to
the two priests, "Put off your own garments, and put on those of
political ministers, and believe yourselves to be such." They did so;
and in this case they at the same time thought from their interior self,
and spoke from arguments which they had inwardly cherished in favor of
man's own intelligence. At that instant there appeared a tree near the
path; and it was said to them, "It is the tree of the knowledge of good
and evil; take heed to yourselves lest ye eat of it." Nevertheless all
the three, infatuated by their own intelligence, burned with a desire to
eat of it, and said to each other, "Why should not we? Is not the fruit
good?" And they went to it and eat of it. Immediately all the three, as
they were in a like faith, became bosom friends; and they entered
together into the way of self-intelligence, which led into hell:
nevertheless I saw them return thence, because they were not yet
prepared.

355. THE SECOND MEMORABLE RELATION. On a time as I was looking into the
spiritual world, I saw in a certain green field some men, whose garments
were like those worn by men of this world; from which circumstance I
knew that they were lately deceased. I approached them and stood near
them, that I might hear what they were conversing about. Their
conversation was about heaven; and one of them who knew something
respecting it, said, "In heaven there are wonderful things, such as no
one can believe unless he has seen them: there are paradisiacal gardens,
magnificent palaces constructed according to the rules of architecture,
because the work of the art itself, resplendent with gold; in the front
of which are columns of silver; and on the columns heavenly forms made
of precious stones; also houses of jasper and sapphire, in the front of
which are stately porticos, through which the angels enter; and within
the houses handsome furniture, which no art or words can describe. The
angels themselves are of both sexes: there are youths and husbands, also
maidens and wives: maids so beautiful, that nothing in the world bears
any resemblance to their beauty; and wives still more beautiful, who are
genuine images of celestial love, and their husbands images of celestial
wisdom; and all these are ever approaching the full bloom of youth; and
what is more, they know no other love of the sex than conjugial love;
and, what you will be surprised to hear, the husbands there have a
perpetual faculty of enjoyment." When the novitiate spirits heard that
no other love of the sex prevailed in heaven than conjugial love, and
that they had a perpetual faculty of enjoyment, they smiled at each
other, and said, "What you tell us is incredible; there cannot be such a
faculty: possibly you are amusing us with idle tales." But at that
instant a certain angel from heaven unexpectedly stood in the midst of
them, and said, "Hear me, I beseech you; I am an angel of heaven, and
have lived now a thousand years with my wife, and during that time have
been in the same flower of my age in which you here see me. This is in
consequence of the conjugial love in which I have lived with my wife;
and I can affirm, that the above faculty has been and is perpetual with
me; and because I perceive that you believe this to be impossible, I
will talk with you on the subject from a ground of rational argument
according to the light of your understanding. You do not know anything
of the primeval state of man, which you call a state of integrity. In
that state all the interiors of the mind were open even to the Lord; and
hence they were in the marriage of love and wisdom, or of good and
truth; and as the good of love and the truth of wisdom perpetually love
each other, they also perpetually desire to be united; and when the
interiors of the mind are open, the conjugial spiritual love flows down
freely with its perpetual endeavour, and presents the above faculty. The
very soul of a man (_homo_), being in the marriage of good and truth, is
not only in the perpetual endeavour of that union, but also in the
perpetual endeavour of the fructification and production of its own
likeness; and since the interiors of a man even from the soul are open
by virtue of that marriage, and the interiors continually regard as an
end the effect in ultimates that they may exist, therefore that
perpetual endeavor for fructifying and producing its like, which is the
property of the soul, becomes also of the body: and since the ultimate
of the operation of the soul in the body with two conjugial partners is
into the ultimates of love therein, and these depend on the state of the
soul, it is evident whence they derive this perpetuality. Fructification
also is perpetual, because the universal sphere of generating and
propagating the celestial things which are of love, and the spiritual
things which are of wisdom, and thence the natural things which are of
offspring, proceeds from the Lord, and fills all heaven and all the
world; and that celestial sphere fills the souls of all men, and
descends through their minds into the body even to its ultimates, and
gives the power of generating. But this cannot be the case with any but
those with whom a passage is open from the soul through the superior and
inferior principles of the mind into the body to its ultimates, as is
the case with those who suffer themselves to be led back by the Lord
into the primeval state of creation. I can confirm that now for a
thousand years I have never wanted faculty, strength, or vigor, and that
I am altogether a stranger to any diminution of powers, which are
continually renewed by the influx of the above-mentioned sphere, and in
such case also cheer the mind (_animum_), and do not make it sad, as is
the case with those who suffer the loss of those powers. Moreover love
truly conjugial is just like the vernal heat, from the influx of which
all things tend to germination and fructification; nor is there any
other heat in our heaven: wherefore with conjugial partners in that
heaven there is spring in its perpetual _conatus_, and it is this
perpetual _conatus_ from which the above virtue is derived. But
fructifications with us in heaven are different from those with men on
earth. With us fructifications are spiritual, which are the
fructifications of love and wisdom, or of good and truth: the wife from
the husband's wisdom receives into herself the love thereof; and the
husband from the love thereof in the wife receives into himself wisdom;
yea the wife is actually formed into the love of the husband's wisdom,
which is effected by her receiving the propagations of his soul with the
delight arising therefrom, in that she desires to be the love of her
husband's wisdom: thus from a maiden she becomes a wife and a likeness.
Hence also love with its inmost friendship with the wife, and wisdom
with its happiness with the husband, are continually increasing, and
this to eternity. This is the state of the angels of heaven." When the
angel had thus spoken, he looked at those who had lately come from the
world, and said to them, "You know that, while you were in the vigor of
love, you loved your married partners; but when your appetite was
gratified, you regarded them with aversion; but you do not know that we
in heaven do not love our married partners in consequence of that vigor,
but that we have vigor in consequence of love and derived from it; and
that as we perpetually love our married partners, we have perpetual
vigor: if therefore you can invert the state, you may be able to
comprehend this. Does not he who perpetually loves a married partner,
love her with the whole mind and with the whole body? for love turns
every thing of the mind and of the body to that which it loves; and as
this is done reciprocally, it conjoins the objects so that they become a
one." He further said, "I will not speak to you of the conjugial love
implanted from the creation in males and females, and of their
inclination to legitimate conjunction, or of the faculty of
prolification in the males, which makes one with the faculty of
multiplying wisdom from the love of truth; and that so far as a man
loves wisdom from the love thereof, or truth from good, so far he is in
love truly conjugial and in its attendant vigor."

356. When he had spoken these words, the angel was silent; and from the
spirit of his discourse the novitiates comprehended that a perpetual
faculty of enjoyment is communicable; and as this consideration rejoiced
their minds, they exclaimed, "O how happy is the state of angels! We
perceive that you in the heavens remain for ever in a state of youth,
and thence in the vigor of that age; but tell us how we also may enjoy
that vigor." The angel replied, "Shun adulteries as internal, and
approach the Lord, and you will possess it." They said, "We will do so."
We look less curiously into the mythology of scandal; we accept easily
and willingly stories disparaging to illustrious persons in history,
because similar stories are told and retold with so much confidence
and fluency among the political adversaries of those who have the
misfortune to be their successful rivals.

       The absurdity of a calumny may be as evident as the absurdity of a
miracle; the ground for belief may be no more than a lightness of
mind, and a less pardonable wish that it may be true.

But the idle tale floats in society, and by and by is written down
in books and passes into the region of established realities.

The tendency to idolize great men and the tendency to depreciate them
arises alike in emotion; but the slanders of disparagement are as truly
legends as the wonder-tales of saints and warriors; and anecdotes related
of Caesar at patrician dinner-parties at Rome as little deserve attention
as the information so freely given upon the habits of modern statesmen
in the _salons_ of London and Paris. They are read now by us in classic
Latin, but they were recorded by men who hated Caesar and hated
all that he had done; and that a poem has survived for two thousand
years is no evidence that the author of it, even though he might be a
Catullus, was uninfluenced by the common passions of humanity.

Caesar, it is allowed, had extraordinary talents, extraordinary
energy, and some commendable qualities; but he was, as the elder
Curio said, "omnium mulierum vir et omnium virorum mulier;" he had
mistresses in every country which he visited, and he had _liaisons_
with half the ladies in Rome. That Caesar's morality was altogether
superior to that of the average of his contemporaries is in a high degree
improbable. He was a man of the world, peculiarly attractive to women,
and likely to have been attracted by them. On the other hand, the
undiscriminating looseness attributed to him would have been peculiarly
degrading in a man whose passions were so eminently under control, whose
calmness was never known to be discomposed, and who, in everything
which he did, acted always with deliberate will. Still worse would it be
if, by his example, he made ridiculous his own laws against adultery and
indulged himself in vices which he punished in others. What, then, is
the evidence? The story of Nicomedes may be passed over. All that
is required on that subject has been already said. It was never heard
of before Caesar's consulship, and the proofs are no more than
the libels of Bibulus, the satire of Catullus, and certain letters of
Cicero's which were never published, but were circulated privately
in Roman aristocratic society.[1] A story is suspicious which is first
produced after twenty years in a moment of political excitement. Caesar
spoke of it with stern disgust. He replied to Catullus with an
invitation to dinner; otherwise he passed it over in silence--the only
answer which an honorable man could give. Suetonius quotes a loose
song sung by Caesar's soldiers at his triumph.

We know in what terms British sailors often speak of their favorite
commanders.
Affection, when it expresses itself most emphatically, borrows the language
of its opposites. Who would dream of introducing into a serious life
of Nelson catches chanted in the forecastle of the "Victory"? But
which of the soldiers sang these verses? Does Suetonius mean that the
army sang them in chorus as they marched in procession? The very notion
is preposterous. It is proved that during Caesar's lifetime
scandal was busy with his name; and that it would be so busy, whether
justified or not, is certain from the nature of things. Cicero says that
no public man in Rome escaped from such imputations. He himself flung
them broadcast, and they were equally returned upon himself. The
surprise is rather that Caesar's name should have suffered so little,
and that he should have been admitted on reflection by Suetonius to
have been comparatively free from the abominable form of vice which was
then so common.

As to his _liaisons_ with women, the handsome, brilliant Caesar,
surrounded by a halo of military glory, must have been a Paladin of
romance to any woman who had a capacity of admiration in her. His
own distaste for gluttony and hard drinking, and for the savage amusements
in which the male Romans so much delighted, may have made the society of
cultivated ladies more agreeable to him than that of men, and if he
showed any such preference the coarsest interpretation would be inevitably
placed upon it. These relations, perhaps, in so loose an age assumed
occasionally a more intimate form; but it is to be observed that the first
public act recorded of Caesar was his refusal to divorce his wife
at Sylla's bidding; that he was passionately attached to his sister; that
his mother, Aurelia, lived with him till she died, and that this
mother was a Roman matron of the strictest and severest type. Many
names were mentioned in connection with him, yet there is no record of
any natural child save Brutus, and one other whose claims were
denied and disproved.

Two intrigues, it may be said, are beyond dispute.

His connection with the mother of Brutus was notorious. Cleopatra,
in spite of Oppius, was living with him in his house at the time of his
murder. That it was so believed a hundred years after his death is,
of course, indisputable; but in both these cases the story is entangled
with legends which show how busily imagination had been at work. Brutus
was said to be Caesar's son, though Caesar was but fifteen when he was
born; and Brutus, though he had the temper of an Orestes, was devotedly
attached to his mother in spite of the supposed adultery, and professed
to have loved Caesar when he offered him as a sacrifice to his country's
liberty. Cleopatra is said to have joined Caesar at Rome after his
return from Spain, and to have resided openly with him as his mistress.
Supposing that she did come to Rome, it is still certain that Calpurnia
was in Caesar's house when he was killed. Cleopatra must have been
Calpurnia's guest as well as her husband's; and her presence, however
commented upon in society, could not possibly have borne the avowed
complexion which tradition assigned to it. On the other hand, it is quite
intelligible that the young Queen of Egypt, who owed her position to
Caesar, might have come, as other princes came, on a visit of courtesy,
and that Caesar after their acquaintance at Alexandria should have
invited her to stay with him.

But was Cleopatra at Rome at all? The only real evidence for her presence
there is to be found in a few words of Cicero: "Reginae fuga mihi non
molesta."--"I am not sorry to hear of the flight of the queen." [2]
There is nothing to show that the "queen" was the Egyptian
queen. Granting that the word Egyptian is to be understood, Cicero may
have referred to Arsinoë, who was called Queen as well as her sister, and
had been sent to Rome to be shown at Caesar's triumph.

But enough and too much on this miserable subject. Men will continue
to form their opinions about it, not upon the evidence, but according
to their preconceived notions of what is probable or improbable.
Ages of progress and equality are as credulous of evil as ages of faith
are credulous of good, and reason will not modify convictions which
do not originate in reason.

Let us pass on to surer ground.

In person Caesar was tall and slight. His features were more refined than
was usual in Roman faces; the forehead was wide and high, the nose
large and thin, the lips full, the eyes dark gray like an eagle's,
the neck extremely thick and sinewy. His complexion was pale. His
beard and mustache were kept carefully shaved. His hair was short and
naturally scanty, falling off toward the end of his life and leaving
him partially bald. His voice, especially when he spoke in public,
was high and shrill.
His health was uniformly strong until his last year, when he became
subject to epileptic fits. He was a great bather, and scrupulously
clean in all his habits, abstemious in his food, and careless in
what it consisted, rarely or never touching wine, and noting sobriety
as the highest of qualities when describing any new people.
He was an athlete in early life, admirable in all manly exercises, and
especially in riding. In Gaul, as has been said already, he rode a
remarkable horse, which he had bred himself, and which would let no one
but Caesar mount him. From his boyhood it was observed of him that he
was the truest of friends, that he avoided quarrels, and was most easily
appeased when offended. In manner he was quiet and gentlemanlike, with
the natural courtesy of high-breeding.
On an occasion when he was dining somewhere the other guests found
the oil too rancid for them. Caesar took it without remark, to spare
his entertainer's feelings. When on a journey through a forest with his
friend Oppius, he came one night to a hut where there was a single
bed. Oppius being unwell, Caesar gave it up to him, and slept on the
ground.

In his public character he may be regarded under three aspects, as a
politician, a soldier, and a man of letters.

Like Cicero, Caesar entered public life at the bar. He belonged by birth
to the popular party, but he showed no disposition, like the Gracchi, to
plunge into political agitation. His aims were practical. He made war
only upon injustice and oppression; and when he commenced as a pleader
he was noted for the energy with which he protected a client whom he
believed to have been wronged. At a later period, before he was praetor,
he was engaged in defending Masintha, a young Numidian prince, who
had suffered some injury from Hiempsal, the father of Juba. Juba himself
came to Rome on the occasion, bringing with him the means of influencing
the judges which Jugurtha had found so effective. Caesar in his
indignation seized Juba by the beard in the court; and when Masintha was
sentenced to some unjust penalty Caesar carried him off, concealed him
in his house, and took him to Spain in his carriage. When he rose
into the Senate, his powers as a speaker became strikingly remarkable.

Cicero, who often heard him, and was not a favorable judge, said that
there was a pregnancy in his sentences and a dignity in his manner which
no orator in Rome could approach. But he never spoke to court popularity;
his aim from first to last was better government, the prevention of bribery
and extortion, and the distribution among deserving citizens of some
portion of the public land which the rich were stealing. The Julian
laws, which excited the indignation of the aristocracy, had no other
objects than these; and had they been observed they would have saved
the Constitution. The obstinacy of faction and the civil war which
grew out of it obliged him to extend his horizon, to contemplate more
radical reforms--a large extension of the privileges of citizenship,
with the introduction of the provincial nobility into the Senate,
and the transfer of the administration from the Senate and annually elected
magistrates to the permanent chief of the army. But his objects throughout
were purely practical. The purpose of government he conceived to be the
execution of justice; and a constitutional liberty under which
justice was made impossible did not appear to him to be liberty at
all.

The practicality which showed itself in his general aims appeared also
in his mode of working. Caesar, it was observed, when anything
was to be done, selected the man who was best able to do it, not caring
particularly who or what he might be in other respects. To this faculty
of discerning and choosing fit persons to execute his orders may be
ascribed the extraordinary success of his own provincial administration,
the enthusiasm which was felt for him in the North of Italy, and the
perfect quiet of Gaul after the completion of the conquest. Caesar did
not crush the Gauls under the weight of Italy. He took the best of them
into the Roman service, promoted them, led them to associate the
interests of the Empire with their personal advancement and the
prosperity of their own people. No act of Caesar's showed more
sagacity then the introduction of Gallic nobles into the Senate;
none was more bitter to the Scipios and Metelli, who were compelled
to share their august privileges with these despised barbarians.

It was by accident that Caesar took up the profession of a soldier; yet
perhaps no commander who ever lived showed greater military genius. The
conquest of Gaul was effected by a force numerically insignificant,
which was worked with the precision of a machine. The variety of uses
to which it was capable of being turned implied, in the first place,
extraordinary forethought in the selection of materials. Men whose
nominal duty was merely to fight were engineers, architects, mechanics
of the highest order. In a few hours they could extemporize an impregnable
fortress on an open hillside. They bridged the Rhine in a week. They
built a fleet in a month. The legions at Alesia held twice their number
pinned within their works, while they kept at bay the whole force of
insurgent Gaul, entirely by scientific superiority. The machine, which
was thus perfect, was composed of human beings who required supplies
of tools, and arms, and clothes, and food, and shelter, and for all these
it depended on the forethought of its commander. Maps there were none.
Countries entirely unknown had to be surveyed; routes had to be
laid out; the depths and courses of rivers, the character of
mountain passes, had all to be ascertained. Allies had to be found among
tribes as yet unheard of.
Countless contingent difficulties had to be provided for, many of which
must necessarily arise, though the exact nature of them could not
be anticipated. When room for accidents is left open, accidents do not
fail to be heard of. Yet Caesar was never defeated when personally
present, save once at Gergovia, and once at Durazzo; and the failure
at Gergovia was caused by the revolt of the Aedui; and the manner
in which the failure at Durazzo was retrieved showed Caesar's
greatness more than the most brilliant of his victories.

He was rash, but with a calculated rashness, which the event never
failed to justify. His greatest successes were due to the
rapidity of his movements, which brought him on the enemy before they
heard of his approach. He travelled sometimes a hundred miles a
day, reading or writing in his carriage, though countries without roads,
and crossing rivers without bridges. No obstacles stopped him when
he had a definite end in view. In battle he sometimes rode; but he was
more often on foot, bareheaded, and in a conspicuous dress, that he might
be seen and recognized. Again and again by his own efforts he recovered
a day that was half lost. He once seized a panic-stricken standard-bearer,
turned him round, and told him that he had mistaken the direction
of the enemy.

He never misled his army as to an enemy's strength, or if he mis-stated
their numbers it was only to exaggerate. In Africa, before Thapsus,
when his officers were nervous at the reported approach of Juba, he
called them together and said briefly, "You will understand that within
a day King Juba will be here with the legions, thirty thousand horse, a
hundred thousand skirmishers, and three hundred elephants. You are not
to think or ask questions. I tell you the truth, and you must prepare for
it. If any of you are alarmed, I shall send you home."
Yet he was singularly careful of his soldiers. He allowed his legions rest,
though he allowed none to himself.

He rarely fought a battle at a disadvantage. He never exposed his men to
unnecessary danger, and the loss by wear and tear in the campaigns in
Gaul was exceptionally and even astonishingly slight. When a gallant
action was performed, he knew by whom it had been done, and every
soldier, however humble, might feel assured that if he deserved praise
he would have it. The army was Caesar's family.
When Sabinus was cut off, he allowed his beard to grow, and he did not
shave it till the disaster was avenged. If Quintus Cicero had been his
own child, he could not have run greater personal risk to save him
when shut up at Charleroy. In discipline he was lenient to ordinary
faults, and not careful to make curious inquiries into such things. He
liked his men to enjoy themselves. Military mistakes in his officers
too he always endeavored to excuse, never blaming them for
misfortunes, unless there had been a defect of courage as well as judgment.
Mutiny and desertion only he never overlooked. And thus no general was
ever more loved by, or had greater power over, the army which served under
him. He brought the insurgent 10th legion into submission by a single
word. When the civil war began and Labienus left him, he told all his
officers who had served under Pompey that they were free to follow if
they wished. Not another man forsook him.

Suetonius says that he was rapacious, that he plundered tribes
in Spain who were allies of Rome, that he pillaged shrines and temples
in Gaul, and destroyed cities merely for spoil. He adds a story which
Cicero would not have left untold and uncommented on if he had
been so fortunate as to hear of it: that Caesar when first consul took
three thousand pounds weight of gold out of the Capitol and replaced it
with gilded brass.

A similar story is told of the Cid and of other heroes of fiction. How
came Cicero to be ignorant of an act which, if done at all, was
done under his own eyes?
When praetor Caesar brought back money from Spain to the treasury; but
he was never charged at the time with peculation or oppression there.
In Gaul the war paid its own expenses; but what temples were there in
Gaul which were worth spoiling? Of temples, he was, indeed, scrupulously
careful.
Varro had taken gold from the Temple of Hercules at Cadiz. Caesar replaced
it. Metellus Scipio had threatened to plunder the Temple of Diana
at Ephesus. Caesar protected it. In Gaul the Druids were his best friends;
therefore he certainly had not outraged religion there; and the quiet
of the province during the civil war is a sufficient answer to the
accusation of gratuitous oppression.

The Gauls paid the expenses of their conquest in the prisoners taken in
battle, who were sold to the slave merchants; and this is the real blot
on Caesar's career. But the blot was not personally upon Caesar, but
upon the age in which he lived. The great Pomponius Atticus himself
was a dealer in human chattels. That prisoners of war should be sold
as slaves was the law of the time, accepted alike by victors and
vanquished; and the crowds of libertini who assisted at Caesar's
funeral proved that he was not regarded as the enemy of these
unfortunates, but as their special friend.

His leniency to the Pompeian faction has already been spoken of
sufficiently. It may have been politic, but it arose also from the
disposition of the man. Cruelty originates in fear, and Caesar was
too indifferent to death to fear anything. So far as his public
action was concerned, he betrayed no passion save hatred of injustice;
and he moved through life calm and irresistible, like a force of
nature.From these considerations it is plainly seen what is the quality of
the fire of jealousy into which polygamical conjugial love enkindles
itself,--that it is into anger and revenge; into anger with the meek,
and into revenge with the fierce. The reason of this effect is, because
their love is natural, and does not partake of anything spiritual. This
is a consequence of what is demonstrated in the chapter on
Polygamy,--that polygamy is lasciviousness, n. 345; and that a
polygamist, so long as he remains such, is natural, and cannot become
spiritual, n. 347. But the fire of jealousy is different with natural
monogamists, whose love is inflamed not so much against the women as
against those who do violence, becoming anger against the latter, and
cold against the former: it is otherwise with polygamists, whose fire of
jealousy burns also with the rage of revenge: this likewise is one of
the reasons why, after the death of polygamists, their concubines and
wives are for the most part set free, and are sent to seraglios not
guarded, to employ themselves in the various elegant arts proper to
women.

371. IX. JEALOUSY WITH THOSE MARRIED PARTNERS WHO TENDERLY LOVE EACH
OTHER, IS A JUST GRIEF GROUNDED IN SOUND REASON LEST CONJUGIAL LOVE
SHOULD BE DIVIDED, AND SHOULD THEREBY PERISH. All love is attended with
fear and grief; fear lest it should perish, and grief in case it
perishes: it is the same with conjugial love; but the fear and grief
attending this love is called zeal or jealousy. The reason why this
zeal, with married partners who tenderly love each other, is just and
grounded in sound reason, is, because it is at the same time a fear for
the loss of eternal happiness, not only of its own but also of its
married partner's, and because also it is a defence against adultery. In
respect to the first consideration,--that it is a just fear for the loss
of its own eternal happiness and of that of its married partner, it
follows from every thing which has been heretofore adduced concerning
love truly conjugial; and also from this consideration, that married
partners derive from that love the blessedness of their souls, the
satisfaction of their minds, the delight of their bosoms, and the
pleasure of their bodies; and since these remain with them to eternity,
each party has a fear for eternal happiness. That the above zeal is a
just defence against adulteries, is evident: hence it is like a fire
raging against violation, and defending itself against it. From these
considerations it is evident, that whoever loves a married partner
tenderly, is also jealous, but is just and discreet according to the
man's wisdom.

372. It was said, that in conjugial love there is implanted a fear lest
it should be divided, and a grief lest it should perish, and that its
zeal is like a fire raging against violation. Some time ago, when
meditating on this subject, I asked the zealous angels concerning the
seat of jealousy? They said, that it is in the understanding of the man
who receives the love of a married partner and returns it; and that its
quality there is according to his wisdom: they said further, that
jealousy has in it somewhat in common with honor, which also resides in
conjugial love; for he that loves his wife, also honors her. In regard
to zeal's residing with a man in his understanding, they assigned this
reason; because conjugial love defends itself by the understanding, as
good does by truth; so the wife defends those things which are common
with the man, by her husband; and that on this account zeal is implanted
in the men, and by them, and for their sake, in the women. To the
question as to the region of the mind in which jealousy resides with the
men, they replied, in their souls, because it is also a defence against
adulteries; and because adulteries principally destroy conjugial love,
that when there is danger of the violation of that love, the man's
understanding grows hard, and becomes like a horn, with which he strikes
the adulterer.

373. X. JEALOUSY WITH MARRIED PARTNERS WHO DO NOT LOVE EACH OTHER, IS
GROUNDED IN SEVERAL CAUSES; ARISING IN SOME INSTANCES FROM VARIOUS
MENTAL WEAKNESSES. The causes why married partners who do not mutually
love each other, are yet jealous, are principally the honor resulting
from power, the fear of defamation with respect both to the man himself
and also to his wife, and the dread lest domestic affairs should fall
into confusion. It is well known that the men have honor resulting from
power, that is, that they are desirous of being respected in consequence
thereof; for so long as they have this honor, they are as it were of an
elevated mind, and not dejected when in the company of men and women: to
this honor also is attached the name of bravery; wherefore military
officers have it more than others. That the fear of defamation, with
respect both to the man himself and also to his wife, is a cause of
jealousy that agrees with the foregoing: to which may be added, that
living with a harlot, and debauched practices in a house, are accounted
infamous. The reason why some are jealous through a dread lest their
domestic affairs should fall into confusion, is because, so far as this
is the case, the husband is made light of, and mutual services and aids
are withdrawn; but with some in process of time this jealousy ceases and
is annihilated, and with some it is changed into the mere semblance of
love.

374. That jealousy in certain cases arises from various mental
weaknesses, is not unknown in the world; for there are jealous persons,
who are continually thinking that their wives are unfaithful, and
believe them to be harlots, merely because they hear or see them talk in
a friendly manner with or about men. There are several vitiated
affections of the mind which induce this weakness; the principal of
which is a suspicious fancy, which if it be long cherished, introduces
the mind into societies of similar spirits, from whence it cannot
without difficulty be rescued; it also confirms itself in the body, by
rendering the serum, and consequently the blood, viscous, tenacious,
thick, slow, and acrid, a defect of strength also increases it; for the
consequence of such defect is, that the mind cannot be elevated from its
suspicious fancies; for the presence of strength elevates, and its
absence depresses, the latter causing the mind to sink, give way, and
become feeble; in which case it immerses itself more and more in the
above fancy, till it grows delirious, and thence takes delight in
quarrelling, and, so far as is allowable, in abuse.

375. There are also several countries, which more than others labor
under this weakness of jealousy: in these the wives are imprisoned, are
tyrannically shut out from conversation with men, are prevented from
even looking at them through the windows, by blinds drawn down, and are
terrified by threats of death if the cherished suspicion shall appear
well grounded; not to mention other hardships which the wives in those
countries suffer from their jealous husbands. There are two causes of
this jealousy; one is, an imprisonment and suffocation of the thoughts
in the spiritual things of the church; the other is, an inward desire of
revenge. As to the first cause,--the imprisonment and suffocation of the
thoughts in the spiritual things of the church, its operation and effect
may be concluded from what has been proved above,--that everyone has
conjugial love according to the state of the church with him, and as the
church is from the Lord, that that love is solely from the Lord, n. 130,
131; when therefore, instead of the Lord, living and deceased men are
approached and invoked, it follows, that the state of the church is such
that conjugial love cannot act in unity with it; and the less so while
the mind is terrified into that worship by the threats of a dreadful
prison: hence it comes to pass, that the thoughts, together with the
expressions of them in conversation, are violently seized and
suffocated; and when they are suffocated, there is an influx of such
things as are either contrary to the church, or imaginary in favor of
it; the consequence of which is, heat in favor of harlots and cold
towards a married partner; from which two principles prevailing together
in one subject, such an unconquerable fire of jealousy flows forth. As
to the second cause,--the inward desire of revenge, this altogether
checks the influx of conjugial love, and swallows it up, and changes the
delight thereof, which is celestial, into the delight of revenge, which
is infernal; and the proximate determination of this latter is to the
wife. There is also an appearance, that the unhealthiness of the
atmosphere, which in those regions is impregnated with the poisonous
exhalations of the surrounding country, is an additional cause.

376. XI. IN SOME INSTANCES THERE IS NOT ANY JEALOUSY; AND THIS ALSO FROM
VARIOUS CAUSES. There are several causes of there being no jealousy, and
of its ceasing. The absence of jealousy is principally with those who
make no more account of conjugial than of adulterous love, and at the
same time are so void of honorable feeling as to slight the reputation
of a name: they are not unlike married pimps. There is no jealousy
likewise with those who have rejected it from a confirmed persuasion
that it infests the mind, and that it is useless to watch a wife, and
that to do so serves only to incite her, and that therefore it is better
to shut the eyes, and not even to look through the key-hole, lest any
thing should be discovered. Some have rejected jealousy on account of
the reproach attached to the name, and under the idea that any one who
is a real man, is afraid of nothing: some have been driven to reject it
lest their domestic affairs should suffer, and also lest they should
incur public censure in case the wife was convicted of the disorderly
passion of which she is accused. Moreover jealousy passes off into no
jealousy with those who grant license to their wives, either from a want
of ability, or with a view to the procreation of children for the sake
of inheritance, also in some cases with a view to gain, and so forth.
There are also disorderly marriages, in which, by mutual consent, the
licence of unlimited amour is allowed to each party, and yet they are
civil and complaisant to each other when they meet.

377. XII. THERE IS A JEALOUSY ALSO IN REGARD TO CONCUBINES, BUT NOT SUCH
AS IN REGARD TO WIVES. Jealousy in regard to wives originates in a man's
inmost principles; but jealousy in regard to concubines originates in
external principles; they therefore differ in kind. The reason why
jealousy in regard to wives originates in inmost principles is, because
conjugial love resides in them: the reason why it resides there is,
because marriage from the eternity of its compact established by
covenant, and also from an equality of right, the right of each party
being transferred to the other, unites souls, and lays a superior
obligation on minds: this obligation and that union, once impressed,
remain inseparable, whatever be the quality of the love afterwards,
whether it be warm or cold. Hence it is that an invitation to love
coming from a wife chills the whole man from the inmost principles to
the outermost; whereas an invitation to love coining from a concubine
has not the same effect upon the object of her love. To jealousy in
regard to a wife is added the earnest desire of reputation with a view
to honor; and there is no such addition to jealousy in regard to a
concubine. Nevertheless both kinds of jealousy vary according to the
seat of the love received by the wife and by the concubine; and at the
same time according to the state of the judgment of the man receiving
it.

378. XIII. JEALOUSY LIKEWISE EXISTS AMONG BEASTS AND BIRDS. That it
exists among wild beasts, as lions, tigers, bears, and several others,
while they have whelps, is well known; and also among bulls, although
they have not calves: it is most conspicuous among dung-hill cocks, who
in favor of their hens fight with their rivals even to death: the reason
why the latter have such jealousy is, because they are vain-glorious
lovers, and the glory of that love cannot endure an equal; that they are
vain-glorious lovers, above every genus and species of birds, is
manifest from their gestures, nods, gait, and tone of voice. That the
glory of honor with men, whether lovers or not, excites, increases, and
sharpens jealousy, has been confirmed above.

379. XIV. THE JEALOUSY OF MEN AND HUSBANDS IS DIFFERENT FROM THAT OF
WOMEN AND WIVES. The differences cannot however be distinctly pointed
out, since the jealousy of married partners who love each other
spiritually, differs from that of married partners who love each other
merely naturally, and differs again with those who disagree in minds,
and also with those who have subjected their consorts to the yoke of
obedience. The jealousies of men and of women considered in themselves
are different, because from different origins: the origin of the
jealousies of men is in the understanding, whereas of women it is in the
will applied to the understanding of the husband: the jealousy of a man
therefore, is like a flame of wrath and anger; whereas that of a woman
is like a fire variously restrained, by fear, by regard to the husband,
by respect to her own love, and by her prudence in not revealing this
love to her husband by jealousy: they differ also because wives are
loves, and men recipients thereof; and wives are unwilling to squander
their love upon the men, but the case is not so with the recipients
towards the wives. With the spiritual, however, it is otherwise; with
these the jealousy of the man is transferred into the wife, as the love
of the wife is transferred into the husband; therefore with each party
it appears like itself against the attempts of a violator; but the
jealousy of the wife is inspired into the husband against the attempts
of the violating harlot, which is like grief weeping, and moving the
conscience.

       *       *       *       *       *

380. To the above I shall add two MEMORABLE RELATIONS. I was once in
much amazement at the great multitude of men who ascribe creation, and
consequently whatever is under the sun and above it, to nature;
expressing the real sentiments of their hearts as to the visible things
of the world, by this question, "What are these but the works of
nature?" And when they are asked why they ascribe them to nature and not
to God, when nevertheless they occasionally join in the general
confession, that God has created nature, and therefore they might as
well ascribe creation to God as to nature, they return for answer, with
an internal tone of voice, which is scarcely audible, "What is God but
nature?" From this persuasion concerning nature as the creator of the
universe, and from this folly which has to them the semblance of wisdom,
all such persons appear so full of their own importance, that they
regard all those who acknowledge the creation of the universe to be from
God, as so many ants which creep along the ground and tread in a beaten
path, and in some cases as butterflies which fly in the air; ridiculing
their opinions as dreams because they see what they do not see, and
deciding all by the question, "Who has seen God, and who has not seen
nature?" While I was thus amazed at the great multitude of such persons,
there stood near me an angel, who asked me, "What is the subject of your
meditation?" I replied, "It is concerning the great multitude of such as
believe that nature created the universe." The angel then said to me,
"All hell consists of such persons, who are there called satans and
devils; satans, if they have confirmed themselves in favor of nature to
the denial of God, and devils, if they have lived wickedly, and thereby
rejected all acknowledgement of God from their hearts; but I will lead
you to the _gymnasia_, which are in the south-west, where such persons
dwell, having not yet departed to their infernal abodes." He took me by
the hand and led me there. I saw some small houses, in which were
apartments for the studious, and in the midst of them one which served
as a principal hall to the rest. It was constructed of a pitchy kind of
stone, covered with a sort of glazed plates, that seemed to sparkle with
gold and silver, like the stones called _Glades Mariæ_; and here and
there were interspersed shells which glittered in like manner. We
approached and knocked at the door, which was presently opened by one
who bade us welcome. He then went to the table, and fetched four books,
and said, "These books are the wisdom which is at this day the
admiration of many kingdoms: this book or wisdom is the admiration of
many in France, this of many in Germany, this of some in Holland, and
this of some in England:" He further said, "If you wish to see it, I
will cause these four books to shine brightly before your eyes:" he then
poured forth and spread around them the glory of his own reputation, and
the books presently shone as with light; but this light instantly
vanished from our sight. We then asked him what he was now writing? He
replied, that he was now about to bring forth from his treasures, and
publish to the world, things of inmost wisdom, which would be comprised
under these general heads: I. Whether nature be derived from life, or
life from nature. II. Whether the centre be derived from the expanse, or
the expanse from the centre. III. On the centre and the expanse of
nature and of life. Having said this, he reclined on a couch at the
table; but we walked about in his spacious study. He had a candle on the
table, because the light of the sun never shone in that room, but only
the nocturnal light of the moon; and what surprised me, the candle
seemed to be carried all round the room, and to illuminate it; but, for
want of being snuffed, it gave but little light. While he was writing,
we saw images in various forms flying from the table towards the walls,
which in that nocturnal moon-light appeared like beautiful Indian birds;
but on opening the door, lo! in the light of the sun they appeared like
birds of the evening, with wings like network; for they were semblances
of truth made fallacies by being confirmed, which he had ingeniously
connected together into series. After attending some time to this sight,
we approached the table, and asked him what he was then writing? He
replied, "On the first general head, WHETHER NATURE BE DERIVED FROM
LIFE, OR LIFE FROM NATURE;" and on this question he said, that he could
confirm either side, and cause it to be true; but as something lay
concealed within which excited his fears, therefore he durst only
confirm this side, that nature is of life, that is, from life, but not
that life is of nature, that is, from it. We then civilly requested him
to tell us, what lay concealed within, which excited his fears? He
replied, he was afraid lest he should be called a naturalist, and so an
atheist, by the clergy, and a man of unsound reason by the laity; as
they both either believe from a blind credulity, or see from the sight
of those who confirm that credulity. But just then, being impelled by a
kind of indignant zeal for the truth, we addressed him in saying,
"Friend, you are much deceived; your wisdom, which is only an ingenious
talent for writing, has seduced you, and the glory of reputation has led
you to confirm what you do not believe. Do you know that the human mind
is capable of being elevated above sensual things, which are derived
into the thoughts from the bodily senses, and that when it is so
elevated, it sees the things that are of life above, and those that are
of nature beneath? What is life but love and wisdom? and what is nature
but their recipient, whereby they may produce their effects or uses? Can
these possibly be one in any other sense than as principal and
instrumental are one? Can light be one with the eye, or sound with the
ear? Whence are the senses of these organs but from life, and their
forms but from nature? What is the human body but an organ of life? Are
not all things therein organically formed to produce the things which
the love wills and the understanding thinks? Are not the organs of the
body from nature, and love and thought from life? And are not those
things entirely distinct from each other? Raise the penetration of your
ingenuity a little, and you will see that it is the property of life to
be affected and to think, and that to be affected is from love, and to
think is from wisdom, and each is from life; for, as we have said, love
and wisdom are life: if you elevate your faculty of understanding a
little higher, you will see that no love and wisdom exists, unless its
origin be somewhere or other, and that its origin is wisdom itself, and
thence life itself, and these are God from whom is nature." Afterwards
we conversed with him about his second question, WHETHER THE CENTRE BE
OF THE EXPANSE, OR THE EXPANSE OF THE CENTRE; and asked him why he
discussed this question? He replied, "With a view to conclude concerning
the centre and the expanse of nature and of life, thus concerning the
origin of each." And when we asked him what were his sentiments on the
subject, he answered, as in the former case, that he could confirm
either side, but for fear of suffering in his reputation, he would
confirm that the expanse is of the centre, that is, from the centre;
although I know, said he, that something existed before the sun, and
this in the universe throughout, and that these things flowed together
of themselves into order, thus into centres. But here again we addressed
him from the overflowing of an indignant zeal, and said, "Friend, you
are insane." On hearing these words, he drew his couch aside from the
table, and looked timidly at us, and then listened to our conversation,
but with a smile upon his countenance, while we thus proceeded: "What is
a surer proof of insanity, than to say that the centre is from the
expanse? By your centre we understand the sun, and by your expanse the
universe; and thus, according to you, the universe existed without the
sun: but does not the sun make nature, and all its properties, which
depend solely on the heat and light proceeding from the sun by the
atmospheres? Where were those things previous to the sun's existence?
But whence they originated we will shew presently. Are not the
atmospheres and all things which exist on the earth, as surfaces, and
the sun their centre? What are they all without the sun; or how could
they subsist a single moment in the sun's absence? Consequently what
were they all before the sun, or how could they subsist? Is not
subsistence perpetual existence? Since therefore all the parts of nature
derive their subsistence from the sun, they must of consequence derive
also their existence from the same origin: every one sees and is
convinced of this truth by the testimony of his own eyes. Does not that
which is posterior subsist from what is prior, as it exists from what is
prior? Supposing the surface to be the prior and the centre the
posterior, would not the prior in such case subsist from the posterior,
which yet is contrary to the laws of order? How can posterior things
produce prior, or exterior things produce interior, or grosser things
produce purer? consequently, how can surfaces, which constitute the
expanse, produce centres? Who does not see that this is contrary to the
laws of nature? We have adduced these arguments from a rational
analysis, to prove that the expanse exists from the centre, and not the
centre from the expanse; nevertheless every one who sees aright, sees it
to be so without the help of such arguments. You have asserted, that the
expanse flowed together of itself into a centre; did it thus flow by
chance into so wonderful and stupendous an order, where one thing exists
for the sake of another, and everything for the sake of man, and with a
view to his eternal life? Is it possible that nature from any principle
of love, by any principle of wisdom, should provide such things? And can
nature make angels of men, and heaven of angels? Ponder and consider
these things: and your idea of nature existing from nature will fall to
the ground." Afterwards we questioned him as to his former and present
sentiments concerning his third inquiry, relating to the CENTRE AND
EXPANSE OF NATURE AND OF LIKE; whether he was of opinion that the centre
and expanse of life are the same with the centre and expanse of nature?
He replied, that he was in doubt about it, and that he formerly thought
that the interior activity of nature is life; and that love and wisdom,
which essentially constitute the life of man, are thence derived; and
that the sun's fire, by the instrumentality of heat and light, through
the mediums of the atmospheres, produce those principles; but that now,
from what he had heard concerning the eternal life of men, he began to
waver in his sentiments, and that in consequence of such wavering, his
mind was sometimes carried upwards, sometimes downwards; and that when
it was carried upwards, he acknowledged a centre of which he had before
no idea; but when downwards, he saw a centre which he believed to be the
only one that existed; and that life is from the centre which before was
unknown to him; and nature is from the centre which he before believed
to be the only one existing; and that each centre has an expanse around
it. To this we said, Well, if he would only respect the centre and
expanse of nature from the centre and expanse of life, and not
contrariwise; and we informed him, that above the angelic heaven there
is a sun which is pure love, in appearance very like the sun of the
world; and that from the heat which proceeds from that sun, angels and
men derive will and love, and from its light they derive understanding
and wisdom; and that the things which are of life, are called spiritual
and that those which proceed from the sun of the world, are what contain
life, and are called natural; also that the expanse of the centre of
life is called the SPIRITUAL WORLD, which subsists from its sun, and
that the expanse of nature is called the NATURAL WORLD, which subsists
from its sun. Now, since of love and wisdom there cannot be predicated
spaces and times, but instead thereof states, it follows, that the
expanse around the sun of the angelic heaven is not extended, but still
is in the extense of the natural sun, and present with all living
subjects therein according to their receptions, which are according to
forms. But he then asked, "Whence comes the fire of the sun of the
world, or of nature?" We replied, that it is derived from the sun of the
angelic heaven, which is not fire, but divine love proximately
proceeding from God, who is love itself. As he was surprised at this, we
thus proved it: "Love in its essence is spiritual fire; hence fire in
the Word, in its spiritual sense, signifies love: it is on this account
that priests, when officiating in the temple, pray that heavenly fire
may fill their hearts, by which they mean heavenly love: the fire of the
altar and of the candlestick in the tabernacle amongst the Israelites,
represented divine love: the heat of the blood, or the vital heat of men
and animals in general is from no other source than love, which
constitutes their life: hence it is that a man is enkindled, grows warm,
and becomes on fire, while his love is exalted into zeal, anger, and
wrath; wherefore from the circumstance, that spiritual heat, which is
love, produces natural heat with men, even to the kindling and inflaming
of their faces and limbs, it may appear, that the fire of the natural
sun has existed from no other source than the fire of the spiritual sun,
which is divine love. Now, since the expanse originates from the centre,
and not the centre from the expanse, as we said above, and the centre of
life, which is the sun of the angelic heaven, is divine love proximately
proceeding from God, who is in the midst of that sun; and since the
expanse of that centre, which is called the spiritual world, is hence
derived; and since from that sun existed the sun of the world, and from
the latter its expanse, which is called the natural world; it is
evident, that the universe was created by one God." With these words we
took our leave, and he attended us out of the court of his study, and
conversed with us respecting heaven and hell, and the divine government,
from a new acuteness of genius.

381. THE SECOND MEMORABLE RELATION. On a time as I was looking around
into the world of spirits, I saw at a distance a palace surrounded and
as it were besieged by a crowd; I also saw many running towards it.
Wondering what this could mean, I speedily left the house, and asked one
of those who were running, what was the matter at the palace? He
replied, that three new comers from the world had been taken up into
heaven, and had there seen magnificent things, also maidens and wives of
astonishing beauty; and that being let down from heaven they had entered
into that palace, and were relating what they had seen; especially that
they had beheld such beauties as their eyes had never before seen, or
can see, unless illustrated by the light of heavenly _aura_. Respecting
themselves they said, that in the world they had been orators, from the
kingdom of France, and had applied themselves to the study of eloquence,
and that now they were seized with a desire of making an oration on the
origin of beauty. When this was made known in the neighbourhood, the
multitude flocked together to hear them. Upon receiving this
information, I hastened also myself, and entered the palace, and saw the
three men standing in the midst, dressed in long robes of a sapphire
color, which, having threads of gold in their texture at every change of
posture shone as if they had been golden. They stood ready to speak
behind a kind of stage; and presently one of them rose on a step behind
the stage, and delivered his sentiments concerning the origin of the
beauty of the female sex, in the following words.

382. "What is the origin of beauty but love, which, when it flows into
the eyes of youths, and sets them on becomes beauty? therefore love and
beauty are the same thing; for love, from an inmost principle, tinges
the face of a marriageable maiden with a kind of flame, from the
transparence of which is derived the dawn and bloom of her life. Who
does not know that the flame emits rays into her eyes, and spreads from
these as centres into the countenance, and also descends into the
breast, and sets the heart on fire, and thereby affects (a youth), just
as a fire with its heat and light affects a person standing near it?
That heat is love, and that light is the beauty of love. The whole world
is agreed, and firm in the opinion, that every one is lovely and
beautiful according to his love: nevertheless the love of the male sex
differs from that of the female. Male love is the love of growing wise,
and female love is that of loving the love of growing wise in the male;
so far therefore as a youth is the love of growing wise, so far he is
lovely and beautiful to a maiden; and so far as a maiden is the love of
a youth's wisdom, so far she is lovely and beautiful to a youth;
wherefore as love meets and kisses the love of another, so also do
beauties. I conclude therefore, that love forms beauty into a
resemblance of itself."

383. After him arose a second, with a view of discovering, in a neat and
elegant speech, the origin of beauty. He expressed himself thus: "I have
heard that love is the origin of beauty; but I cannot agree with this
opinion. What human being knows what love is? Who has ever contemplated
it with any idea of thought? Who has ever seen it with the eye? Let such
a one tell me where it is to be found. But I assert that wisdom is the
origin of beauty; in women a wisdom which lies concealed and stored up
in the inmost principles of the mind, in men a wisdom which manifests
itself, and is apparent. Whence is a man (_homo_) a man but from wisdom?
Were it not so, a man would be a statue or a picture. What does a maiden
attend to in a youth, but the quality of his wisdom; and what does a
youth attend to in a maiden, but the quality of her affection of his
wisdom? By wisdom I mean genuine morality; because this is the wisdom of
life. Hence it is, that when wisdom which lies concealed, approaches and
embraces wisdom which is manifest, as is the case interiorly in the
spirit of each, they mutually kiss and unite, and this is called love;
and in such case each of the parties appears beautiful to the other. In
a word, wisdom is like the light or brightness of fire, which impresses
itself on the eyes, and thereby forms beauty."

384. After him the third arose, and spoke to this effect: "It is neither
love alone nor wisdom alone, which is the origin of beauty; but it is
the union of love and wisdom; the union of love with wisdom in a youth,
and the union of wisdom with its love in a maiden: for a maiden does not
love wisdom in herself but in a youth, and hence sees him as beauty, and
when a youth sees this in a maiden, he then sees her as beauty;
therefore love by wisdom forms beauty, and wisdom grounded in love
receives it. That this is the case, appears manifestly in Heaven. I have
there seen maidens and wives, and have attentively considered their
beauties, and have observed, that beauty in maidens differs from beauty
in wives; in maidens being only the brightness, but in wives the
splendor of beauty. The difference appeared like that of a diamond
sparkling from light, and of a ruby shining from fire together with
light. What is beauty but the delight of the sight? and in what does
this delight originate but in the sport of love and wisdom? This sport
gives brilliancy to the sight, and this brilliancy vibrates from eye to
eye, and presents an exhibition of beauty. What constitutes beauty of
countenance, but red and white, and the lovely mixture thereof with each
other? and is not the red derived from love, and the white from wisdom?
love being red from its fire, and wisdom, white from its light. Both
these I have clearly seen in the faces of two married partners in
heaven; the redness of white in the wife, and the whiteness of red in
the husband; and I observed that they shone in consequence of mutually
looking at each other." When the third had thus concluded, the assembly
applauded and cried out, "He has gained the victory." Then on a sudden,
a flaming light, which is the light of conjugial love, filled the house
with its splendor, and the hearts of the company with satisfaction.

       *       *       *       *       *

ON THE CONJUNCTION OF CONJUGIAL LOVE WITH THE LOVE OF INFANTS.

385. There are evident signs that conjugial love and the love of
infants, which is called _storge_, are connected; and there are also
signs which may induce a belief that they are not connected; for there
is the love of infants with married partners who tenderly love each
other, and also with married partners who disagree entirely, and
likewise with those who are separated from each other, and in some cases
it is more tender and stronger with the latter than the former; but that
still the love of infants is always connected with conjugial love, may
appear from the origin from which it flows in; for although this origin
varies with the recipients, still those loves remain inseparable, just
as the first end in the last, which is the effect. The first end of
conjugial love is the procreation of offspring, and the last, or the
effect, is the offspring procreated. That the first end enters into the
effect, and is therein as in its origin, and does not withdraw from it,
may be seen from a rational view of the orderly progression of ends and
causes to effects. But as the reasonings of the generality commence
merely from effects, and from them proceed to some consequences thence
resulting, and do not commence from causes, and from them proceed
analytically to effects, and so forth; therefore the rational principles
of light must needs become the obscure principles of cloud; whence come
derivations from truth, arising from appearances and fallacies. But that
it may be seen that conjugial love and the love of infants are
interiorly connected, although exteriorly disjointed, we will proceed to
demonstrate it in the following order. I. _Two universal spheres proceed
from the Lord to preserve the universe in its created State; of which
the one is the sphere of procreating, and the other the sphere of
protecting the things procreated._ II. _These two universal spheres make
a one with the sphere of conjugial love and the sphere of the love of
infants._ III. _These two spheres universally and singularly flow into
all things of heaven, and all things of the world from first to last._
IV. _The sphere of the love of infants is a sphere of protection and
support of those who cannot protect and support themselves._ V. _This
sphere affects both the evil and the good, and disposes every one to
love, protect, and support his offspring from his own love._ VI. _This
sphere principally affects the female sex, thus mothers, and the male
sex, or fathers, by derivation from them._ VII. _This sphere is also a
sphere of innocence and peace from the Lord._ VIII. _The sphere of
innocence flows into infants, and through them into the parents, and
affects them._ IX, _It also flows into the souls of the parents, and
unites with the same sphere (as operative) with the infants; and it is
principally insinuated by means of the touch._ X. _In the degree in
which innocence retires from infants, affection and conjunction also
abate, and this successively even to separation._ XI. _A state of
rational innocence and peace with parents towards infants is grounded on
the circumstance, that they know nothing and can do nothing from
themselves, but from others, especially from the father and mother; and
that this state also successively retires, in proportion as they know
and have ability from themselves, and not from others._ XII. _The above
sphere advances in order from the end through causes into effects and
makes periods; whereby creation is preserved in the state foreseen and
provided for._ XIII. _The love of infants descends and does not ascend._
XIV. _Wives have one state of love before conception and another after,
even to the birth._ XV. _With parents conjugial love is conjoined with
the love of infants by spiritual causes, and thence by natural._ XVI.
_The love of infants and children is different with spiritual married
partners from what it is with natural._ XVII. _With spiritual married
partners that love is from what is interior or prior, but with natural
from what is exterior or posterior._ XVIII. _In consequence hereof that
love prevails with married partners who mutually love each other, and
also with those who do not at all love each other._ XIX. _The love of
infants remains after death, especially with women._ XX. _Infants are
educated under the Lord's auspices by such women, and grow in stature
and intelligence as in the world._ XXI. _It is there provided by the
Lord, that with those infants the innocence of infancy becomes the
innocence of wisdom, and thus the infants become angels._ We now proceed
to an explanation of each article.

386. I. TWO UNIVERSAL SPHERES PROCEED FROM THE LORD TO PRESERVE THE
UNIVERSE IN ITS CREATED STATE; OF WHICH THE ONE IS THE SPHERE OF
PROCREATING AND THE OTHER THE SPHERE OF PROTECTING THE THINGS
PROCREATED. The divine which proceeds from the Lord is called a sphere,
because it goes forth from him, surrounds him, fills both the spiritual
and the natural world, and produces the effects of the ends which the
Lord predestinated in creation, and provides since creation. All that
which flows from a subject, and surrounds and environs it, is named a
sphere; as in the case of the sphere of light from the sun around it, of
the sphere of life from man around him, of the sphere of odor from a
plant around it, of the sphere of attraction from the magnet around it,
and so forth: but the universal spheres of which we are here treating,
are from the Lord around him; and they proceed from the sun of the
spiritual world, in the midst of which he is. From the Lord by means of
that sun, proceeds a sphere of heat and light, or what is the same, a
sphere of love and wisdom, to produce ends, which are uses; but that
sphere according to uses, is distinguished by various names: the divine
sphere which looks to the preservation of the universe in its created
state by successive generations, is called the sphere of procreating;
and the divine sphere which looks to the preservation of generations in
their beginnings, and afterwards in their progressions, is called the
sphere of protecting the things procreated: besides these two, there are
several other divine spheres which are named according to their uses,
consequently variously, as may be seen above, n. 222. The operations of
uses by these spheres are the divine providence.

387. II. THESE TWO UNIVERSAL SPHERES MAKE A ONE WITH THE SPHERE OF
CONJUGIAL LOVE AND THE SPHERE OF THE LOVE OF INFANTS. That the sphere of
conjugial love makes a one with the sphere of procreating, is evident;
for procreation is the end, and conjugial love the mediate cause by
which (the end is promoted), and the end and the cause in what is to be
effected and in effects, act in unity, because they act together. That
the sphere of the love of infants makes a one with the sphere of
protecting the things procreated, is also evident, because it is the end
proceeding from the foregoing end, which was procreation, and the love
of infants is its mediate cause by which it is promoted: for ends
advance in a series, one after another, and in their progress the last
end becomes the first, and thereby advances further, even to the
boundary, in which they subsist or cease. But on this subject more will
be seen in the explanation of article XII.

388. III. THESE TWO SPHERES UNIVERSALLY AND SINGULARLY FLOW INTO ALL
THINGS OF HEAVEN AND ALL THINGS OF THE WORLD, FROM FIRST TO LAST. It is
said universally and singularly, because when mention is made of a
universal, the singulars of which it is composed are meant at the same
time; for a universal exists from and consists of singulars; thus it
takes its name from them, as a whole exists from, consists of, and takes
its name from its parts; therefore, if you take away singulars, a
universal is only a name, and is like a mere surface which contains
nothing: consequently to attribute to God universal government, and to
take away singulars, is vain talk and empty preaching: nor is it to the
purpose, in this case, to urge a comparison with the universal
government of the kings of the earth. From this ground then it is said,
that those two spheres flow in universally and singularly.

389. The reason why the spheres of procreating and of protecting the
things procreated, or the spheres of conjugial love and the love of
infants, flow into all thing of heaven and all things of the world, from
first (principles) to last, is because all things which proceed from the
Lord, or from the sun which is from him and in which he is, pervade the
created universe even to the last of all its principles: the reason of
this is, because divine things, which in progression are called
celestial and spiritual, have no relation to space and time. That
extension cannot be predicated of things spiritual, in consequence of
their not having any relation to space and time, is well known: hence
whatever proceeds from the Lord, is in an instant from first
(principles) in last. That the sphere of conjugial love is thus
universal may be seen above, n. 222-225. That in like manner the sphere
of the love of infants is universal, is evident from that love's
prevailing in heaven, where there are infants from the earths; and from
that love's prevailing in the world with men, beasts and birds, serpents
and insects. Something resembling this love prevails also in the
vegetable and mineral kingdoms; in the vegetable, in that seeds are
guarded by shells or husks as by swaddling clothes, and moreover are in
the fruit as in a house, and are nourished with juice as with milk; that
there is something similar in minerals, is plain from the matrixes and
external covering, in which noble gems and metals are concealed and
guarded.

390. The reason why the sphere of procreating, and the sphere of
protecting the things procreated, make a one in a continual series, is,
because the love of procreating is continued into the love of what is
procreated. The quality of the love of procreating is known from its
delight, which is supereminent and transcendent. This love influences
the state of procreating with men, and in a remarkable manner the state
of reception with women; and this very exalted delight with its love
continues even to the birth, and there attains its fulness.

391. IV. THE SPHERE OF THE LOVE OF INFANTS IS A SPHERE OF PROTECTION AND
SUPPORT OF THOSE WHO CANNOT PROTECT AND SUPPORT THEMSELVES. That the
operations of uses from the Lord by spheres proceeding from him, are the
divine providence, was said above, n. 386; this divine providence
therefore is meant by the sphere of protection and support of those who
cannot protect and support themselves: for it is a law of creation that
the things created are to be preserved, guarded, protected, and
supported; otherwise the universe would fall to decay: but as this
cannot be done immediately from the Lord with living creatures, who are
left to their own choice, it is done mediately by his love implanted in
fathers, mothers, and nurses. That their love is from the Lord
influencing them, is not known to themselves, because they do not
perceive the influx, and still less the Lord's omnipresence: but who
does not see, that this principle is not of nature, but of the divine
providence operating in and by nature; and that such a universal
principle cannot exist except from God, by a certain spiritual sun,
which is in the centre of the universe, and whose operation, being
without space and time, is instant and present from first principles in
last? But in what manner that divine operation, which is the Lord's
divine providence, is received by animate subjects, will be shewn in
what follows. That mothers and fathers protect and support infants,
because they cannot protect and support themselves, is not the cause of
that love, but is a rational cause derived from that love's falling into
the understanding; for a man, from this cause alone, without love
inspired and inspiring it, or without law and punishment compelling him,
would no more than a statue provide for infants.

392. V. THIS SPHERE AFFECTS BOTH THE EVIL AND THE GOOD, AND DISPOSES
EVERY ONE TO LOVE, PROTECT, AND SUPPORT HIS OFFSPRING FROM HIS OWN LOVE.
Experience testifies that the love of infants prevails equally with the
evil and the good, and in like manner with tame and wild beasts; yea,
that in some cases it is stronger and more ardent in its influence on
evil men, and also on wild beasts. The reason of this is, because all
love proceeding from the Lord and flowing into subjects, is changed in
the subject into the love of its life; for every animate subject has no
other sensation than that its love originates in itself, as it does not
perceive the influx; and while also it actually loves itself, it makes
the love of infants proper to itself; for it sees as it were itself in
them, and them in itself, and itself thus united with them. Hence also
this love is fiercer with wild beasts, as with lions and lionesses, he
and she bears, leopards and leopardesses, he and she wolves, and others
of a like nature, than with horses, deer, goats, and sheep; because
those wild beasts have dominion over the tame, and hence self-love is
predominant, and this loves itself in its offspring; therefore as we
said, the influent love is turned into self-love. Such an inversion of
the influent love into self-love, and the consequent protection and
support of the young offspring by evil parents, is of the Lord's divine
providence; for otherwise there would remain but few of the human race,
and none of the savage beasts, which, nevertheless, are of use. From
these considerations it is evident, that every one is disposed to love,
protect, and support his offspring, from his own love.

393. VI. THIS SPHERE PRINCIPALLY AFFECTS THE FEMALE SEX, THUS MOTHERS
AND THE MALE SEX, OR FATHERS, BY DERIVATION FROM THEM. This follows from
what was said above, in regard to the origin of conjugial love,--that
the sphere of conjugial love is received by the women, and through them
is transferred to the men: because women are born loves of the
understanding of the men, and the understanding is a recipient. The case
is the same with the love of infants, because this originates in
conjugial love. It is well known that mothers are influenced by a most
tender love of infants, and fathers by a love less tender. That the love
of infants is inherent in conjugial love, into which women are born, is
evident from the amiable and endearing love of girls towards infants,
and towards their dolls, which they carry, dress, kiss, and press to
their bosoms: boys are not influenced by any such affection. It appears
as if mothers derived the love of infants from nourishing them in the
womb out of their own blood, and from the consequent appropriation of
their life, and thus from sympathetic union: but still this is not the
origin of that love; for if another infant, without the mother's
knowledge, were to be put after the birth in the place of the genuine
infant, the mother would love it with equal tenderness as if it were her
own: moreover infants are sometimes loved by their nurses more than by
their mothers. From these considerations it follows, that this love is
from no other source than from the conjugial love implanted in every
woman, to which is joined the love of conceiving; from the delight of
which the wife is prepared for reception. This is the first of the above
love, which with its delight after the birth passes fully to the
offspring.

394. VII. THIS SPHERE IS ALSO A SPHERE OF INNOCENCE AND PEACE (FROM THE
LORD). Innocence and peace are the two inmost principles of heaven; they
are called inmost principles, because they proceed immediately from the
Lord: for the Lord is innocence itself and peace itself. From innocence
the Lord is called a Lamb, and from peace he saith, "_Peace I leave you;
my peace I give you_," John xiv. 27; and he is also meant by the peace
with which the disciples were to salute a city or house which they
entered; and of which it is said, that if it was worthy, peace would
come upon it, and if not worthy, peace would return, Matt. x. 11-15.
Hence also the Lord is called the Prince of peace, Isaiah ix. 5, 6. A
further reason why innocence and peace are the inmost principles of
heaven, is, because innocence is the _esse_ of every good, and peace is
the blessed principle of every delight which is of good. See the work on
HEAVEN AND HELL, as to the state of innocence of the angels of heaven,
n. 276-283; and as to peace in heaven, n. 284-290.

395. VIII. THE SPHERE OF INNOCENCE FLOWS INTO INFANTS, AND THROUGH THEM
INTO THE PARENTS, AND AFFECTS THEM. It is well known that infants are
innocences; but it is not known that their innocence flows in from the
Lord. It flows in from the Lord, because, as was said just above, he is
innocence itself; neither can any thing flow in, since it cannot exist
except from its first principle, which is IT itself. But we will briefly
describe the nature and quality of the innocence of infants, which
affects parents: it shines forth from their face, from some of their
gestures, and from their first speech, and affects them. They have
innocence, because they do not think from any interior principle; for
they do not as yet know what is good and evil, and what is true and
false, as the ground of their thoughts; in consequence of which they
have not a prudence originating in selfhood, nor any deliberate purpose;
of course they do not regard any evil as an end. They are free from
selfhood acquired from self-love and the love of the world; they do not
attribute any thing to themselves; they refer to their parents whatever
they receive; content with the trifles which are given them as presents,
they have no care about food and raiment, or about the future; they do
not look to the world, and immerse themselves thereby in the desire of
many things; they love their parents, their nurses, and their infant
companions, with whom they play in innocence; they suffer themselves to
be guided, they harken and obey. This is the innocence of infancy, which
is the cause of the love called _storge_.

396. IX. IT ALSO FLOWS IN TO THE SOULS OF THE PARENTS, AND UNITES WITH
THE SAME SPHERE (AS OPERATIVE) WITH THE INFANTS, AND IT IS PRINCIPALLY
INSINUATED BY MEANS OF THE TOUCH. The Lord's innocence flows into the
angels of the third heaven, where all are in the innocence of wisdom,
and passes through the inferior heavens, but only through the innocences
of the angels therein, and thus immediately and mediately flows into
infants. These differ but little from graven forms; but still they are
receptible of life from the Lord through the heavens. Yet, unless the
parents also received that influx in their souls, and in the inmost
principles of their minds, they would in vain be affected by the
innocence of the infants. There must be something adequate and similar
in another, whereby communication may be effected, and which may cause
reception, affection, and thence conjunction; otherwise it would be like
soft seed falling upon a stone, or a lamb exposed to a wolf. From this
ground then it is, that innocence flowing into the souls of the parents,
unites with the innocence of the infants. Experience may shew that, with
the parents, this conjunction is effected by the mediation of the bodily
senses, but especially by the touch: as that the sight is intimately
delighted by seeing them, the hearing by their speech, the smelling by
their odor. That the communication and therefore the conjunction of
innocence is principally effected by the touch, is evident from the
satisfaction of carrying them in the arms, from fondling and kissing
them, especially in the case of mothers, who are delighted in laying
their mouth and face upon their bosoms, and at the same time in touching
the same with the palms of their hands, in general, in giving them milk
by suckling them at the breasts, moreover, in stroking their naked body,
and the unwearied pains they take in washing and dressing them on their
laps. That the communications of love and its delights between married
partners are effected by the sense of the touch has been occasionally
proved above. The reason why communications of the mind are also
effected by the same sense is, because the hands are a man's ultimates,
and his first principles are together in the ultimates, whereby also all
things of the body and of the mind are kept together in an inseparable
connection. Hence it is, that Jesus touched infants, Matt, xviii. 2-6;
Mark x. 13-16; and that he healed the sick by the touch: and that those
who touched him were healed: hence also it is, that inaugurations into
the priesthood are at this day effected by the laying on of hands. From
these considerations it is evident, that the innocence of parents and
the innocence of infants meet each other by the touch, especially of the
hands, and thereby join themselves together as by kisses.

397. That innocence produces similar effects with beasts and birds as
with men, and that by contact, is well known: the reason of this is,
because all that proceeds from the Lord, in an instant pervades the
universe, as may be seen above, n. 388-390; and as it proceeds by
degrees, and by continual mediations, therefore it passes not only to
animals, but also to vegetables and minerals; see n. 389; it also passes
into the earth itself, which is the mother of all vegetables and
minerals; for the earth, in the spring, is in a prepared state for the
reception of seeds, as it were in the womb; and when it receives them,
it, as it were, conceives, cherishes them, bears, excludes, suckles,
nourishes, clothes, educates, guards, and, as it were, loves the
offspring derived from them, and so forth. Since the sphere of
procreation proceeds thus far, how much more must it proceed to animals
of every kind, even to worms! That as the earth is the common mother of
vegetables, so there is also a common mother of bees in every hive, is a
well known tact, confirmed by observation.

398. X. IN THE DEGREE IN WHICH INNOCENCE RETIRES FROM INFANTS, AFFECTION
AND CONJUNCTION ALSO ABATE, AND THIS SUCCESSIVELY EVEN TO SEPARATION. It
is well known that the love of infants, or _storge_, retires from
parents according as innocence retires from them; and that, in the case
of men, it retires even to the separation of children from home, and in
the case of beasts and birds, to a rejection from their presence, and a
total forgetfulness of relationship. From this circumstance, as an
established fact, it may further appear, that innocence flowing in on
each side produces the love called _storge_.

399. XI. A STATE OF RATIONAL INNOCENCE AND PEACE WITH PARENTS TOWARDS
INFANTS, IS GROUNDED IN THE CIRCUMSTANCE, THAT THEY KNOW NOTHING AND CAN
DO NOTHING FROM THEMSELVES, BUT FROM OTHERS, ESPECIALLY FROM THE FATHER
AND MOTHER; AND THIS STATE SUCCESSIVELY RETIRES, IN PROPORTION AS THEY
KNOW AND HAVE ABILITY FROM THEMSELVES, AND NOT FROM OTHERS. That the
sphere of the love of infants is a sphere of protection and support of
those who cannot protect and support themselves, was shewn above in its
proper article, n. 391: that this is only a rational cause with men, but
not the very essential cause of that love prevailing with them, was also
mentioned in the same article. The real original cause of that love is
innocence from the Lord, which flows in while the man is ignorant of it,
and produces the above rational cause; therefore as the first cause
produces a retiring from that love, so also does the second cause at the
same time; or what is the same, as the communication of innocence
retires, so also the persuading reason accompanies it; but this is the
case only with man to the intent that he may do what he does from
freedom according to reason, and from this, as from a rational and at
the same time a moral law, may support his adult offspring according to
the requirements of necessity and usefulness. This second cause does not
influence animals who are without reason, they being affected only by
the prior cause, which to them is instinct.

400. XII. THE SPHERE OF THE LOVE OF PROCREATING ADVANCES IN ORDER FROM
THE END THROUGH CAUSES INTO EFFECTS, AND MAKES PERIODS; WHEREBY CREATION
IS PRESERVED IN THE STATE FORESEEN AND PROVIDED FOR. All operations in
the universe have a progression from ends through causes into effects.
These three are in themselves indivisible, although in idea they appear
divided; but still the end, unless the intended effect is seen together
with it, is not any thing; nor does either become any thing, unless the
cause supports, contrives, and conjoins it. Such a progression is
inherent in every man in general, and in every particular, altogether as
will, understanding, and action: every end in regard to man relates to
the will, every cause to the understanding, and every effect to the
action; in like manner, every end relates to love, every efficient cause
to wisdom, and every effect thence derived to use. The reason of this
is, because the receptacle of love is the will, the receptacle of wisdom
is the understanding, and the receptacle of use is action: since
therefore operations in general and in particular with man advance from
the will through the understanding into act, so also do they advance
from love through wisdom into use. By wisdom here we mean all that which
belongs to judgement and thought. That these three are a one in the
effect, is evident. That they also make a one in ideas before the
effect, is perceived from the consideration, that determination only
intervenes; for in the mind an end goes forth from the will and produces
for itself a cause in the understanding, and presents to itself an
intention; and intention is as an act before determination; hence it is,
that by a wise man, and also by the Lord, intention is accepted as an
act. What rational person cannot see, or, when he hears, acknowledge,
that those three principles flow from some first cause, and that that
cause is, that from the Lord, the Creator and Conservator of the
universe, there continually proceed love, wisdom, and use, and these
three are one? Tell, if you can, in what other source they originate.

401. A similar progression from end through cause into effect belongs
also to the sphere of procreating and of protecting the things
procreated. The end in this case is the will or love of procreating; the
middle cause, by which the end is effected and into which it infuses
itself, is conjugial love; the progressive series of efficient causes is
the loving, conception, gestation of the embryo or offspring to be
procreated; and the effect is the offspring itself procreated. But
although end, cause, and effect successively advance as three things,
still in the love of procreating, and inwardly in all the causes, and in
the effect itself, they make a one. They are the efficient causes only,
which advance through times, because in nature; while the end or will,
or love, remains continually the same: for ends advance in nature
through times without time; but they cannot come forth and manifest
themselves, until the effect or use exists and becomes a subject; before
this, the love could love only the advance, but could not secure and fix
itself. That there are periods of such progressions, and that creation
is thereby preserved in the state foreseen and provided for, is well
known. But the series of the love of infants from its greatest to its
least, thus to the boundary in which it subsists or ceases, is
retrograde; since it is according to the decrease of innocence in the
subject, and also on account of the periods.

402. XIII. THE LOVE OF INFANTS DESCENDS, AND DOES NOT ASCEND. That it
descends from generation to generation, or from sons and daughters to
grandsons and granddaughters, and does not ascend from these to fathers
and mothers of families, is well known. The cause of its increase in
descent is the love of fructifying, or of producing uses, and in respect
to the human race, it is the love of multiplying it; but this derives
its origin solely from the Lord, who, in the multiplication of the human
race, regards the conservation of creation, and as the ultimate end
thereof, the angelic heaven, which is solely from the human race; and
since the angelic heaven is the end of ends, and thence the love of
loves with the Lord, therefore there is implanted in the souls of men,
not only the love of procreating, but also of loving the things
procreated in successions: hence also this love exists only with man and
not with any beast or bird. That this love with man descends increasing,
is in consequence of the glory of honor, which in like manner increases
with him according to amplifications. That the love of honor and glory
receives into itself the love of infants flowing from the Lord, and
makes it as it were its own, will be seen in article XVI.

403. XIV. WIVES HAVE ONE STATE OF LOVE BEFORE CONCEPTION AND ANOTHER
AFTER, EVEN TO THE BIRTH. This is adduced to the end that it may be
known, that the love of procreating, and the consequent love of what is
procreated, is implanted in conjugial love with women, and that with
them those two loves are divided, while the end, which is the love of
procreating, begins its progression. That the love called _storge_ is
then transferred from the wife to the husband; and also that the love of
procreating, which, as we said, with a woman makes one with her
conjugial love, is then not alike, is evident from several indications.

404. XV. WITH PARENTS CONJUGIAL LOVE IS CONJOINED WITH THE LOVE OF
INFANTS BY SPIRITUAL CAUSES, AND THENCE BY NATURAL. The spiritual causes
are, that the human race may be multiplied, and from this the angelic
heaven enlarged, and that thereby such may be born as will become
angels, serving the Lord to promote uses in heaven, and by consociation
with men also in the earths: for every man has angels associated with
him from the Lord; and such is his conjunction with them, that if they
were taken away, he would instantly die. Caesar disappointed expectation
by refusing to punish any one of his political opponents. He killed no
one. He deprived no one of his property. He even protected the
money-lenders, and made the Jews his constant friends. Debts he insisted
must be paid, bonds fulfilled, the rights of property respected,
no matter what wild hopes imagination might have indulged in.
Something only he remitted of the severity of interest, and the poor
in the city were allowed their lodgings rent free for a year.

He restored quiet, and gave as much satisfaction as circumstances
permitted. His real difficulty was with the legions, who had come
back from Greece. They had deserved admirably well, but they were
unfortunately over-conscious of their merits. Ill-intentioned officers
had taught them to look for extravagant rewards. Their expectations had
not been fulfilled; and when they supposed that their labors were
over, they received orders to prepare for a campaign in Africa. Sallust,
the historian, was in command of their quarters in Campania.
They mutinied, and almost killed him. He fled to Rome. The soldiers of
the favored 10th legion pursued him to the gates, and demanded speech
with Caesar. He bade them come to him, and with his usual fearlessness
told them to bring their swords.

The army was Caesar's life. In the army lay the future of Rome, if Rome
was to have a future. There, if anywhere, the national spirit survived.
It was a trying moment; but there was a calmness in Caesar, a rising
from a profound indifference to what man or fortune could give or take
from him, which no extremity could shake.
The legionaries entered the city, and Caesar directed them to state
their complaints. They spoke of their services and their sufferings.With natural fathers and mothers the love of
infants is indeed grounded also in innocence; but when the innocence is
received by them, it is entwined around their own love, and consequently
the love of their infants from the latter, and at the same time from the
former, kissing, embracing, and dangling them, hugging them to their
bosoms, and fawning upon and flattering them beyond all bounds,
regarding them as one heart and soul with themselves; and afterwards,
when they have passed the state of infancy even to boyhood and beyond
it, in which state innocence is no longer operative, they love them not
from any fear of God and actual piety, or the piety of life, nor from
any rational and moral intelligence they may have; neither do they
regard, or only very slightly, if at all, their internal affections, and
thence their virtues and good morals, but only their externals, which
they favor and indulge. To these externals their love is directed and
determined: hence also they close their eyes to their vices, excusing,
and favoring them. The reason of this is, because with such parents the
love of their offspring is also the love of themselves; and this love
adheres to the subject outwardly, without entering into it, as self does
not enter into itself.

406. The quality of the love of infants and of the love of children with
the spiritual and with the natural, is evidently discerned from them
after death; for most fathers, when they come into another life,
recollect their children who have died before them; they are also
presented to and mutually acknowledge each other. Spiritual fathers only
look at them, and inquire as to their present state, and rejoice if it
is well with them, and grieve if it is ill; and after some conversation,
instruction, and admonition respecting moral celestial life, they
separate from them, telling them, that they are no longer to be
remembered as fathers because the Lord is the only Father to all in
heaven, according to his words, Matt. xxiii. 9: and that they do not at
all remember them as children. But natural fathers, when they first
become conscious that they are living after death, and recall to mind
their children who have died before them, and also when, agreeably to
their wishes, they are presented to each other, they instantly embrace,
and become united like bundles of rods; and in this case the father is
continually delighted with beholding and conversing with them. If the
father is told that some of his children are satans, and that they have
done injuries to the good, he nevertheless keeps them in a group around
him, if he himself sees that they are the occasion of hurt and do
mischief, he still pays no attention to it, nor does he separate any of
them from association with himself; in order, therefore, to prevent the
continuance of such a mischievous company, they are of necessity
committed forthwith to hell; and there the father, before the children,
is shut up in confinement, and the children are separated, and each is
removed to the place of his life.

407. To the above I will add this wonderful relation:--in the spiritual
world I have seen fathers who, from hatred, and as it were rage, had
looked at infants presented before their eyes, with a mind so savage,
that, if they could, they would have murdered them; but on its being
hinted to them, though without truth, that they were their own infants,
their rage and savageness instantly subsided, and they loved them to
excess. This love and hatred prevail together with those who in the
world had been inwardly deceitful, and had set their minds in enmity
against the Lord.

408. XVII. WITH THE SPIRITUAL THAT LOVE IS FROM WHAT IS INTERIOR OR
PRIOR, BUT WITH THE NATURAL FROM WHAT IS EXTERIOR OR POSTERIOR. To think
and conclude from what is interior or prior, is to think and conclude
from ends and causes to effects; but to think and conclude from what is
exterior or posterior, is to think and conclude from effects to causes
and ends. The latter progression is contrary to order, but the former
according to it; for to think and conclude from ends and causes, is to
think and conclude from goods and truths, viewed in a superior region of
the mind, to effects in an inferior region. Real human rationality from
creation is of this quality. But to think and conclude from effects, is
to think and conclude from an inferior region of the mind, where the
sensual things of the body reside with their appearances and fallacies,
to guess at causes and effects, which in itself is merely to confirm
falsities and concupiscences, and afterwards to see and believe them to
be truths of wisdom and goodnesses of the love of wisdom. The case is
similar in regard to the love of infants and children with the spiritual
and the natural; the spiritual love them from what is prior, thus
according to order: but the natural love them from what is posterior,
thus contrary to order. These observations are adduced only for the
confirmation of the preceding article.

409. XVIII. IN CONSEQUENCE HEREOF THAT LOVE PREVAILS WITH MARRIED
PARTNERS WHO MUTUALLY LOVE EACH OTHER, AND ALSO WITH THOSE WHO DO NOT AT
ALL LOVE EACH OTHER; consequently it prevails with the natural as well
as with the spiritual; but the latter are influenced by conjugial love,
whereas the former are influenced by no such love but what is apparent
and pretended. The reason why the love of infants and conjugial love
still act in unity, is, because, as we have said, conjugial love is
implanted in every woman from creation, and together with it the love of
procreating, which is determined to and flows into the procreated
offspring, and from the women is communicated to the men. Hence in
houses, in which there is no conjugial love between the man and his
wife, it nevertheless is with the wife, and thereby some external
conjunction is effected with the man. From this same ground it is, that
even harlots love their offspring; for that which from creation is
implanted in souls, and respects propagation, is indelible, and cannot
be extirpated.

410. XIX. THE LOVE OF INFANTS REMAINS AFTER DEATH, ESPECIALLY WITH
WOMEN. Infants, as soon as they are raised up, which happens immediately
after their decease, are elevated into heaven, and delivered to angels
of the female sex, who in the life of the body in the world loved
infants, and at the same time feared God. These, having loved all
infants with maternal tenderness, receive them as their own; and the
infants in this case, as from an innate feeling, love them as their
mothers: as many infants are consigned to them, as they desire from a
spiritual _storge_. The heaven in which infants are appears in front in
the region of the forehead, in the line in which the angels look
directly at the Lord. That heaven is so situated, because all infants
are educated under the immediate auspices of the Lord. There is an
influx also into this heaven from the heaven of innocence, which is the
third heaven. When they have passed through this first period, they are
transferred to another heaven, where they are instructed.

411. XX. INFANTS ARE EDUCATED UNDER THE LORD'S AUSPICES BY SUCH WOMEN,
AND GROW IN STATURE AND INTELLIGENCE AS IN THE WORLD. Infants in heaven
are educated in the following manner; they learn to speak from the
female angel who has the charge of their education; their first speech
is merely the sound of affection, in which however there is some
beginning of thought, whereby what is human in the sound is
distinguished from the sound of an animal; this speech gradually becomes
more distinct, as ideas derived from affection enter the thought: all
their affections, which also increase, proceed from innocence. At first,
such things are insinuated into them as appear before their eyes, and
are delightful; and as these are from a spiritual origin, heavenly
things flow into them at the same time, whereby the interiors of their
minds are opened. Afterwards, as the infants are perfected in
intelligence, so they grow in stature, and viewed in this respect, they
appear also more adult, because intelligence and wisdom are essential
spiritual nourishment; therefore those things which nourish their minds,
also nourish their bodies. Infants in heaven, however, do not grow up
beyond their first age, where they stop, and remain in it to eternity.
And when they are in that age, they are given in marriage, which is
provided by the Lord, and is celebrated in the heaven of the youth, who
presently follows the wife into her heaven, or into her house, if they
are of the same society. That I might know of a certainty, that infants
grow in stature, and arrive at maturity as they grow in intelligence, I
was permitted to speak with some while they were infants, and afterwards
when they were grown up; and they appeared as full-grown youths, in a
stature, like that of young men full grown in the world.

412. Infants are instructed especially by representatives adequate and
suitable to their genius; the great beauty and interior wisdom of which
can scarcely be credited in the world. I am permitted to adduce here two
representations, from which a judgement may be formed in regard to the
rest. On a certain time they represented the Lord ascending from the
sepulchre, and at the same time the unition of his human with the
divine. At first they presented the idea of a sepulchre, but not at the
same time the idea of the Lord, except so remotely, that it was
scarcely, and as it were at a distance, perceived that it was the Lord;
because in the idea of a sepulchre there is somewhat funereal, which
they hereby removed. Afterwards they cautiously admitted into the
sepulchre a sort of atmosphere, appearing nevertheless as a thin vapor,
by which they signified, and this with a suitable degree of remoteness,
spiritual life in baptism. They afterwards represented the Lord's
descent to those who were bound, and his ascent with them into heaven;
and in order to accommodate the representation to their infant minds,
they let down small cords that were scarcely discernible, exceedingly
soft and yielding, to aid the Lord in the ascent, being always
influenced by a holy fear lest any thing in the representation should
affect something that was not under heavenly influence: not to mention
other representations, whereby infants are introduced into the
knowledges of truth and the affections of good, as by games adapted to
their capacities. To these and similar things infants are led by the
Lord by means of innocence passing through the third heaven; and thus
spiritual things are insinuated into their affections, and thence into
their tender thoughts, so that they know no other than that they do and
think such things from themselves, by which their understanding
commences.

413. XXI. IT IS THERE PROVIDED BY THE LORD, THAT WITH THOSE INFANTS THE
INNOCENCE OF INFANCY BECOMES THE INNOCENCE OF WISDOM (AND THUS THEY
BECOME ANGELS). Many may conjecture that infants remain infants, and
become angels immediately after death: but it is intelligence and wisdom
that make an angel: therefore so long as infants are without
intelligence and wisdom, they are indeed associated with angels, yet are
not angels: but they then first become so when they are made intelligent
and wise. Infants therefore are led from the innocence of infancy to the
innocence of wisdom, that is, from external innocence to internal: the
latter innocence is the end of all their instruction and progression:
therefore when they attain to the innocence of wisdom, the innocence of
infancy is adjoined to them, which in the mean time had served them as a
plane. I saw a representation of the quality of the innocence of
infancy; it was of wood almost without life, and was vivified in
proportion as the knowledges of truth and the affections of good were
imbibed: and afterwards there was represented the quality of the
innocence of wisdom, by a living infant. The angels of the third heaven,
who are in a state of innocence from the Lord above other angels, appear
like naked infants before the eyes of spirits who are beneath the
heavens; and as they are wiser than all others, so are they also more
truly alive: the reason of this is, because innocence corresponds to
infancy, and also to nakedness, therefore it is said of Adam and his
wife, when they were in a state of innocence, that they were naked and
were not ashamed, but that when they had lost their state of innocence,
they were ashamed of their nakedness, and hid themselves, Gen. ii. 25;
chap. iii. 7, 10, 11. In a word, the wiser the angels are the more
innocent they are. The quality of the innocence of wisdom may in some
measure be seen from the innocence of infancy above described, n. 395,
if only instead of parents, the Lord be assumed as the Father by whom
they are led, and to whom they ascribe what they have received.

414. On the subject of innocence I have often conversed with the angels
who have told me that innocence is the _esse_ of every good, and that
good is only so far good as it has innocence in it: and, since wisdom is
of life and thence of good, that wisdom is only so far wisdom as it
partakes of innocence: the like is true of love, charity, and faith; and
hence it is that no one can enter heaven unless he has innocence; which
is meant by these words of the Lord, "_Suffer infants to come to me, and
forbid them not; for of such is the kingdom of the heavens; verily I say
unto you, Whosoever shall not receive the kingdom of the heavens as an
infant, he will not enter therein_," Mark x. 14, 15; Luke xviii. 16, 17.
In this passage, as well as in other parts of the Word, infants denote
those who are in innocence. The reason why good is good, so far as it
has innocence in it, is, because all good is from the Lord, and
innocence consists in being led by the Lord.

       *       *       *       *       *

415. To the above I shall add this MEMORABLE RELATION. One morning, as I
awoke out of sleep, the light beginning to dawn and it being very
serene, while I was meditating and not yet quite awake, I saw through
the window as it were a flash of lightning, and presently I heard as it
were a clap of thunder; and while I was wondering whence this could be,
I heard from heaven words to this effect, "There are some not far from
you, who are reasoning sharply about God and nature. The vibration of
light like lightning, and the clapping of the air like thunder, are
correspondences and consequent appearances of the conflict and collision
of arguments, on one side in favor of God, and on the other in favor of
nature." The cause of this spiritual combat was as follows: there were
some satans in hell who expressed a wish to be allowed to converse with
the angels of heaven; "for," said they, "we will clearly and fully
demonstrate, that what they call God, the Creator of all things, is
nothing but nature; and thus that God is a mere unmeaning expression,
unless nature be meant by it." And as those satans believed this with
all their heart and soul, and also were desirous to converse with the
angels of heaven, they were permitted to ascend out of the mire and
darkness of hell, and to converse with two angels at that time
descending from heaven. They were in the world of spirits, which is
intermediate between heaven and hell. The satans on seeing the angels
there, hastily ran to them, and cried out with a furious voice, "Are you
the angels of heaven with whom we are allowed to engage in debate,
respecting God and nature? You are called wise because you acknowledge a
God; but, alas! how simple you are! Who sees God? who understands what
God is? who conceives that God governs, and can govern the universe,
with everything belonging thereto? and who but the vulgar and common
herd of mankind acknowledges what he does not see and understand? What
is more obvious than that nature is all in all? Is it not nature alone
that we see with our eyes, hear with our ears, smell with our nostrils,
taste with our tongues, and touch and feel with our hands and bodies?
And are not our bodily senses the only evidences of truth? Who would not
swear from them that it is so? Are not your heads in nature, and is
there any influx into the thoughts of your heads but from nature? Take
away nature, and can you think at all? Not to mention several other
considerations of a like kind." On hearing these words the angels
replied, "You speak in this manner because you are merely sensual. All
in the hells have the ideas of their thoughts immersed in the bodily
senses, neither are they able to elevate their minds above them;
therefore we excuse you. The life of evil and the consequent belief of
what is false have closed the interiors of your minds, so that you are
incapable of any elevation above the things of sense, except in a state
removed from evils of life, and from false principles of faith: for a
satan, as well as an angel, can understand truth when he hears it; but
he does not retain it, because evil obliterates truth and induces what
is false: but we perceive that you are now in a state of removal from
evil, and thus that you can understand the truth which we speak; attend
therefore to what we shall say:" and they proceeded thus: "You have been
in the natural world, and have departed thence, and are now in the
spiritual world. Have you known anything till now concerning a life
after death? Have you not till now denied such a life, and degraded
yourselves to the beasts? Have you known any thing heretofore about
heaven and hell, or the light and heat of this world? or of this
circumstance, that you are no longer within the sphere of nature, but
above it; since this world and all things belonging to it are spiritual,
and spiritual things are above natural, so that not the least of nature
can flow into this world? But, in consequence of believing nature to be
a God or a goddess, you believe also the light and heat of this world to
be the light and heat of the natural world, when yet it is not at all
so; for natural light here is darkness, and natural heat is cold. Have
you known anything about the sun of this world from which our light and
heat proceed? Have you known that this sun is pure love, and the sun of
the natural world pure fire; and the sun of the world, which is pure
fire, is that from which nature exists and subsists; and that the sun of
heaven, which is pure love, is that from which life itself, which is
love with wisdom exists and subsists; and thus that nature, which you
make a god or a goddess, is absolutely dead? You can, under the care of
a proper guard, ascend with us into heaven; and we also, under similar
protection, can descend with you into hell; and in heaven you will see
magnificent and splendid objects, but in hell such as are filthy and
unclean. The ground of the difference is, because all in the heavens
worship God, and all in the hells worship nature; and the magnificent
and splendid objects in the heavens are correspondences of the
affections of good and truth, and the filthy and unclean objects in the
hells are correspondences of the lusts of what is evil and false. Judge
now, from these circumstances, whether God or nature be all in all." To
this the satans replied, "In the state wherein we now are, we can
conclude, from what we have heard, that there is a God; but when the
delight of evil seizes our minds, we see nothing but nature." These two
angels and two satans were standing to the right, at no great distance
from me; therefore I saw and heard them; and lo! I saw near them many
spirits who had been celebrated in the natural world for their
erudition; and I was surprised to observe that those great scholars at
one time stood near the angels and at another near the satans, and that
they favored the sentiments of those near whom they stood; and I was led
to understand that the changes of their situation were changes of the
state of their minds, which sometimes favored one side and sometimes the
other; for they were _vertumni_. Moreover, the angels said, "We will
tell you a mystery; on our looking down upon the earth, and examining
those who were celebrated for erudition, and who have thought about God
and nature from their own judgement, we have found six hundred out of a
thousand favorers of nature, and the rest favorers of God; and that
these were in favor of God, in consequence of having frequently
maintained in their conversation, not from any convictions of their
understandings, but only from hear-say, that nature is from God; for
frequent conversation from the memory and recollection, and not at the
same time from thought and intelligence, induces a species of faith."
After this, the satans were entrusted to a guard and ascended with the
two angels into heaven, and saw the magnificent and splendid objects
contained therein; and being then an illustration from the light of
heaven, they acknowledged the being of a God, and that nature was
created to be subservient to the life which is in God and from God; and
that nature in itself is dead, and consequently does nothing of itself,
but is acted upon by life. Having seen and perceived these things, they
descended: and as they descended the love of evil returned and closed
their understanding above and opened it beneath; and then there appeared
above it as it were a veil sending forth lightning from infernal fire;
and as soon as they touched the earth with their feet, the ground
cleaved asunder beneath them, and they returned to their associates.

416. After these things those two angels seeing me near, said to the
by-standers respecting me, "We know that this man has written about God
and nature; let us hear what he has written." They therefore came to me,
and intreated that what I had written about God and nature might be read
to them: I therefore read as follows. "Those who believe in a Divine
operation in everything of nature, may confirm themselves in favor of
the Divine, from many things which they see in nature, equally, yea more
than those who confirm themselves in favor of nature: for those who
confirm themselves in favor of the Divine, attend to the wonderful
things, which are conspicuous in the productions of both vegetables and
animals:--in the PRODUCTION OF VEGETABLES, that from a small seed sown
in the earth there is sent forth a root, by means of the root a stem,
and successively buds, leaves, flowers, fruits, even to new seeds;
altogether as if the seed was acquainted with the order of succession,
or the process by which it was to renew itself. What rational person can
conceive, that the sun which is pure fire, is acquainted with this, or
that it can endue its heat and light with a power to effect such things;
and further, that it can form wonderful things therein, and intend use?
When a man of elevated reason sees and considers such things, he cannot
think otherwise than that they are from him who has infinite wisdom,
consequently from God. Those who acknowledge the Divine, also see and
think so; but those who do not acknowledge it, do not see and think so,
because they are unwilling; and thereby they let down their rational
principle into the sensual, which derives all its ideas from the
luminous principle in which the bodily senses are, and confirms their
fallacies urging, 'Do not you see the sun effecting these things by its
heat and light? What is that which you do not see?' Is it anything?
Those who confirm themselves in favor of the Divine, attend to the
wonderful things which are conspicuous in the PRODUCTIONS OF ANIMALS; to
mention only what is conspicuous in eggs, that there lies concealed in
them a chick in its seed, or first principles of existence, with
everything requisite even to the hatching, and likewise to every part of
its progress after hatching, until it becomes a bird, or winged animal,
in the form of its parent stock. A farther attention to the nature and
quality of the form cannot fail to cause astonishment in the
contemplative mind; to observe in the least as well as in the largest
kinds, yea, in the invisible as in the visible, that is, in small
insects, as in fowls or great beasts, how they are all endowed with
organs of sense, such as seeing, smelling, tasting, touching; and also
with organs of motion, such as muscles, for they fly and walk; and
likewise with viscera, around the heart and lungs, which are actuated by
the brains: that the commonest insects enjoy all these parts of
organization is known from their anatomy, as described by some writers,
especially SWAMMERDAM in his Books of Nature. Those who ascribe all
things to nature do indeed see such things; but they think only that
they are so, and say that nature produces them: and this they say in
consequence of having averted their minds from thinking about the
Divine; and those who have so averted their minds, when they see the
wonderful things in nature, cannot think rationally, and still less
spiritually; but they think sensually and materially, and in this case
they think in and from nature, and not above it, in like manner as those
do who are in hell; differing from beasts only in this respect, that
they have rational powers, that is, they are capable of understanding,
and thereby of thinking otherwise, if only they are willing. Those who
have averted themselves from thinking about the Divine, when they see
the wonderful things in nature, and thereby become sensual, do not
consider that the sight of the eye is so gross that it sees several
small insects as one confused mass; when yet each of them is organized
to feel and to move itself, consequently is endowed with fibres and
vessels, also with a little heart, pulmonary pipes, small viscera, and
brains; and that the contexture of these parts consists of the purest
principles in nature, and corresponds to some life, by virtue of which
their minutest parts are distinctly acted upon. Since the sight of the
eye is so gross that several of such insects, with the innumerable
things in each, appear to it as a small confused mass, and yet those who
are sensual, think and judge from that sight, it is evident how gross
their minds are, and consequently in what thick darkness they are
respecting spiritual things.

417. "Every one that is willing to do so, may confirm himself in favor
of the Divine from the visible things in nature; and he also who thinks
of God from the principle of life, does so confirm himself; while, for
instance, he observes the fowls of heaven, how each species of them
knows its proper food and where it is to be found; how they can
distinguish those of their own kind by the sounds they utter and by
their external appearance; how also, among other kinds, they can tell
which are their friends and which their foes; how they pair together,
build their nests with great art, lay therein their eggs, hatch them,
know the time of hatching, and at its accomplishment help their young
out of the shell, love them most tenderly, cherish them under their
wings, feed and nourish them, until they are able to provide for
themselves and do the like, and to procreate a family in order to
perpetuate their kind. Every one that is willing to think of a divine
influx through the spiritual world into the natural, may discern it in
these instances, and may also, if he will, say in his heart, 'Such
knowledges cannot flow into those animals from the sun by the rays of
its light:' for the sun, from which nature derives its birth and its
essence, its pure fire, and consequently the rays of its light are
altogether dead; and thus they may conclude, that such effects are
derived from an influx of divine wisdom into the ultimates of nature.

418. "Every one may confirm himself in favor of the Divine from what is
visible in nature, while he observes worms, which from the delight of a
certain desire, wish and long after a change of their earthly state into
a state analogous to a heavenly one; for this purpose they creep into
holes, and cast themselves as it were into a womb that they may be born
again, and there become chrysalises, aurelias, nymphs, and at length
butterflies; and when they have undergone this change, and according to
their species are decked with beautiful wings, they fly into the air as
into their heaven, and there indulge in all festive sports, pair
together, lay their eggs, and provide for themselves a posterity; and
then they are nourished with a sweet and pleasant food, which they
extract from flowers. Who that confirms himself in favor of the Divine
from what is visible in nature, does not see some image of the earthly
state of man in these animals while they are worms, and of his heavenly
state in the same when they become butterflies? whereas those who
confirm themselves in favor of nature, see indeed such things; but as
they have rejected from their minds all thought of man's heavenly state,
they call them mere instincts of nature.

419. "Again, everyone may confirm himself in favor of the Divine from
what is visible in nature, while he attends to the discoveries made
respecting bees,--how they have the art to gather wax and suck honey
from herbs and flowers, and build cells like small houses, and arrange
them into the form of a city with streets, through which they come in
and go out; and how they can smell flowers and herbs at a distance, from
which they may collect wax for their home and honey for their food; and
how, when laden with these treasures, they can trace their way back in a
right direction to their hive; thus they provide for themselves food and
habitation against the approaching winter, as if they were acquainted
with and foresaw its coming. They also set over themselves a mistress as
a queen, to be the parent of a future race, and for her they build as it
were a palace in an elevated situation, and appoint guards about her;
and when the time comes for her to become a mother, she goes from cell
to cell and lays her eggs, which her attendants cover with a sort of
ointment to prevent their receiving injury from the air; hence arises a
new generation, which, when old enough to provide in like manner for
itself, is driven out from home; and when driven out, it flies forth to
seek a new habitation, not however till it has first collected itself
into a swarm to prevent dissociation. About autumn also the useless
drones are brought forth and deprived of their wings, lest they should
return and consume the provision which they had taken no pains to
collect; not to mention many other circumstances; from which it may
appear evident, that on account of the use which they afford to mankind,
they have by influx from the spiritual world a form of government, such
as prevails among men in the world, yea, among angels in the heavens.
What man of uncorrupted reason does not see that such instincts are not
communicated to bees from the natural world? What has the sun, in which
nature originates, in common with a form of government which vies with
and is similar to a heavenly one? From these and similar circumstances
respecting brute animals, the confessor and worshiper of nature confirms
himself in favor of nature, while the confessor and worshiper of God,
from the same circumstances, confirms himself in favor of the Divine:
for the spiritual man sees spiritual things therein, and the natural man
natural; thus every one according to his quality. In regard to myself,
such circumstances have been to me testimonies of an influx of what is
spiritual into what is natural, or of an influx of the spiritual world
into the natural world; thus of an influx from the divine wisdom of the
Lord. Consider also, whether you can think analytically of any form of
government, any civil law, any moral virtue, or any spiritual truth,
unless the Divine flows in from his wisdom through the spiritual world:
for my own part, I never did, and still feel it to be impossible; for I
have perceptibly and sensibly observed such influx now (1768) for
twenty-five years continually: I therefore speak this from experience.

420. "Can nature, let me ask, regard use as an end, and dispose uses
into orders and forms? This is in the power of none but a wise being;
and none but God, who is infinitely wise, can so order and form the
universe. Who else can foresee and provide for mankind all the things
necessary for their food and clothing, producing them from the fruits of
the earth and from animals? It is surely a wonderful consideration among
many others, that those common insects, called silk-worms, should supply
with splendid clothing all ranks of persons, from kings and queens even
to the lowest servants; and that those common insects the bees, should
supply wax to enlighten both our temples and palaces. These, with
several other similar considerations, are standing proofs, that the Lord
by an operation from himself through the spiritual world, effects
whatever is done in nature.

421. "It may be expedient here to add, that I have seen in the spiritual
world those who had confirmed themselves in favor of nature by what is
visible in this world, so as to become atheists, and that their
understanding in spiritual light appeared open beneath but closed above,
because with their thinking faculty they had looked downwards to the
earth and not upwards to heaven. The super-sensual principle, which is
the lowest principle of the understanding, appeared as a veil, in some
cases sparkling from infernal fire, in some black as soot, and in some
pale and livid as a corpse. Let every one therefore beware of
confirmation in favor of nature, and let him confirm himself in favor of
the Divine; for which confirmation there is no want of materials.

422. "Some indeed are to be excused for ascribing certain visible
effects to nature, because they have had no knowledge respecting the sun
of the spiritual world, where the Lord is, and of influx thence; neither
have they known any thing about that world and its state, nor yet of its
presence with man; and consequently they could think no other than that
the spiritual principle was a purer natural principle; and thus that
angels were either in the ether or in the stars; also that the devil was
either man's evil, or, if he actually existed, that he was either in the
air or in the deep; also that the souls of men after death were either
in the inmost part of the earth, or in some place of confinement till
the day of judgement; not to mention other like conceits, which sprung
from ignorance of the spiritual world and its sun. This is the reason
why those are to be excused, who have believed that the visible
productions of nature are the effect of some principle implanted in her
from creation: nevertheless those who have made themselves atheists by
confirmations in favor of nature, are not to be excused, because they
might have confirmed themselves in favor of the Divine. Ignorance indeed
excuses, but does not take away the false principle which is confirmed;
for this false principle agrees with evil, and evil with hell."


ADULTEROUS LOVE AND ITS SINFUL PLEASURES.


ON THE OPPOSITION OF ADULTEROUS LOVE AND CONJUGIAL LOVE.

423. At the entrance upon our subject, it may be expedient to declare
what we mean in this chapter by adulterous love. By adulterous love we
do not mean fornicatory love, which precedes marriage, or which follows
it after the death of a married partner; neither do we mean concubinage,
which is engaged in from causes legitimate, just, and excusatory; nor do
we mean either the mild or the grievous kinds of adultery, whereof a man
actually repents; for the latter become not opposite, and the former are
not opposite, to conjugial love, as will be seen in the following pages,
where each is treated of. But by adulterous love, opposite to conjugial
love, we here mean the love of adultery, so long as it is such as not to
be regarded as sin, or as evil, and dishonorable, and contrary to
reason, but as allowable with reason. This adulterous love not only
makes conjugial love the same with itself, but also overthrows,
destroys, and at length nauseates it. The opposition of this love to
conjugial love is the subject treated of in this chapter. That no other
love is treated of (as being in such opposition), may be evident from
what follows concerning fornication, concubinage, and the various kinds
of adultery. But in order that this opposition may be made manifest to
the rational sight, it may be expedient to demonstrate it in the
following series: I. _It is not known what adulterous love is, unless it
be known what conjugial love is._ II. _Adulterous love is opposed to
conjugial love._ III. _Adulterous love is opposed to conjugial love, as
the natural man viewed in himself is opposed to the spiritual man._ IV.
_Adulterous love is opposed to conjugial love, as the connubial
connection of what is evil and false is opposed to the marriage of good
and truth._ V. _Hence adulterous love in opposed to conjugial love, as
hell is opposed to heaven._ VI. _The impurity of hell is from adulterous
love, and the purity of heaven from conjugial love._ VII. _The impurity
and the purity in the church are similarly circumstanced._ VIII.
_Adulterous love more and more makes a man not a man (homo), and not a
man (vir), and conjugial love makes a man more and more a man (homo),
and a man (vir)._ IX. _There are a sphere of adulterous love and a
sphere of conjugial love._ X. _The sphere of adulterous love ascends
from hell, and the sphere of conjugial love descends from heaven._ XI.
_Those two spheres mutually meet each other in each world; but they do
not unite._ XII. _Between those two spheres there is an equilibrium, and
man is in it._ XIII. _A man is able to turn himself to whichever he
pleases; but so far as he turns himself to the one, so far he turns
himself from the other._ XIV. _Each sphere brings with it delights._ XV.
_The delights of adulterous love commence from the flesh and are of the
flesh even in the spirit; but the delights of conjugial love commence in
the spirit, and are of the spirit even in the flesh._ XVI. _The delights
of adulterous love are the pleasures of insanity; but the delights of
conjugial love are the delights of wisdom._ We proceed to an explanation
of each article.

424. I. IT IS NOT KNOWN WHAT ADULTEROUS LOVE IS, UNLESS IT BE KNOWN WHAT
CONJUGIAL LOVE IS. By adulterous love we mean the love of adultery,
which destroys conjugial love, as above, n. 423. That it is not known
what adulterous love is, unless it be known what conjugial love is,
needs no demonstration, but only illustration by similitudes: as for
example, who can know what is evil and false, unless he know what is
good and true? and who knows what is unchaste, dishonorable, unbecoming,
and ugly, unless he knows what is chaste, honorable, becoming, and
beautiful? and who can discern the various kinds of insanity, but he
that is wise, or that knows what wisdom is? also, who can rightly
perceive discordant and grating sounds, but he that is well versed in
the doctrine and study of harmonious numbers? in like manner, who can
clearly discern what is the quality of adultery, unless he has first
clearly discerned what is the quality of marriage? and who can make a
just estimate of the filthiness of the pleasures of adulterous love, but
he that has first made a just estimate of the purity of conjugial love?
As I have now completed the treatise ON CONJUGIAL LOVE AND ITS CHASTE
DELIGHTS, I am enabled, from the intelligence I thence acquired, to
describe the pleasures respecting adulterous love.

425. II. ADULTEROUS LOVE IS OPPOSED TO CONJUGIAL LOVE. Every thing in
the universe has its opposite; and opposites, in regard to each other,
are not relatives, but contraries. Relatives are what exist between the
greatest and the least of the same thing; whereas contraries arise from
an opposite in contrariety thereto; and the latter are relatives in
regard to each other, as the former are in their regard one to another;
wherefore also the relations themselves are opposites. That all things
have their opposites, is evident from light, heat, the times of the
world, affections, perceptions, sensations, and several other things.
The opposite of light is darkness; the opposite of heat is cold; of the
times of the world the opposites are day and night, summer and winter;
of affections the opposites are joys and mourning, also gladnesses and
sadnesses; of perceptions the opposites are goods and evils, also truths
and falses; and of sensations the opposites are things delightful and
things undelightful. Hence it may be evidently concluded, that conjugial
love has its opposite; this opposite is adultery, as every one may see,
if he be so disposed, from all the dictates of sound reason. Tell, if
you can, what else is its opposite. It is an additional evidence in
favor of this position, that as sound reason was enabled to see the
truth of it by her own light, therefore she has enacted laws, which are
called laws of civil justice, in favor of marriages and against
adulteries. That the truth of this position may appear yet more
manifest, I may relate what I have very often seen in the spiritual
world. When those who in the natural world have been confirmed
adulterers, perceive a sphere of conjugial love flowing down from
heaven, they instantly either flee away into caverns and hide
themselves, or, if they persist obstinately in contrariety to it, they
grow fierce with rage, and become like furies. The reason why they are
so affected is, because all things of the affections, whether delightful
or undelightful, are perceived in that world, and on some occasions as
clearly as an odor is perceived by the sense of smelling; for the
inhabitants of that world have not a material body, which absorbs such
things. The reason why the opposition of adulterous love and conjugial
love is unknown to many in the world, is owing to the delights of the
flesh, which, in the extremes, seem to imitate the delights of conjugial
love; and those who are in delights only, do not know anything
respecting that opposition; and I can venture to say, that should you
assert, that everything has its opposite, and should conclude that
conjugial love also has its opposite, adulterers will reply, that that
love has not an opposite, because adulterous love cannot be
distinguished from it; from which circumstance it is further manifest,
that he that does not know what conjugial love is, does not know what
adulterous love is; and moreover, that from adulterous love it is not
known what conjugial love is, but from conjugial love it is known what
adulterous love is. No one knows good from evil, but evil from good; for
evil is in darkness, whereas good is in light.

426. III. ADULTEROUS LOVE IS OPPOSED TO CONJUGIAL LOVE, AS THE NATURAL
MAN VIEWED IN HIMSELF IS OPPOSED TO THE SPIRITUAL MAN. That the natural
man and the spiritual are opposed to each other, so that the one does
not will what the other wills, yea, that they are at strife together, is
well known in the church; but still it has not heretofore been
explained. We will therefore shew what is the ground of discrimination
between the spiritual man and the natural, and what excites the latter
against the former. The natural man is that into which every one is
first introduced as he grows up, which is effected by sciences and
knowledges, and by rational principles of the understanding; but the
spiritual man is that into which he is introduced by the love of doing
uses, which love is also called charity: wherefore so far as any one is
in charity, so far he is spiritual; but so far as he is not in charity,
so far he is natural, even supposing him to be ever so quick-sighted in
genius, and wise in judgement. That the latter, the natural man,
separate from the spiritual, notwithstanding all his elevation into the
light of reason, still gives himself without restraint to the government
of his lusts, and is devoted to them, is manifest from his genius alone,
in that he is void of charity; and whoever is void of charity, gives
loose to all the lasciviousness of adulterous love: wherefore, when he
is told, that this wanton love is opposed to chaste conjugial love, and
is asked to consult his rational _lumen_, he still does not consult it,
except in conjunction with the delight of evil implanted from birth in
the natural man; in consequence whereof he concludes, that his reason
does not see anything contrary to the pleasing sensual allurements of
the body; and when he has confirmed himself in those allurements, his
reason is in amazement at all those pleasures which are proclaimed
respecting conjugial love; yea, as was said above, he fights against
them, and conquers, and, like a conqueror after the enemy's overthrow,
he utterly destroys the camp of conjugial love in himself. These things
are done by the natural man from the impulse of his adulterous love. We
mention these circumstances, in order that it may be known, what is the
true ground of the opposition of those two loves; for, as has been
abundantly shewn above, conjugial love viewed in itself is spiritual
love, and adulterous love viewed in itself is natural love.

427. IV. ADULTEROUS LOVE IS OPPOSED TO CONJUGIAL LOVE, AS THE CONNUBIAL
CONNECTION OF WHAT IS EVIL AND FALSE IS OPPOSED TO THE MARRIAGE OF GOOD
AND TRUTH. That the origin of conjugial love is from the marriage of
good and truth, was demonstrated above in its proper chapter, from n.
83-102; hence it follows, that the origin of adulterous love is from the
connubial connection of what is evil and false, and that hence they are
opposite loves, as evil is opposed to good, and the false of evil to the
truth of good. It is the delights of each love which are thus opposed;
for love without its delight is not anything. That these delights are
thus opposed to each other, does not at all appear: the reason why it
does not appear is, because the delight of the love of evil in externals
assumes a semblance of the delight of the love of good; but in internals
the delight of the love of evil consists of mere concupiscences of evil,
evil itself being the conglobated mass (or glome) of those
concupiscences: whereas the delight of the love of good consists of
innumerable affections of good, good itself being the co-united bundle
of those affections. This bundle and that glome are felt by man only as
one delight; and as the delight of evil in externals assumes a semblance
of the delight of good, as we have said, therefore also the delight of
adultery assumes a semblance of the delight of marriage; but after
death, when everyone lays aside externals, and the internals are laid
bare, then it manifestly appears, that the evil of adultery is a glome
of the concupiscences of evil, and the good of marriage is a bundle of
the affections of good: thus that they are entirely opposed to each
other.

428. In reference to the connubial connection of what is evil and false,
it is to be observed, that evil loves the false, and desires that it may
be a one with itself, and they also unite; in like manner as good loves
truth, and desires that it may be a one with itself, and they also
unite: from which consideration it is evident, that as the spiritual
origin of marriage is the marriage of good and truth, so the spiritual
origin of adultery is the connubial connection of what is evil and
false. Hence, this connubial connection is meant by adulteries,
whoredoms, and fornications, in the spiritual sense of the Word; see the
APOCALYPSE REVEALED, n. 134. It is from this principle, that he that is
in evil, and connects himself connubially with what is false, and he
that is in what is false, and draws evil into a partnership of his
chamber, from the joint covenant confirms adultery, and commits it so
far as he dares and has the opportunity; he confirms it from evil by
what is false, and he commits it from what is false by evil: and also on
the other hand, that he that is in good, and marries truth, or he that
is in truth, and brings good into partnership of the chamber with
himself, confirms himself against adultery, and in favor of marriage,
and attains to a happy conjugial life.

429. V. HENCE ADULTEROUS LOVE IS OPPOSED TO CONJUGIAL LOVE AS HELL IS
OPPOSED TO HEAVEN. All who are in hell are in the connubial connection
of what is evil and false, and all who are in heaven are in the marriage
of good and truth; and as the connubial connection of what is evil and
false is also adultery, as was shewn just above, n. 427, 428, hell is
also that connubial connection. Hence all who are in hell are in the
lust, lasciviousness, and immodesty of adulterous love, and shun and
dread the chastity and modesty of conjugial love; see above, n. 428.
From these considerations it may be seen, that those two loves,
adulterous and conjugial, are opposed to each other, as hell is to
heaven, and heaven to hell.

430. VI. THE IMPURITY OF HELL IS FROM ADULTEROUS LOVE, AND THE PURITY OF
HEAVEN FROM CONJUGIAL LOVE. All hell abounds with impurities, all of
which originate in immodest and obscene adulterous love, the delights of
that love being changed into such impurities. Who can believe, that in
the spiritual world, every delight of love is presented to the sight
under various appearances, to the sense under various odors, and to the
view under various forms of beasts and birds? The appearances under
which in hell the lascivious delights of adulterous love are presented
to the sight, are dunghills and mire; the odors by which they are
presented to the sense, are stinks and stenches; and the forms of beasts
and birds under which they are presented to the view, are hogs,
serpents, and the birds called ochim and tziim. The case is reversed in
regard to the chaste delights of conjugial love in heaven. The
appearances under which those delights are presented to the sight, are
gardens and flowery fields; the odors whereby they are presented to the
sense, are the perfumes arising from fruits and the fragrancies from
flowers; and the forms of animals under which they are presented to the
view are lambs, kids, turtle-doves, and birds of paradise. The reason
why the delights of love are changed into such and similar things is,
because all things which exist in the spiritual world are
correspondences: into these correspondences the internals of the minds
of the inhabitants are changed, while they pass away and become external
before the senses. But it is to be observed, that there are innumerable
varieties of impurities, into which the lasciviousnesses of whoredoms
are changed, while they pass off into their correspondences: these
varieties are according to the genera and species of those
lasciviousnesses, as may be seen in the following pages, where
adulteries and their degrees are treated of: such impurities however do
not proceed from the delights of the love of those who have repented;
because they have been washed from them during their abode in the world.

431. VII. THE IMPURITY AND THE PURITY IN THE CHURCH ARE SIMILARLY
CIRCUMSTANCED. The reason of this is, because the church is the Lord's
kingdom in the world, corresponding to his kingdom in the heavens; and
also the Lord conjoins them together, that they may make a one; for he
distinguishes those who are in the world, as he distinguishes heaven and
hell, according to their loves. Those who are in the immodest and
obscene delights of adulterous love, associate to themselves similar
spirits from hell: whereas those who are in the modest and chaste
delights of conjugial love, are associated by the Lord to similar angels
from heaven. While these their angels, in their attendance on man, are
stationed near to confirmed and determined adulterers, they are made
sensible of the direful stenches mentioned above, n. 430, and recede a
little. On account of the correspondence of filthy loves with dunghills
and bogs, it was commanded the sons of Israel, "That they should carry
with them a paddle with which to cover their excrement, lest Jehovah God
walking in the midst of their camp should see the nakedness of the
thing, and should return," Deut, xxiii. 13, 14. This was commanded,
because the camp of the sons of Israel represented the church, and those
unclean things corresponded to the lascivious principles of whoredoms,
and by Jehovah God's walking in the midst of their camp was signified
his presence with the angels. The reason why they were to cover it was,
because all those places in hell, where troops of such spirits have
their abode, were covered and closed up, on which account also it is
said, "lest he see the nakedness of the thing." It has been granted me
to see that all those places in hell are closed up, and also that when
they were opened, as was the case when a new demon entered, such a
horrid stench issued from them, that it infested my belly with its
noisomeness; and what is wonderful, those stenches are to the
inhabitants as delightful as dunghills are to swine. From these
considerations it is evident, how it is to be understood, that the
impurity in the church is from adulterous love, and its purity from
conjugial love.

432. VIII. ADULTEROUS LOVE MORE AND MORE MAKES A MAN (homo) NOT A MAN
(homo), AND A MAN (vir) NOT A MAN (vir), AND CONJUGIAL LOVE MAKES A MAN
(homo) MORE AND MORE A MAN (homo), AND A MAN (vir). That conjugial love
makes a man (_homo_) is illustrated and confirmed by all the
considerations which were clearly and rationally demonstrated in the
first part of this work, concerning love and the delights of its wisdom;
as 1. That he that is principled in love truly conjugial, becomes more
and more spiritual; and in proportion as any one is more spiritual, in
the same proportion he is more a man (_homo_). 2. That he becomes more
and more wise; and the wiser any one is, so much the more is he a man
(_homo_). 3. That with such a one the interiors of the mind are more and
more opened, insomuch that he sees or intuitively acknowledges the Lord;
and the more any one is in the sight or acknowledgement, the more he is
a man. 4. That he becomes more and more moral and civil, inasmuch as a
spiritual soul is in his morality and civility; and the more any one is
morally civil, the more he is a man. 5. That also after death he becomes
an angel of heaven; and an angel is in essence and form a man; and also
the genuine human principle in his face shines forth from his
conversation and manners: from these considerations it is manifest, that
conjugial love makes a man (_homo_) more and more a man (_homo_). That
the contrary is the case with adulterers, follows as a consequence from
the opposition of adultery and marriage, which is the subject treated of
in this chapter; as, 1. That they are not spiritual but in the highest
degree natural; and the natural man separate from the spiritual man, is
a man only as to the understanding, but not as to the will: this he
immerses in the body and the concupiscences of the flesh, and at those
times the understanding also accompanies it. That such a one is but half
a man (_homo_), he himself may see from the reason of his understanding,
in ease he elevates it. 2. That adulterers are not wise, except in their
conversation and behaviour, when they are in the company of such as are
in high station, or as are distinguished for their learning or their
morals; but that when alone with themselves they are insane, setting at
nought the divine and holy things of the church, and defiling the morals
of life with immodest and unchaste principles, will be shewn in the
chapter concerning adulteries. Who does not see that such gesticulators
are men only as to external figure, and not as to internal form? 3. That
adulterers become more and more not men, has been abundantly confirmed
to me by what I have myself been eye-witness to respecting them in hell:
for there they are demons, and when seen in the light of heaven, appear
to have their faces full of pimples, their bodies bunched out, their
voice rough, and their gestures antic. But it is to be observed, that
such are determined and confirmed adulterers, but not non-deliberate
adulterers: for in the chapter concerning adulteries and their degrees,
four kinds are treated of. Determined adulterers are those who are so
from the lust of the will; confirmed adulterers are those who are so
from the persuasion of the understanding; deliberate adulterers are
those who are so from the allurements of the senses; and non deliberate
adulterers are those who have not the faculty or the liberty of
consulting the understanding. The two former kinds of adulterers are
those who become more and more not men; whereas the two latter kinds
become men as they recede from those errors, and afterwards become wise.

433. That conjugial love makes a man (_homo_) more a man (_vir_), is
also illustrated by what was adduced in the preceding part concerning
conjugial love and its delights; as, 1. That the virile faculty and
power accompanies wisdom, as this is animated from the spiritual things
of the church, and that hence it resides in conjugial love; and that the
wisdom of this love opens a vein from its fountain in the soul, and
thereby invigorates, and also blesses with permanence, to the
intellectual life, which is the very essential masculine life. 2. That
hence it is, that the angels of heaven are in this permanence to
eternity, according to their own declarations in the MEMORABLE RELATION,
n. 355, 356. That the most ancient men in the golden and silver ages,
were in permanent efficacy, because they loved the caresses of their
wives, and abhorred the caresses of harlots, I have heard from their own
mouths; see the MEMORABLE RELATIONS, n. 75, 76. That that spiritual
sufficiency is also in the natural principle, and will not be wanting to
those at this day, who come to the Lord, and abominate adulteries as
infernal, has been told me from heaven. But the contrary befalls
determined and confirmed adulterers who are treated of above, n. 432.
That the virile faculty and power with such is weakened even till it
ceases; and that after this there commences cold towards the sex; and
that cold is succeeded by a kind of fastidiousness approaching to
loathing, is well known, although but little talked of. That this is the
case with such adulterers in hell, I have heard at a distance, from the
sirens, who are obsolete venereal lusts, and also from the harlots
there. From these considerations it follows, that adulterous love makes
a man (_homo_) more and more not a man (_homo_) and not a man (_vir_)
and that conjugial love makes a man more and more a man (_homo_) and a
man (_vir_).

434. IX. THERE ARE A SPHERE OF ADULTEROUS LOVE AND A SPHERE OF CONJUGIAL
LOVE. What is meant by spheres, and that they are various, and that
those which are of love and wisdom proceed from the Lord, and through
the angelic heavens descend into the world, and pervade it even to its
ultimates, was shewn above, n. 222-225; and n. 386-397. That every thing
in the universe has its opposites, may be seen above, n. 425: hence it
follows, that whereas there is a sphere of conjugial love, there is also
a sphere opposite to it, which is called a sphere of adulterous love;
for those spheres are opposed to each other, as the love of adultery is
opposed the love of marriage. This opposition has been treated of in the
preceding parts of this chapter.

435. X. THE SPHERE OF ADULTEROUS LOVE ASCENDS FROM HELL, AND THE SPHERE
OF CONJUGIAL LOVE DESCENDS FROM HEAVEN. That the sphere of conjugial
love descends from heaven, was shewn in the places cited just above, n.
434; but the reason why the sphere of adulterous love ascends from hell,
is, because this love is from thence, see n. 429. That sphere ascends
thence from the impurities into which the delights of adultery are
changed with those who are of each sex there; concerning which delight
see above, n. 430, 431.

436. XI. THOSE TWO SPHERES MEET EACH OTHER IN EACH WORLD; BUT THEY DO
NOT UNITE. By each world is meant the spiritual world and the natural
world. In the spiritual world those spheres meet each other in the world
of spirits, because this is the medium between heaven and hell; but in
the natural world they meet each other in the rational plane
appertaining to man, which also is the medium between heaven and hell:
for the marriage of good and truth flows into it from above, and the
marriage of evil and the false flows into it from beneath. The latter
marriage flows in through the world, but the former through heaven.
Hence it is, that the human rational principle can turn itself to either
side as it pleases, and receive influx. If it turns to good, it receives
it from above; and in this case the man's rational principle is formed
more and more to the reception of heaven; but if it turns itself to
evil, it receives that influx from beneath; and in this case the man's
rational principle is formed more and more to the reception of hell. The
reason why those two spheres do not unite, is, because they are
opposites; and an opposite acts upon an opposite like enemies, one of
whom, burning with deadly hatred, furiously assaults the other, while
the other is in no hatred, but only endeavours to defend himself. From
these considerations it is evident, that those two spheres only meet
each other, but do not unite. The middle interstice, which they make, is
on the one part from the evil not of the false, and from the false not
of the evil, and on the other part from good not of truth, and from
truth not of good: which two may indeed touch each other, but still they
do not unite.

437. XII. BETWEEN THOSE TWO SPHERES THERE IS AN EQUILIBRIUM, AND MAN IS
IN IT. The equilibrium between them is a spiritual equilibrium, because
it is between good and evil; from this equilibrium a man has free will,
in and by which he thinks and wills, and hence speaks and acts as from
himself. His rational principle consists in his having the option to
receive either good or evil; consequently, whether he will freely and
rationally dispose himself to conjugial love, or to adulterous love; if
to the latter, he turns the hinder part of the head, and the back to the
Lord; if to the former, he turns the fore part of the head and the
breast to the Lord; if to the Lord, his rationality and liberty are led
by himself; but if backwards from the Lord, his rationality and liberty
are led by hell.

438. XIII. A MAN CAN TURN HIMSELF TO WHICHEVER SPHERE HE PLEASES; BUT SO
FAR AS HE TURNS HIMSELF TO THE ONE, SO FAR HE TURNS HIMSELF FROM THE
OTHER. Man was created so that he may do whatever he does freely,
according to reason, and altogether as from himself: without these two
faculties he would not be a man but a beast; for he would not receive
any thing flowing from heaven, and appropriate it to himself as his own,
and consequently it would not be possible for anything of eternal life
to be inscribed on him; for this must be inscribed on him as his, in
order that it may be his own; and whereas there is no freedom on the one
part, unless there be also a like freedom on the other, as it would be
impossible to weigh a thing, unless the scales from an equilibrium could
incline to either side: so, unless a man had liberty from reason to draw
near also to evil, thus to turn from the right to the left, and from the
left to the right, in like manner to the infernal sphere, which is that
of adultery, as to the celestial sphere, which is that of marriage, (it
would be impossible for him to receive any thing flowing from heaven,
and to appropriate it to himself.)

439. XIV. EACH SPHERE BRINGS WITH IT DELIGHTS; that is, both the sphere
of adulterous love which ascends from hell, and the sphere of conjugial
love which descends from heaven, affects the recipient man (_homo_) with
delights; because the ultimate plane in which the delights of each love
terminate, and where they fill and complete themselves, and which
exhibits them in their own proper sensory, is the same. Hence, in the
extremes, adulterous caresses and conjugial caresses are perceived as
similar, although in internals they are altogether dissimilar; that
hence they are also dissimilar in the extremes, is a point not decided
from any sense of discrimination; for dissimilitudes are not made
sensible from their discriminations in the extremes, to any others than
those who are principled in love truly conjugial; for evil is known from
good, but not good from evil; so neither is a sweet scent perceived by
the nose when a disagreeable one is present in it. I have heard from the
angels, that they distinguish in the extremes what is lascivious from
what is not, as any one distinguishes the fire of a dunghill or of burnt
horn by its bad smell, from the fire of spices or of burnt cinnamon by
its sweet smell; and that this arises from their distinction of the
internal delights which enter into the external and compose them.

440. XV. THE DELIGHTS OF ADULTEROUS LOVE COMMENCE FROM THE FLESH AND ARE
OF THE FLESH EVEN IN THE SPIRIT; BUT THE DELIGHTS OF CONJUGIAL LOVE
COMMENCE IN THE SPIRIT AND ARE OF THE SPIRIT EVEN IN THE FLESH. The
reason why the delights of adulterous love commence from the flesh is,
because the stimulant heats of the flesh are their beginnings. The
reason why they infect the spirit and are of the flesh even in the
spirit, is, because the spirit, and not the flesh, is sensible of those
things which happen in the flesh. The case is the same with this sense
as with the rest: as that the eye does not see and discern various
particulars in objects, but they are seen and discerned by the spirit;
neither does the ear hear and discern the harmonies of tunes in singing,
and the concordances of the articulation of sounds in speech, but they
are heard and discerned by the spirit; moreover, the spirit is sensible
of every thing according to its elevation in wisdom. The spirit that is
not elevated above the sensual things of the body, and thereby adheres
to them, is not sensible of any other delights than those which flow in
from the flesh and the world through the senses of the body: these
delights it seizes upon, is delighted with, and makes its own. Now,
since the beginnings of adulterous love are only the stimulant fires and
itchings of the flesh, it is evident, that these things in the spirit
are filthy allurements, which, as they ascend and descend, and
reciprocate, so they excite and inflame. In general the cupidities of
the flesh are nothing but the accumulated concupiscences of what is evil
and false: hence comes this truth in the church, that the flesh lusts
against the spirit, that is, against the spiritual man; wherefore it
follows, that the delights of the flesh, as to the delights of
adulterous love, are nothing but the effervescences of lusts, which in
the spirit become the ebullitions of immodesty.

441. But the delights of conjugial love have nothing in common with the
filthy delights of adulterous love: the latter indeed are in the spirit
of every man; but they are separated and removed, as the man's spirit is
elevated above the sensual things of the body, and from its elevation
sees their appearances and fallacies beneath: in this case it perceives
fleshly delights, first as apparent and fallacious, afterwards as
libidinous and lascivious, which ought to be shunned, and successively
as damnable and hurtful to the soul, and at length it has a sense of
them as being undelightful, disagreeable, and nauseous; and in the
degree that it thus perceives and is sensible of these delights, in the
same degree also it perceives the delights of conjugial love as innocent
and chaste, and at length as delicious and blessed. The reason why the
delights of conjugial love become also delights of the spirit in the
flesh, is, because after the delights of adulterous love are removed, as
was just said above, the spirit being loosed from them enters chaste
into the body, and fills the breasts with the delights of its
blessedness, and from the breasts fills also the ultimates of that love
in the body; in consequence whereof, the spirit with these ultimates,
and these ultimates with the spirits, afterwards act in full communion.

442. XVI. THE DELIGHTS OF ADULTEROUS LOVE ARE THE PLEASURES OF INSANITY;
BUT THE DELIGHTS OF CONJUGIAL LOVE ARE THE DELIGHTS OF WISDOM. The
reason why the delights of adulterous love are the pleasures of insanity
is, because none but natural men are in that love, and the natural man
is insane in spiritual things, for he is contrary to them, and therefore
he embraces only natural, sensual, and corporeal delights. It is said
that he embraces natural, sensual, and corporeal delights, because the
natural principle is distinguished into three degrees: in the supreme
degree are those natural men who from rational sight see insanities, and
are still carried away by the delights thereof, as boats by the stream
of a river; in a lower degree are the natural men who only see and judge
from the senses of the body, despising and rejecting, as of no account,
the rational principles which are contrary to appearances and fallacies;
in the lowest degree are the natural men who without judgement are
carried away by the alluring stimulant heats of the body. These last are
called natural-corporeal, the former are called natural-sensual, but the
first natural. With these men, adulterous love and its insanities and
pleasures are of similar degrees.

443. The reason why the delights of conjugial love are the delights of
wisdom is, because none but spiritual men are in that love, and the
spiritual man is in wisdom; and hence he embraces no delights but such
as agree with spiritual wisdom. The respective qualities of the delights
of adulterous and of conjugial love, may be elucidated by a comparison
with houses: the delights of adulterous love by comparison with a house
whose walls glitter outwardly like sea shells, or like transparent
stones, called selenites, of a gold color; whereas in the apartments
within the walls, are all kinds of filth and nastiness: but the delights
of conjugial love may be compared to a house, the walls of which are
refulgent as with sterling gold, and the apartments within are
resplendent as with cabinets full of various precious stones.

       *       *       *       *       *

444. To the above I shall add the following MEMORABLE RELATION. After I
had concluded the meditations on conjugial love, and had begun those on
adulterous love, on a sudden two angels presented themselves, and said,
"We have perceived and understood what you have heretofore meditated
upon; but the things upon which you are now meditating pass away, and we
do not perceive them. Say nothing about them, for they are of no value."
But I replied, "This love, on which I am now meditating, is not of no
value; because it exists." But they said, "How can there be any love,
which is not from creation? Is not conjugial love from creation; and
does not this love exist between two who are capable of becoming one?
How can there be a love which divides and separates? What youth can love
any other maiden than the one who loves him in return? Must not the love
of the one know and acknowledge the love of the other, so that when they
meet they may unite of themselves? Who can love what is not love? Is not
conjugial love alone mutual and reciprocal? If it be not reciprocal,
does it not rebound and become nothing?" On hearing this, I asked the
two angels from what society of heaven they were? They said, "We are
from the heaven of innocence; we came infants into this heavenly world,
and were educated under the Lord's auspices; and when I became a young
man, and my wife, who is here with me, marriageable, we were betrothed
and entered into a contract, and were joined under the first favorable
impressions; and as we were unacquainted with any other love than what
is truly nuptial and conjugial, therefore, when we were made acquainted
with the ideas of your thought concerning a strange love directly
opposed to our love, we could not at all comprehend it; and we have
descended in order to ask you, why you meditate on things that cannot be
understood? Tell us, therefore, how a love, which not only is not from
creation, but is also contrary to creation, could possibly exist? We
regard things opposite to creation as objects of no value." As they said
this, I rejoiced in heart that I was permitted to converse with angels
of such innocence, as to be entirely ignorant of the nature and meaning
of adultery: wherefore I was free to converse with them, and I
instructed them as follows: "Do you not know, that there exist both good
and evil, and that good is from creation, but not evil; and still that
evil viewed in itself is not nothing, although it is nothing of good?
From creation there exists good, and also good in the greatest degree
and in the least; and when this least becomes nothing, there rises up on
the other side evil: wherefore there is no relation or progression of
good to evil, but a relation and progression of good to a greater and
less good, and of evil to a greater and less evil; for in all things
there are opposites. And since good and evil are opposites, there is an
intermediate, and in it an equilibrium, in which evil acts against good;
but as it does not prevail, it stops in a _conatus_. Every man is
educated in this equilibrium, which, because it is between good and
evil, or, what is the same, between heaven and hell, is a spiritual
equilibrium, which, with those who are in it, produces a state of
freedom. From this equilibrium, the Lord draws all to himself; and if a
man freely follows, he leads him out of evil into good, and thereby into
heaven. The case is the same with love, especially with conjugial love
and adultery: the latter love is evil, but the former good. Every man
that hears the voice of the Lord, and freely follows, is introduced by
the Lord into conjugial love and all its delights and satisfactions; but
he that does not hear and follow, introduces himself into adulterous
love, first into its delights, afterwards into what is undelightful, and
lastly into what is unsatisfactory." When I had thus spoken, the two
angels asked me, "How could evil exist, when nothing but good had
existed from creation? The existence of anything implies that it must
have an origin. Good could not be the origin of evil, because evil is
nothing of good, being privative and destructive of good; nevertheless,
since it exists and is sensibly felt, it is not nothing, but something;
tell us therefore whence this something existed after nothing." To this
I replied, "This arcanum cannot be explained, unless it be known that no
one is good but God alone, and that there is not anything good, which in
itself is good, but from God; wherefore he that looks to God, and wishes
to be led by God, is in good; but he that turns himself from God, and
wishes to be led by himself, is not in good; for the good which he does,
is for the sake either of himself or of the world; thus it is either
meritorious, or pretended, or hypocritical: from which considerations it
is evident, that man himself is the origin of evil; not that that origin
was implanted in him by creation; but that he, by turning from God to
himself, implanted it in himself. That origin of evil was not in Adam
and his wife; but when the serpent said, 'In the day that ye shall eat
of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil, ye shall be as God' (Gen.
iii. 5), they then made in themselves the origin of evil, because they
turned themselves from God, and turned to themselves, as to God. _To eat
of that tree, signifies to believe that they knew good and evil, and
were wise, from themselves, and not from God._" But the two angels then
asked, "How could man turn himself from God, and turn to himself, when
yet he cannot will, think, and thence do anything but from God? Why did
God permit this?" I replied, "Man was so created, that whatever he
wills, thinks, and does, appears to him as in himself, and thereby from
himself: without this appearance a man would not be a man; for he would
be incapable of receiving, retaining, and as it were appropriating to
himself anything of good and truth, or of love and wisdom: whence it
follows, that without such appearance, as a living appearance, a man
would not have conjunction with God, and consequently neither would he
have eternal life. But if from this appearance he induces in himself a
belief that he wills, thinks, and thence does good from himself, and not
from the Lord, although in all appearance as from himself, he turns good
into evil with himself, and thereby makes in himself the origin of evil.
This was the sin of Adam. But I will explain this matter somewhat more
clearly. The Lord looks at every man in the forepart of his head, and
this inspection passes into the hinder part of his head. Beneath the
forepart is the _cerebrum_, and beneath the hinder part is the
_cerebellum_; the latter was designed for love and the goods thereof,
and the former for wisdom and the truths thereof; wherefore he that
looks with the face to the Lord receives from him wisdom, and by wisdom
love; but he that looks backward from the Lord receives love and not
wisdom; and love without wisdom, is love from man and not from the Lord;
and this love, since it conjoins itself with falses, does not
acknowledge God, but acknowledges itself for God, and confirms this
tacitly by the faculty of understanding and growing wise implanted in it
from creation as from itself; wherefore this love is the origin of evil.
That this is the case, will admit of ocular demonstration. I will call
hither some wicked spirit who turns himself from God, and will speak to
him from behind, or into the hinder part of the head, and you will see
that the things which are said are turned into their contraries." I
called such a spirit and he presented himself, and I spoke to him from
behind and said, "Do you know anything about hell, damnation, and
torment in hell?" And presently, when he was turned to me, I asked him
what he heard? He said, "I heard, 'Do you know anything concerning
heaven, salvation, and happiness in heaven?'" and afterwards when the
latter words were said to him from behind, he said that he heard the
former. It was next said to him from behind, "Do you know that those who
are in hell are insane from falses?" and when I asked him concerning
these words what he heard, he said, "I heard, 'Do you know that those
who are in heaven are wise from truths?'" and when the latter words were
spoken to him from behind, he said that he heard, "Do you know that
those who are in hell, are insane from falses?" and so in other
instances: from which it evidently appears, that when the mind turns
itself from the Lord, it turns to itself, and then it perceives things
contrary. "This, as you know, is the reason why, in this spiritual
world, no one is allowed to stand behind another, and to speak to him;
for thereby there is inspired into him a love, which his own
intelligence favors and obeys for the sake of its delight; but since it
is from man, and not from God, it is a love of evil, or a love of the
false. In addition to the above, I will relate to you another similar
circumstance. On certain occasions I have heard goods and truths let
down from heaven into hell; and in hell they were progressively turned
into their opposites, good into evil, and truth into the false; the
cause of this, the same as above, because all in hell turn themselves
from the Lord." On hearing these two things the two angels thanked me,
and said, "As you are now meditating and writing concerning a love
opposite to our conjugial love, and the opposite to that love makes our
minds sad, we will depart;" and when they said, "Peace be unto you," I
besought them not to mention that love to their brethren and sisters in
heaven, because it would hurt their innocence. I can positively assert
that those who die infants, grow up in heaven, and when they attain the
stature which is common to young men of eighteen years old in the world,
and to maidens of fifteen years, they remain of that stature; and
further, that both before marriage and after it, they are entirely
ignorant what adultery is, and that such a thing can exist.

       *       *       *       *       *

ON FORNICATION.

[Transcriber's Note: The out-of-order section number which follows is in
the original text, as is the asterisk which does not seem to indicate a
footnote.]

444.* FORNICATION means the lust of a grown up man or youth with a
woman, a harlot, before marriage; but lust with a woman, not a harlot,
that is, with a maiden or with another's wife, is not fornication; with
a maiden it is the act of deflowering, and with another's wife it is
adultery. In what manner these two differ from fornication, cannot be
seen by any rational being unless he takes a clear view of the love of
the sex in its degrees and diversities, and of its chaste principles on
the one part, and of its unchaste principles on the other, arranging
each part into genera and species, and thereby distinguishing them.
Without such a view and arrangement, it is impossible there should exist
in any one's idea a discrimination between the chaste principle as to
more and less, and between the unchaste principle as to more and less;
and without these distinctions all relation perishes, and therewith all
perspicacity in matters of judgement, and the understanding is involved
in such a shade, that it does not know how to distinguish fornication
from adultery, and still less the milder kinds of fornication from the
more grievous, and in like manner of adultery; thus it mixes evils, and
of different evils makes one pottage, and of different goods one paste.
In order therefore that the love of the sex may be distinctly known as
to that part by which it inclines and makes advances to adulterous love
altogether opposite to conjugial love, it is expedient to examine its
beginning, which is fornication; and this we will do in the following
series: I. _Fornication is of the love of the sex._ II. _This love
commences when a youth begins to think and act from his own
understanding and his voice to be masculine._ III. _Fornication is of
the natural man._ IV. _Fornication is lust, but not the lust of
adultery._ V. _With some men the love of the sex cannot without hurt be
totally checked from going forth into fornication._ VI. _Therefore in
populous cities public stews are tolerated._ VII. _The lust of
fornication is light, so far as it looks to conjugial love, and gives
this love the preference._ VIII. _The lust of fornication is grievous,
so far as it looks to adultery._ IX. _The lust of fornication is more
grievous, as it verges to the desire of varieties and of defloration._
X. _The sphere of the lust of fornication, such as it is in the
beginning, is a middle sphere between the sphere of adulterous love and
the sphere of conjugial love, and makes an equilibrium._ XI. _Care is to
be taken, lest, by inordinate and immoderate fornications, conjugial
love be destroyed._ XII. _Inasmuch as the conjugial principle of one man
with one wife is the jewel of human life and the reservoir of the
Christian religion._ XIII. _With those who, from various reasons, cannot
as yet enter into marriage, and from their passion for the sex, cannot
restrain their lusts, this conjugial principle may be preserved, if the
vague love of the sex be confined to one mistress._ XIV. _Keeping a
mistress is preferable to vague amours, if only one is kept, and she be
neither a maiden nor a married woman, and the love of the mistress be
kept separate from conjugial love._ We proceed to an explanation of each
article.

445. I. FORNICATION IS OF THE LOVE OF THE SEX. We say that fornication
is of the love of the sex, because it is not the love of the sex but is
derived from it. The love of the sex is like a fountain, from which both
conjugial and adulterous love may be derived; they may also be derived
by means of fornication, and also without it: for the love of the sex is
in every man (_homo_), and either does or does not put itself forth: if
it puts itself forth before marriage with a harlot, it is called
fornication; if not until with a wife, it is called marriage; if after
marriage with another woman, it is called adultery: wherefore, as we
have said, the love of the sex is like a fountain, from which may flow
both chaste and unchaste love: but with what caution and prudence chaste
conjugial love can proceed by fornication, yet from what imprudence
unchaste or adulterous love can proceed thereby, we will explain in what
follows. Who can draw the conclusion, that he that has committed
fornication cannot be more chaste in marriage?

446. II. THE LOVE OF THE SEX, FROM WHICH FORNICATION IS DERIVED,
COMMENCES WHEN A YOUTH BEGINS TO THINK AND ACT FROM HIS OWN
UNDERSTANDING, AND HIS VOICE TO BE MASCULINE. This article is adduced to
the intent, that the birth of the love of the sex, and thence of
fornication, may be known, as taking place when the understanding begins
of itself to become rational, or from its own reason to discern and
provide such things as are of emolument and use, whereto in such case
what has been implanted in the memory from parents and masters, serves
as a plane. At that time a change takes place in the mind; it before
thought only from things introduced into the memory, by meditating upon
and obeying them; it afterwards thinks from reason exercised upon them,
and then, under the guidance of the love, it arranges into a new order
the things seated in the memory, and in agreement with that order it
disposes its own life, and successively thinks more and more according
to its own reason, and wills from its own freedom. It is well known that
the love of the sex follows the commencement of a man's own
understanding, and advances according to its vigor; and this is a proof
that that love ascends and descends as the understanding ascends and
descends: by ascending we mean into wisdom, and by descending, into
insanity; and wisdom consists in restraining the love of the sex, and
insanity in allowing it a wide range: if it be allowed to run into
fornication, which is the beginning of its activity, it ought to be
moderated from principles of honor and morality implanted in the memory
and thence in the reason, and afterwards to be implanted in the reason
and in the memory. The reason why the voice also begins to be masculine,
together with the commencement of a man's own understanding, is, because
the understanding thinks, and by thought speaks; which is a proof that
the understanding constitutes the man (_vir_), and also his male
principle; consequently, that as his understanding is elevated, so he
becomes a man-man (_homo vir_), and also a male man (_masculus vir_);
see above, n. 432, 433.

447. III. FORNICATION IS OF THE NATURAL MAN, in like manner as the love
of the sex, which, if it becomes active before marriage, is called
fornication. Every man (_homo_) is born corporeal, becomes sensual,
afterwards natural, and successively rational; and, if in this case he
does not stop in his progress, he becomes spiritual. The reason why he
thus advances step by step, is, in order that planes may be formed, on
which superior principles may rest and find support, as a palace on its
foundations: the ultimate plane, with those that are formed upon it, may
also be compared to ground, in which, when prepared, noble seeds are
sown. As to what specifically regards the love of the sex, it also is
first corporeal, for it commences from the flesh: next it becomes
sensual, for the five senses receive delight from its common principle;
afterwards it becomes natural like the same love with other animals,
because it is a vague love of the sex; but as a man was born to become
spiritual, it becomes afterwards natural-rational, and from
natural-rational spiritual, and lastly spiritual-natural; and in this
case, that love made spiritual flows into and acts upon rational love,
and through this flows into and acts upon sensual love, and lastly
through this flows into and acts upon that love in the body and the
flesh; and as this is its ultimate plane, it acts upon it spiritually,
and at the same time rationally and sensually; and it flows in and acts
thus successively while the man is meditating upon it, but
simultaneously while he is in its ultimate. The reason why fornication
is of the natural man, is, because it proceeds proximately from the
natural love of the sex; and it may become natural-rational, but not
spiritual, because the love of the sex cannot become spiritual, until it
becomes conjugial; and the love of the sex from natural becomes
spiritual, when a man recedes from vague lust, and devotes himself to
one of the sex, to whose soul he unites his own.

448. IV. FORNICATION IS LUST, BUT NOT THE LUST OF ADULTERY. The reasons
why fornication is lust are, 1. Because it proceeds from the natural
man, and in everything which proceeds from the natural man, there is
concupiscence and lust; for the natural man is nothing but an abode and
receptacle of concupiscences and lust, since all the criminal
propensities inherited from the parents reside therein. 2. Because the
fornicator has a vague and promiscuous regard to the sex, and does not
as yet confine his attention to one of the sex; and so long as he is in
this state, he is prompted by lust to do what he does; but in proportion
as he confines his attention to one of the sex, and loves to conjoin his
life with hers, concupiscence becomes a chaste affection, and lust
becomes human love.

449. That the lust of fornication is not the lust of adultery, every one
sees clearly from common perception. What law and what judge imputes a
like criminality to the fornicator as to the adulterer? The reason why
this is seen from common perception is, because fornication is not
opposed to conjugial love as adultery is. In fornication conjugial love
may lie stored up within, as what is spiritual may lie stored up in what
is natural; yea, what is spiritual is also actually disengaged from what
is natural; and when the spiritual is disengaged, then the natural
encompasses it, as bark does its wood, and a scabbard its sword, and
also serves the spiritual as a defence against violence. From these
considerations it is evident, that natural love, which is love to the
sex, precedes spiritual love which is love to one of the sex; but if
fornication comes into effect from the natural love of the sex, it may
also be wiped away, provided conjugial love be regarded, desired, and
sought, as the chief good. It is altogether otherwise with the
libidinous and obscene love of adultery, which we have shewn to be
opposite to conjugial love, and destructive thereof, in the foregoing
chapter concerning the opposition of adulterous and conjugial love:
wherefore if a confirmed and determined adulterer for various reasons
enters into a conjugial engagement, the above case is inverted, since a
natural principle lies concealed within its lascivious and obscene
things, and a spiritual appearance covers it externally. From these
considerations reason may see, that the lust of limited fornication is,
in respect to the lust of adultery, as the first warmth is to the cold
of mid-winter in northern countries.

450. V. WITH SOME MEN THE LOVE OF THE SEX CANNOT WITHOUT HURT BE TOTALLY
CHECKED FROM GOING FORTH INTO FORNICATION. It is needless to recount the
mischiefs which may be caused and produced by too great a check of the
love of the sex, with such persons as labor under a superabundant
venereal heat; from this source are to be traced the origins of certain
diseases of the body and distempers of the mind, not to mention unknown
evils, which are not to be named; it is otherwise with those whose love
of the sex is so scanty that they can resist the sallies of its lust;
also with those who are at liberty to introduce themselves into a
legitimate partnership of the bed while they are young, without doing
injury to their worldly fortunes, thus under the first favorable
impressions. As this is the case in heaven with infants, when they have
grown up to conjugial age, therefore it is unknown there what
fornication is: but the case is different in the world where matrimonial
engagements cannot be contracted till the season of youth is past, and
where, during that season, the generality live within forms of
government, where a length of time is required to perform duties, and to
acquire the property necessary to support a house and family, and then
first a suitable wife is to be courted.

[Footnote: This, like some other of the author's remarks, is not so
applicable to English laws and customs as to those of several of the
continental states, especially Germany, where men are not allowed to
marry till they have attained a certain age, or can show that they
possess the means of supporting a wife and family.]

451. VI. THEREFORE IN POPULOUS CITIES PUBLIC STEWS ARE TOLERATED. This
is adduced as a confirmation of the preceding article. It is well known
that they are tolerated by kings, magistrates, and thence by judges,
inquisitors, and the people, at London, Amsterdam, Paris, Vienna,
Venice, Naples, and even at Rome, besides many other places: among the
reasons of this toleration are those also above mentioned.

452. VII. FORNICATION IS (COMPARATIVELY) LIGHT SO FAR AS IT LOOKS TO
CONJUGIAL LOVE AND GIVES THIS LOVE THE PREFERENCE. There are degrees of
the qualities of evil, as there are degrees of the qualities of good;
wherefore every evil is lighter and more grievous, as every good is
better and more excellent. The case is the same with fornication; which,
as being a lust, and a lust of the natural man not yet purified, is an
evil; but as every man (_homo_) is capable of being purified, therefore
so far as it approaches a purified state, so far that evil becomes
lighter, for so far it is wiped away; thus so far as fornication
approaches conjugial love, which is a purified state of the love of the
sex, (so far it becomes a lighter evil): that the evil of fornication is
more grievous, so far as it approaches the love of adultery, will be
seen in the following article. The reason why fornication is light so
far as it looks to conjugial love, is, because it then looks from the
unchaste state wherein it is, to a chaste state; and so far as it gives
a preference to the latter, so far also it is in it as to the
understanding; and so far as it not only prefers it, but also pre-loves
it, so far also it is in it as to the will, thus as to the internal man;
and in this case fornication, if the man nevertheless persists in it, is
to him a necessity, the causes whereof he well examines in himself.
There are two reasons which render fornication light with those who
prefer and pre-love the conjugial state; the first is, that conjugial
life is their purpose, intention, or end, the other is, that they
separate good from evil with themselves. In regard to the FIRST,--that
conjugial life is their purpose, intention, or end, it has the above
effect, inasmuch as every man is such as he is in his purpose,
intention, or end, and is also such before the Lord and the angels; yea,
he is likewise regarded as such by the wise in the world; for intention
is the soul of all actions, and causes innocence and guilt in the world,
and after death imputation. In regard to the OTHER reason,--that those
who prefer conjugial love to the lust of fornication, separate evil from
good, thus what is unchaste from what is chaste, it has the above
effect, inasmuch as those who separate those two principles by
perception and intention, before they are in good or the chaste
principle, are also separated and purified from the evil of that lust,
when they come into the conjugial state. That this is not the case with
those who in fornication look to adultery, will be seen in the next
article.

453. VIII. THE LUST OF FORNICATION IS GRIEVOUS, SO FAR AS IT LOOKS TO
ADULTERY. In the lust of fornication all those look to adultery who do
not believe adulteries to be sins, and who think similarly of marriage
and of adulteries, only with the distinction of what is allowed and what
is not; these also make one evil out of all evils, and mix them
together, like dirt with eatable food in one dish, and like things vile
and refuse with wine in one cup, and thus eat and drink: in this manner
they act with the love of the sex, fornication and keeping a mistress,
with adultery of a milder sort, of a grievous sort, and of a more
grievous sort, yea with ravishing or defloration: moreover, they not
only mingle all those things, but also mix them in marriages, and defile
the latter with a like notion; but where it is the case, that the latter
are not distinguished from the former, such persons, after their vague
commerce with the sex, are overtaken by colds, loathings, and
nauseousness, at first in regard to a married partner, next in regard to
women in other characters, and lastly in regard to the sex. It is
self-evident that with such persons there is no purpose, intention, or
end, of what is good or chaste, that they may be exculpated, and no
separation of evil from good, or of what is unchaste from what is
chaste, that they may be purified, as in the case of those who from
fornication look to conjugial love, and give the latter the preference,
(concerning whom, see the foregoing article, n. 452). The above
observations I am allowed to confirm by this new information from
heaven: I have met with several, who in the world had lived outwardly
like others, wearing rich apparel, feasting daintily, trading like
others with money, borrowed upon interest, frequenting stage
exhibitions, conversing jocosely on love affairs as from wantonness,
besides other similar things: and yet the angels charged those things
upon some as evils of sin, and upon others as not evils, and declared
the latter guiltless, but the former guilty; and on being questioned why
they did so, when the deeds were alike, they replied, that they regard
all from purpose, intention, or end, and distinguish accordingly; and
that on this account they excuse and condemn those whom the end excuses
and condemns, since all in heaven are influenced by a good end, and all
in hell by an evil end; and that this, and nothing else, is meant by the
Lord's words, _Judge not, that ye be not judged_, Matt. vii. I.

454. IX. THE LUST OF FORNICATION IS MORE GRIEVOUS AS IT VERGES TO THE
DESIRE OF VARIETIES AND OF DEFLORATION. The reason of this is, because
these two desires are accessories of adulteries, and thus aggravations
of it: for there are mild adulteries, grievous adulteries, and most
grievous; and each kind is estimated according to its opposition to, and
consequent destruction of, conjugial love. That the desire of varieties
and the desire of defloration, strengthened by being brought into act,
destroy conjugial love, and drown it as it were in the bottom of the
sea, will be seen presently, when those subjects come to be treated of.

455. X. THE SPHERE OF THE LUST OF FORNICATION, SUCH AS IT IS IN THE
BEGINNING, IS A MIDDLE SPHERE BETWEEN THE SPHERE OF ADULTEROUS LOVE AND
THE SPHERE OF CONJUGIAL LOVE, AND MAKES AN EQUILIBRIUM. The two spheres,
of adulterous love and conjugial love, were treated of in the foregoing
chapter, where it was shewn that the sphere of adulterous love ascends
from hell, and the sphere of conjugial love descends from heaven, n.
435; that those two spheres meet each other in each world, but do not
unite, n. 436; that between those two spheres there is an equilibrium,
and that man is in it, n. 437; that a man can turn himself to whichever
sphere he pleases; but that so far as he turns himself to the one, so
far he turns himself from the other, n. 438: for the meaning of spheres,
see n. 434, and the passages there cited. The reason why the sphere of
the lust of fornication is a middle sphere between those two spheres,
and makes an equilibrium, is, because while any one is in it, he can
turn himself to the sphere of conjugial love, that is, to this love, and
also to the sphere of the love of adultery, that is, to the love of
adultery; but if he turns himself to conjugial love, he turns himself to
heaven; if to the love of adultery, he turns himself to hell: each is in
the man's free determination, good pleasure, and will, to the intent
that he may act freely according to reason, and not from instinct:
consequently that he may be a man, and appropriate to himself influx,
and not a beast, which appropriates nothing thereof to itself. It is
said the lust of fornication such as it is in the beginning, because at
that time it is in a middle state. Who does not know that whatever a man
does in the beginning, is from concupiscence, because from the natural
man? And who does not know that that concupiscence is not imputed, while
from natural he is becoming spiritual? The case is similar in regard to
the lust of fornication, while a man's love is becoming conjugial.

456. XI. CARE IS TO BE TAKEN LEST, BY IMMODERATE AND INORDINATE
FORNICATIONS, CONJUGIAL LOVE BE DESTROYED. By immoderate and inordinate
fornications, whereby conjugial love is destroyed, we mean fornications
by which not only the strength is enervated, but also all the delicacies
of conjugial love are taken away; for from unbridled indulgence in such
fornications, not only weakness and consequent wants, but also
impurities and immodesties are occasioned, by reason of which conjugial
love cannot be perceived and felt in its purity and chastity, and thus
neither in its sweetness and the delights of its prime; not to mention
the mischiefs occasioned to both the body and the mind, and also the
disavowed allurements, which not only deprive conjugial love of its
blessed delights, but also take it away, and change it into cold, and
thereby into loathing. Such fornications are the violent excesses
whereby conjugial sports are changed into tragic scenes: for immoderate
and inordinate fornications are like burning flames which, arising out
of ultimates, consume the body, parch the fibres, defile the blood, and
vitiate the rational principles of the mind; for they burst forth like a
fire from the foundation into the house, which consumes the whole. To
prevent these mischiefs is the duty of parents; for a grown up youth,
inflamed with lust, cannot as yet from reason impose restraint upon
himself.

457. XII. INASMUCH AS THE CONJUGIAL PRINCIPLE OF ONE MAN WITH ONE WIFE
IS THE JEWEL OF HUMAN LIFE AND THE RESERVOIR OF THE CHRISTIAN RELIGION.
These two points have been demonstrated universally and singularly in
the whole preceding part of CONJUGIAL LOVE AND ITS CHASTE DELIGHTS. The
reason why it is the jewel of human life is, because the quality of a
man's life is according to the quality of that love with him; since that
love constitutes the inmost of his life; for it is the life of wisdom
dwelling with its love, and of love dwelling with its wisdom, and hence
it is the life of the delights of each; in a word, a man is a soul
living by means of that love: hence, the conjugial tie of one man with
one wife is called the jewel of human life. This is confirmed from the
following articles adduced above: only with one wife there exists truly
conjugial friendship, confidence, and potency, because there is a union
of minds, n. 333, 334: in and from a union with one wife there exist
celestial blessednesses, spiritual satisfactions, and thence natural
delights, which from the beginning have been provided for those who are
in love truly conjugial, n. 335. That it is the fundamental love of all
celestial, spiritual, and derivative natural loves, and that into that
love are collected all joys and delights from first to last, n. 65-69:
and that viewed in its origin, it is the sport of wisdom and love, has
been fully demonstrated in the CONJUGIAL LOVE AND ITS CHASTE DELIGHTS,
which constitutes the first part of this work.

458. The reason why that love is the reservoir of the Christian religion
is, because this religion unites and dwells with that love; for it was
shewn, that none come into that love, and can be in it, but those who
approach the Lord, and do the truths of his church and its goods; n. 70,
71: that that love is from the only Lord, and that hence it exists with
those who are of the Christian religion; n. 131, 335, 336: that that
love is according to the state of the church, because it is according to
the state of wisdom with man; n. 130. That these things are so, was
fully confirmed in the chapter on the correspondence of that love with
the marriage of the Lord and the church; n. 116, 131; and in the chapter
on the origin of that love from the marriage of good and truth; n.
83-102.

459. XIII. WITH THOSE WHO, FROM VARIOUS REASONS, CANNOT AS YET ENTER
INTO MARRIAGE, AND FROM THEIR PASSION FOR THE SEX, CANNOT MODERATE THEIR
LUSTS, THIS CONJUGIAL PRINCIPLE MAY BE PRESERVED, IF THE VAGUE LOVE OF
THE SEX BE CONFINED TO ONE MISTRESS. That immoderate and inordinate lust
cannot be entirely checked by those who have a strong passion for the
sex, is what reason sees and experience proves: with a view therefore
that such lust may be restrained, in the case of one whose passions are
thus violent, and who for several reasons cannot precipitately enter
into marriage, and that it may be rendered somewhat moderate and
ordinate, there seems to be no other refuge, and as it were asylum, than
the keeping of a woman, who in French is called _maitresse_. It is well
known that in kingdoms, where certain forms and orders are to be
observed, matrimonial engagements cannot be contracted by many till the
season of youth is past; for duties are first to be performed, and
property to be acquired for the support of a house and family, and then
first a suitable wife is to be courted; and yet in the previous season
of youth few are able to keep the springing fountain of manliness
closed, and reserved for a wife: it is better indeed that it should be
reserved; but if this cannot be done on account of the unbridled power
of lust, a question occurs, whether there may not be an intermediate
means, by which conjugial love may be prevented from perishing in the
mean time. That keeping a mistress is such a means appears reasonable
from the following considerations: I. That by this means promiscuous
inordinate fornications are restrained and limited, and thus a less
disorderly state is induced, which more resembles conjugial life. II.
That the ardor of venereal propensities, which in the beginning is
boiling hot, and as it were burning, is appeased and mitigated; and
thereby the lascivious passion for the sex, which is filthy, is tempered
by somewhat analogous to marriage. III. By this means too the strength
is not cast away, neither are weaknesses contracted, as by vague and
unlimited amours. IV. By this means also disease of the body and
insanity of mind are avoided. V. In like manner by this means
adulteries, which are whoredoms with wives, and debaucheries, which are
violations of maidens, are guarded against; to say nothing of such
criminal acts as are not to be named; for a stripling does not think
that adulteries and debaucheries are different from fornications; thus
he conceives that the one is the same with the other; nor is he able
from reason to resist the enticements of some of the sex, who are
proficients in meretricious arts: but in keeping a mistress, which is a
more ordinate and safer fornication, he can learn and see the above
distinctions. VI. By keeping a mistress, also no entrance is afforded to
the four kinds of lusts, which are in the highest degree destructive of
conjugial love,--the lust of defloration, the lust of varieties, the
lust of violation, and the lust of seducing innocences, which are
treated of in the following pages. These observations, however, are not
intended for those who can check the tide of lust; nor for those who can
enter into marriage during the season of youth, and offer and impart to
their wives the first fruits of their manliness.

460. XIV. KEEPING A MISTRESS IS PREFERABLE TO VAGUE AMOURS, PROVIDED
ONLY ONE IS KEPT AND SHE BE NEITHER A MAIDEN NOR A MARRIED WOMAN, AND
THE LOVE OF THE MISTRESS BE KEPT SEPARATE FROM CONJUGIAL LOVE. At what
time and with what persons keeping a mistress is preferable to vague
amours, has been pointed out just above. I. The reason why only one
mistress is to be kept, is, because if more than one be kept, a
polygamical principle gains influence, which induces in a man a merely
natural state, and thrusts him down into a sensual state, so much so
that he cannot be elevated into a spiritual state, in which conjugial
love must be; see n. 338, 339. II. The reason why this mistress must not
be a maiden, is because conjugial love with women acts in unity with
their virginity, and hence constitutes the chastity, purity, and
sanctity of that love; wherefore when a woman makes an engagement and
allotment of her virginity to any man, it is the same thing as giving
him a certificate that she will love him to eternity: on this account a
maiden cannot, from any rational consent, barter away her virginity,
unless when entering into the conjugial covenant: it is also the crown
of her honor: wherefore to seize it without a covenant of marriage, and
afterwards to discard her, is to make a courtezan of a maiden, who might
have been a bride or a chaste wife, or to defraud some man; and each of
these is hurtful. Therefore whoever takes a maiden and unites her to
himself as a mistress, may indeed dwell with her, and thereby initiate
her into the friendship of love, but still with a constant intention, if
he does not play the whoremaster, that she shall be or become his wife.
III. That the kept mistress must not be a married woman, because this is
adultery, is evident. IV. The reason why the love of a mistress is to be
kept separate from conjugial love, is because those loves are distinct,
and therefore ought not to be mixed together: for the love of a mistress
is an unchaste, natural, and external love; whereas the love of marriage
is chaste, spiritual, and internal. The love of a mistress keeps the
souls of two persons distinct, and unites only the sensual principles of
the body; but the love of marriage unites souls, and from their union
conjoins also the sensual principles of the body, until from two they
become as one, which is one flesh. V. The love of a mistress enters only
into the understanding and the things which depend on it; but the love
of marriage enters also into the will and the things which depend on it,
consequently into every thing appertaining to man (_homo_); wherefore if
the love of a mistress becomes the love of marriage, a man cannot
retract from any principle of right, and without violating the conjugial
union; and if he retracts and marries another woman, conjugial love
perishes in consequence of the breach thereof. It is to be observed,
that the love of a mistress is kept separate from conjugial love by this
condition, that no engagement of marriage be made with the mistress, and
that she be not induced to form any such expectation. Nevertheless it is
far better that the torch of the love of the sex be first lighted with a
wife.

       *       *       *       *       *

461. To the above I shall add the following MEMORABLE RELATION. I was
once conversing with a novitiate spirit who, during his abode in the
world, had meditated much about heaven and hell. (Novitiate spirits are
men newly deceased, who are called spirits, because they are then
spiritual men.) As soon as he entered into the spiritual world he began
to meditate in like manner about heaven and hell, and seemed to himself,
when meditating about heaven, to be in joy, and when about hell, in
sorrow. The rejoicings being over, business began. Caesar was,
of course, supreme. He was made inspector of public morals, the censorship
being deemed inadequate to curb the inordinate extravagance. He was
named Dictator for ten years, with a right of nominating the person
whom the people were to choose for their consuls and praetors. The clubs
and caucuses, the bribery of the tribes, the intimidation, the
organized bands of voters formed out of the clients of the aristocracy,
were all at an end. The courts of law were purified.
No more judges were to be bought with money or by fouler temptations.
The Leges Julias became a practical reality. One remarkable and darable
reform was undertaken and carried through amidst the jests of Cicero
and the other wits of the time--the revision of the Roman calendar. The
distribution of the year had been governed hitherto by the motions
of the moon. The twelve annual moons had fixed at twelve the number
of the months, and the number of days required to bring the lunar year
into correspondence with the solar had been supplied by irregular
intercalations, at the direction of the Sacred College. But the Sacred
College during the last distracted century had neglected their office.
The lunar year was now sixty-five days in advance of the sun. The
so-called winter was really the autumn, the spring the winter. The
summer solstice fell at the beginning of the legal September. On Caesar
as Pontifex Maximus devolved the duty of bringing confusion into order,
and the completeness with which the work was accomplished at the
first moment of his leisure shows that he had found time in the
midst of his campaigns to think of other things than war or politics.
Sosigenes, an Alexandrian astronomer, was called in to superintend the
reform. It is not unlikely that he had made acquaintance with Sosigenes
in Egypt, and had discussed the problem with him in the hours during
which he is supposed to have amused himself "in the arms of Cleopatra."
Sosigenes, leaving the moon altogether, took the sun for the basis of
the new system. The Alexandrian observers had discovered that the annual
course of the sun was completed in 365 days and six hours. The lunar
twelve was allowed to remain to fix the number of the months. The numbers
of days in each month were adjusted to absorb 365 days. The superfluous
hours were allowed to accumulate, and every fourth year an
additional day was to be intercalated. An arbitrary step was required
to repair the negligence of the past. Sixty-five days had still to be
made good. The new system, depending wholly on the sun, would naturally
have commenced with the winter solstice. But Caesar so far deferred to
usage as to choose to begin, not with the solstice itself, but with
the first new moon which followed. It so happened in that year that the
new moon was eighty days after the solstice; and thus the next year
started, as it continues to start, from the 1st of January. The eight
days were added to the sixty-five, and the current year was lengthened
by nearly three months. It pleased Cicero to mock, as if Caesar, not
contented with the earth, was making himself the master of the
heavens.
"Lyra," he said, "was to set according to the edict;" but the unwise man
was not Caesar in this instance.[1]
While Sosigenes was at work with the calendar, Caesar personally again
revised the Senate. He expelled every member who had been guilty of
extortion or corruption; he supplied the vacancies with officers of
merit, with distinguished colonists, with foreigners, with meritorious
citizens, even including Gauls, from all parts of the Empire. Time,
unfortunately, had to pass before these new men could take their places,
but meanwhile he treated the existing body with all forms of respect,
and took no step on any question of public moment till the Senate had
deliberated on it. As a fitting close to the war he proclaimed an amnesty
to all who had borne arms against him. The past was to be forgotten,
and all his efforts were directed to the regeneration of Roman society.
Cicero paints the habits of fashionable life in colors which were
possibly exaggerated; but enough remains of authentic fact to justify
the general truth of the picture.
Women had forgotten their honor, children their respect for parents.
Husbands had murdered wives, and wives husbands. Parricide and incest
formed common incidents of domestic Italian history; and, as
justice had been ordered in the last years of the Republic, the most
abandoned villain who came into court with a handful of gold was assured
of impunity. Rich men, says Suetonius, were never deterred from crime
by a fear of forfeiting their estates; they had but to leave Italy, and
their property was secured to them. It was held an extraordinary step
toward improvement when Caesar abolished the monstrous privilege, and
ordered that parricides should not only be exiled, but should
forfeit everything that belonged to them, and that minor felons should
forfeit half their estates.

Cicero had prophesied so positively that Caesar would throw off the
mask of clemency when the need for it was gone, that he was disappointed
to find him persevere in the same gentleness, and was impatient for
revenge to begin. So bitter Cicero was that he once told Atticus he could
almost wish himself to be the object of some cruel prosecution, that
the tyrant might have the disgrace of it.[2]
He could not deny that "the tyrant" was doing what, if Rome was to
continue an ordered commonwealth, it was essential must be done.
Caesar's acts were unconstitutional! Yes; but constitutions are made
for men, not men for constitutions, and Cicero had long seen
that the Constitution was at an end. It had died of its own iniquities.
He had perceived in his better moments that Caesar and Caesar only could
preserve such degrees of freedom as could be retained without universal
destruction. But he refused to be comforted. He considered it a disgrace
to them all that Caesar was alive.[3] Why did not somebody kill him?
Kill him? And what then? On that side too the outlook was not
promising. News had come that Labienus and young Cnaeus Pompey had
united their forces in Spain. The whole Peninsula was in revolt, and the
counter-revolution was not impossible after all. He reflected with terror
on the sarcasms which he had flung on young Pompey. He knew him
to be a fool and a savage. "Hang me," he said, "if I do not prefer
an old and kind master to trying experiments with a new and cruel one.
The laugh will be on the other side then." [4]
Far had Cicero fallen from his dream of being the greatest man in
Rome!
Condemned to immortality by his genius, yet condemned also to survive in
the portrait of himself which he has so unconsciously and so innocently
drawn.

The accounts from Spain were indeed most serious. It is the misfortune
of men of superior military ability that their subordinates are
generally failures when trusted with independent commands. Accustomed
to obey implicitly the instructions of their chief, they have done what
they have been told to do, and their virtue has been in never thinking
for themselves. They succeed, and they forget why they succeed, and in
part attribute their fortune to their own skill. With Alexander's
generals, with Caesar's, with Cromwell's, even with some of Napoleon's,
the story has been the same. They have been self-confident, yet when
thrown upon their own resources they have driven back upon a
judgment which has been inadequately trained. The mind which guided
them is absent. The instrument is called on to become self-acting, and
necessarily acts unwisely.
Caesar's lieutenants while under his own eye had executed his orders
with the precision of a machine. When left to their own responsibility
they were invariably found wanting. Among all his officers there
was not a man of real eminence. Labienus, the ablest of them, had but
to desert Caesar, to commit blunder upon blunder, and to ruin
the cause to which he attached himself. Antony, Lepidus, Trebonius,
Calvinus, Cassius Longinus, Quintus Cicero, Sabinus, Decimus Brutus,
Vatinius, were trusted with independent authority, only to show themselves
unfit to use it. Cicero had guessed shrewdly that Caesar's greatest
difficulties would begin with his victory.
He had not a man who was able to govern under him away from his
immediate eye.

       Cassius Longinus, Trebonius, and Marcus Lepidus had been sent to
Spain after the battle of Pharsalia.

They had quarrelled among themselves.

They had driven the legions into mutiny. The authority of Rome had
broken down as entirely as when Sertorius was defying the Senate; and
Spain had become the receptacle of all the active disaffection
which remained in the Empire. Thither had drifted the wreck of Scipio's
African army. Thither had gathered the outlaws, pirates, and banditti
of Italy and the Islands.
Thither too had come flights of Numidians and Moors in hopes of
plunder; and Pompey's sons and Labienus had collected an army as numerous
as that which had been defeated at Thapsus, and composed of materials far
more dangerous and desperate. There were thirteen legions of
them in all, regularly formed, with eagles and standards; two which
had deserted from Trebonius; one made out of Roman Spanish settlers, or
old soldiers of Pompey's who had been dismissed at Lerida; four out of
the remnants of the campaign in Africa; the rest a miscellaneous
combination of the mutinous legions of Longinus and outlawed adventurers
who knew that there was no forgiveness for them, and were ready to fight
while they could stand. It was the last cast of the dice for the old
party of the aristocracy.
Appearances were thrown off. There were no more Catos, no more phantom
Senates to lend to rebellion the pretended dignity of a national cause.

The true barbarian was there in his natural colors.

Very reluctantly Caesar found that he must himself grapple with this
last convulsion. The sanguinary obstinacy which no longer proposed any
object to itself save defiance and revenge, was converting a war which
at first wore an aspect of a legitimate constitutional struggle, into a
conflict with brigands. Clemency had ceased to be possible, and
Caesar would have gladly left to others the execution in person
of the sharp surgery which was now necessary. He was growing old:
fifty-five this summer. His health was giving way. For fourteen
years he had known no rest. That he could have endured so long such a
strain on mind and body was due only to his extraordinary abstinence,
to the simplicity of his habits, and the calmness of temperament which
in the most anxious moments refused to be agitated. But the work was
telling at last on his constitution, and he departed on his last campaign
with confessed unwillingness. The future was clouded with uncertainty.
A few more years of life might enable him to introduce into the
shattered frame of the Commonwealth some durable elements. His
death in the existing confusion might be as fatal as Alexander's. That
some one person not liable to removal under the annual wave of
electoral agitation must preside over the army and the administration,
had been evident in lucid moments even to Cicero.

To leave the prize to be contended for among the military chiefs was
to bequeath a legacy of civil wars and probable disruption; to compound
with the embittered remnants of the aristocracy who were still in the
field would intensify the danger; yet time and peace alone could give
opportunity for the conditions of a permanent settlement to shape
themselves. The name of Caesar had become identified with the stability
of the Empire. He no doubt foresaw that the only possible chief would
be found in his own family.
Being himself childless, he had adopted his sister's grandson, Octavius,
afterward Augustus, a fatherless boy of seventeen; and had trained him
under his own eye. He had discerned qualities doubtless in his nephew
which, if his own life was extended for a few years longer, might
enable the boy to become the representative of his house and perhaps
the heir of his power. In the unrecorded intercourse between
the uncle and his niece's child lies the explanation of the rapidity
with which the untried Octavius seized the reins when all was again
chaos, and directed the Commonwealth upon the lines which it was
to follow during the remaining centuries of Roman power.

Octavius accompanied Caesar into Spain. They travelled in a carriage,
having as a third with them the general whom Caesar most trusted and
liked, and whom he had named in his will as one of Octavius's guardians,
Decimus Brutus--the same officer who had commanded his fleet for him
at Quiberon and at Marseilles, and had now been selected as the future
governor of Cisalpine Gaul. Once more it was midwinter when they left
Rome. They travelled swiftly; and Caesar, as usual, himself brought the
news that he was coming. But the winter season did not bring
to him its usual advantages, for the whole Peninsula had revolted, and
Pompey and Labienus were able to shelter their troops in the towns, while
Caesar was obliged to keep the field. Attempts here and there to capture
detached positions led to no results. On both sides now the war was
carried on upon the principles which the Senate had adopted from the
first. Prisoners from the revolted legions were instantly executed, and
Cnaeus Pompey murdered the provincials whom he suspected of an inclination
for Caesar. Attagona was at last taken. Caesar moved on Cordova; and
Pompey, fearing that the important cities might seek their own
security by coming separately to terms, found it necessary to risk a
battle.

[Sidenote: March 17, B.C. 45.] [Sidenote: B.C. 45.] The scene of the
conflict which ended the civil war was the plain of Munda. The day was
the 17th of March, B.C. 45. Spanish tradition places Munda on the
Mediterranean, near Gibraltar. The real Munda was on the Guadalquiver,
so near to Cordova that the remains of the beaten army found shelter
within its walls after the battle. Caesar had been so invariably
victorious in his engagements in the open field that the result
might have been thought a foregone conclusion. Legendary history reported
in the next generation that the elements had been pregnant with auguries.
Images had sweated; the sky had blazed with meteors; celestial armies,
the spirits of the past and future, had battled among the constellations.
The signs had been unfavorable to the Pompeians; the eagles of their
legions had dropped the golden thunderbolts from their talons, spread
their wings, and had flown away to Caesar. In reality, the eagles
had remained in their places till the standards fell from the hands
of their dead defenders; and the battle was one of the most desperate in
which Caesar had ever been engaged. The numbers were nearly equal--the
material on both sides equally good. Pompey's army was composed of
revolted Roman soldiers.

In arms, in discipline, in stubborn fierceness, there was no
difference. The Pompeians had the advantage of situation, the village
of Munda, with the hill on which it stood, being in the centre
of their lines. The Moorish and Spanish auxiliaries, of whom there were
large bodies on either side, stood apart when the legions
closed; they having no further interest in the matter than in siding
with the conqueror, when fortune had decided who the conqueror was to
be. There were no manoeuvres; no scientific evolutions.
The Pompeians knew that there was no hope for them if they were
defeated.
Caesar's men, weary and savage at the protraction of the war, were determined
to make a last end of it; and the two armies fought hand to hand with
their short swords, with set teeth and pressed lips, opened only
with a sharp cry as an enemy fell dead. So equal was the struggle, so
doubtful at one moment the issue of it, that Caesar himself sprang
from his horse, seized a standard, and rallied a wavering legion.

It seemed as if the men meant all to stand and kill or be killed as long
as daylight lasted. The ill fate of Labienus decided the victory. He had
seen, as he supposed, some movement which alarmed him among
Caesar's Moorish auxiliaries, and had galloped conspicuously across the
field to lead a division to check them. A shout rose, "He flies--he
flies!" A panic ran along the Pompeian lines. They gave way, and Caesar's
legions forced a road between their ranks. One wing broke off and made
for Cordova; the rest plunged wildly within the ditch and walls of Munda,
the avenging sword smiting behind into the huddled mass of fugitives.
Scarcely a prisoner was taken. Thirty thousand fell on the field,
among them three thousand Roman knights, the last remains of the haughty
youths who had threatened Caesar with their swords in the
senate-house, and had hacked Clodius's mob in the Forum. Among them was
slain Labienus--his desertion of his general, his insults and his
cruelties to his comrades, expiated at last in his own blood. Attius
Varus was killed also, who had been with Juba when he destroyed
Curio. The tragedy was being knitted up in the deaths of the last
actors in it. The eagles of the thirteen legions were all taken. The
two Pompeys escaped on their horses, Sextus disappearing in the mountains
of Grenada or the Sierra Morena; Cnaeus flying for Gibraltar, where
he hoped to find a friendly squadron.

Munda was at once blockaded, the enclosing wall--savage evidence
of the temper of the conquerors--being built of dead bodies pinned
together with lances, and on the top of it a fringe of heads on swords'
points with the faces turned toward the town. A sally was attempted at
midnight, and failed. The desperate wretches then fought among themselves,
till at length the place was surrendered, and fourteen thousand of those
who still survived were taken, and spared. Their comrades, who had made
their way into Cordova, were less fortunate. When the result
of the battle was known, the leading citizen, who had headed the revolt
against Caesar, gathered all that belonged to him into a heap, poured
turpentine over it, and, after a last feast with his family, burnt
himself, his house, his children, and servants. In the midst of the
tumult the walls were stormed.
Cordova was given up to plunder and massacre, and twenty-two thousand
miserable people--most of them, it may be hoped, the fugitives from
Munda--were killed. The example sufficed. Every town opened its gates,
and Spain was once more submissive. Sextus Pompey successfully concealed
himself. Cnaeus reached Gibraltar, but to find that most of the ships
which he looked for had been taken by Caesar's fleet. He tried to cross
to the African coast, but was driven back by bad weather, and search
parties were instantly on his track. He had been wounded; he had
sprained his ankle in his flight. Strength and hope were gone. He was
carried on a litter to a cave on a mountain side, where his pursuers
found him, cut off his head, and spared Cicero from further anxiety.

Thus bloodily ended the Civil War, which the Senate of Rome had
undertaken against Caesar, to escape the reforms which were threatened
by his second consulship. They had involuntarily rendered their country
the best service which they were capable of conferring upon it, for the
attempts which Caesar would have made to amend a system too decayed to
benefit by the process had been rendered forever impossible by their
persistence. The free constitution of the Republic had issued at last
in elections which were a mockery of representation, in courts of law
which were an insult to justice, and in the conversion of the Provinces
of the Empire into the feeding-grounds of a gluttonous aristocracy. In
the army alone the Roman character and the Roman honor survived. In the
Imperator, therefore, as chief of the army, the care of the Provinces,
the direction of public policy, the sovereign authority in the last appeal,
could alone thenceforward reside. The Senate might remain as a Council
of State; the magistrates might bear their old names, and administer
their old functions. But the authority of the executive government lay
in the loyalty, the morality, and the patriotism of the legions to whom
the power had been transferred. Fortunately for Rome, the change came
before decay had eaten into the bone, and the genius of the Empire had
still a refuge from platform oratory and senatorial wrangling in
the hearts of her soldiers.

Caesar did not immediately return to Italy. Affairs in Rome were no longer
pressing, and, after the carelessness and blunders of his lieutenants,
the administration of the Peninsula required his personal inspection.
From open revolts in any part of the Roman dominions he had nothing
more to fear. The last card had been played, and the game of
open resistance was lost beyond recovery. There might be dangers
of another kind: dangers from ambitious generals, who might hope
to take Caesar's place on his death; or dangers from constitutional
philosophers, like Cicero, who had thought from the first that the
Civil War had been a mistake, "that Caesar was but mortal, and that
there were many ways in which a man might die." A reflection so
frankly expressed, by so respectable a person, must have occurred
to many others as well as to Cicero; Caesar could not but have
foreseen in what resources disappointed fanaticism or baffled
selfishness might seek refuge. But of such possibilities he was
prepared to take his chance; he did not fly from them, he did not
seek them; he took his work as he found it, and remained in Spain
through the summer, imposing fines and allotting rewards, readjusting
the taxation, and extending the political privileges of the Roman
colonies. It was not till late in the autumn that he again turned
his face toward Rome.
[1] In connection with this subject it is worth while to mention
another change in the division of time, not introduced by Caesar,
but which came into general use about a century after.(See note to
No. 450, and the Preliminary note.)

468. VI. THE LEGITIMATE CAUSES OF THIS CONCUBINAGE ARE THE LEGITIMATE
CAUSES OF DIVORCE, WHILE THE WIFE IS NEVERTHELESS RETAINED AT HOME. By
divorce is meant the annulling of the conjugial covenant, and thence an
entire separation, and after this a full liberty to marry another wife.
The one only cause of this total separation or divorce, is adultery,
according to the Lord's precept, Matt. xix. 9. To the same cause are to
be referred manifest obscenities, which bid defiance to the restraints
of modesty, and fill and infest the house with flagitious practices of
lewdness, giving birth to adulterous immodesty, and rendering the whole
mind abandoned. To these things may be added malicious desertion, which
involves adultery, and causes a wife to commit whoredom, and thereby to
be divorced, Matt. v. 32. These three causes, being legitimate causes of
divorce,--the first and third before a public judge, and the middle one
before the man himself, as judge, are also legitimate causes of
concubinage, when the adulterous wife is retained at home. The reason
why adultery is the one only cause of divorce is, because it is
diametrically opposite to the life of conjugial love, and totally
destroys and annihilates it; see above, n. 255.

469. The reasons why, by the generality of men, the adulterous wife is
still retained at home, are, 1. Because the man is afraid to produce
witnesses in a court of justice against his wife, to accuse her of
adultery, and thereby to make the crime public; for unless
eye-witnesses, or evidences to the same amount, were produced to convict
her, he would be secretly reproached in companies of men, and openly in
companies of women. 2. He is afraid also lest his adulteress should have
the cunning to clear her conduct, and likewise lest the judges should
show favor to her, and thus his name suffer in the public esteem. 3.
Moreover, there may be domestic reasons, which may make separation from
the house unadvisable: as in case there are children, towards whom also
the adulteress has natural love; in case they are bound together by
mutual services which cannot be put an end to; in case the wife is
connected with and dependent upon her relatives, whether on the father's
or mother's side, and there is a hope of receiving an increase of
fortune from them; in case he lived with her in the beginning in habits
of agreeable intimacy; and in case she, after she became meretricious,
has the skill to soothe the man with engaging pleasantry and pretended
civility, to prevent blame being imputed to herself; not to mention
other cases, which, as in themselves they are legitimate causes of
divorce, are also legitimate causes of concubinage; for the causes of
retaining the wife at home do not take away the cause of divorce,
supposing her guilty of adultery. Who, but a person of vile character,
can fulfil the duties of the conjugial bed, and at the same time have
commerce with a strumpet? If instances of this sort are occasionally to
be met with, no favorable conclusions are to be drawn from them.

470. VII. THE JUST CAUSES OF THIS CONCUBINAGE ARE THE JUST CAUSES OF
SEPARATION FROM THE BED. There are legitimate causes of separation, and
there are just causes: legitimate causes are enforced by the decisions
of judges, and just causes by the decisions come to by the man alone.
The causes both legitimate and just of separation from the bed, and also
from the house, were briefly enumerated above, n. 252, 253; among which
are VITIATED STATES OF THE BODY, including diseases whereby the whole
body is so far infected, that the contagion may prove fatal: of this
nature are malignant and pestilential fevers, leprosies, the venereal
disease, cancers; also diseases whereby the whole body is so far weighed
down, as to admit of no sociability, and from which exhale dangerous
effluvia and noxious vapors, whether from the surface of the body, or
from its inward parts, in particular from the stomach and the lungs:
from the surface of the body proceed malignant pocks, warts, pustules,
scorbutic pthisis, virulent scab, especially if the face is disfigured
by it; from the stomach proceed foul, stinking, and rank eructations;
from the lungs, filthy and putrid exhalations arising from imposthumes,
ulcers or abscesses, or from vitiated blood or serum. Besides these
there are also other various diseases; as _lipothamia_, which is a total
faintness of body, and defect of strength; _paralysis_, which is a
loosening and relaxation of the membranes and ligaments which serve for
motion; epilepsy; permanent infirmity arising from apoplexy; certain
chronical diseases; the iliac passion; rupture; besides other diseases,
which the science of pathology teaches. VITIATED STATES OF THE MIND,
which are just causes of separation from the bed and the house, are
madness, frenzy, furious wildness, actual foolishness and idiocy, loss
of memory, and the like. That these are just causes of concubinage,
since they are just causes of separation, reason sees without the help
of a judge.

471. VIII. OF THE EXCUSATORY CAUSES OF THIS CONCUBINAGE SOME ARE REAL
AND SOME ARE NOT. Since besides the just causes which are just causes of
separation, and thence become just causes of concubinage, there are also
excusatory causes, which depend on judgement and justice with the man,
therefore these also are to be mentioned: but as the judgements of
justice may be perverted and be converted by confirmations into the
appearances of what is just, therefore these excusatory causes are
distinguished into real and not real, and are separately described.

472. IX. THE REALLY EXCUSATORY CAUSES ARE SUCH AS ARE GROUNDED IN WHAT
IS JUST. To know these causes, it may be sufficient to mention some of
them; such as having no natural affection towards the children, and a
consequent rejection of them, intemperance, drunkenness, uncleanliness,
immodesty, a desire of divulging family secrets, of disputing, of
striking, of taking revenge, of doing evil, of stealing, of deceiving;
internal dissimilitude, whence comes antipathy; a froward requirement of
the conjugial debt, whence the man becomes as cold as a stone; being
addicted to magic and witchcraft; an extreme degree of impiety; and
other similar evils.

473. There are also milder causes, which are really excusatory and which
separate from the bed, and yet not from the house; as a cessation of
prolification on the part of the wife, in consequence of advanced age,
and thence a reluctance and opposition to actual love, while the ardor
thereof still continues with the man; besides similar cases in which
rational judgement sees what is just, and which do not hurt the
conscience.

474. X. THE EXCUSATORY CAUSES WHICH ARE NOT REAL ARE SUCH AS ARE NOT
GROUNDED IN WHAT IS JUST, ALTHOUGH IN THE APPEARANCE OF WHAT IS JUST.
These are known from the really excusatory causes above mentioned, and,
if not rightly examined, may appear to be just, and yet are unjust; as
that times of abstinence are required after the bringing forth of
children, the transitory sicknesses of wives, from these and other
causes a check to prolification, polygamy permitted to the Israelites,
and other like causes of no weight as grounded in justice. These are
fabricated by the men after they have become cold, when unchaste lusts
have deprived them of conjugial love, and have infatuated them with the
idea of its likeness to adulterous love. When such men engage in
concubinage, they, in order to prevent defamation, assign such spurious
and fallacious causes as real and genuine,--and very frequently also
falsely charge them against their wives, their companions often
favorably assenting and applauding them.

475. XI. THOSE WHO FROM CAUSES LEGITIMATE, JUST, AND REALLY EXCUSATORY,
ARE ENGAGED IN THIS CONCUBINAGE, MAY AT THE SAME TIME BE PRINCIPLED IN
CONJUGIAL LOVE. We say that such may at the same time be principled in
conjugial love; and we thereby mean, that they may keep this love stored
up in themselves; for this love, in the subject in which it is, does not
perish, but is quiescent. The reasons why conjugial love is preserved
with those who prefer marriage to concubinage, and enter into the latter
from the causes above mentioned, are these; that this concubinage is not
repugnant to conjugial love; that it is not a separation from it; that
it is only a clothing encompassing it; that this clothing is taken away
from them after death. 1. That this concubinage is not repugnant to
conjugial love, follows from what was proved above; that such
concubinage, when engaged in from causes legitimate, just, and really
excusatory, is not unlawful, n. 467-473. 2. That this concubinage is not
a separation from conjugial love; for when causes legitimate, or just,
or really excusatory, arise, and persuade and compel a man, then,
conjugial love with marriage is not separated, but only interrupted; and
love interrupted, and not separated, remains in the subject. The case in
this respect is like that of a person, who, being engaged in a business
which he likes, is detained from it by company, by public sights, or by
a journey; still he does not cease to like his business: it is also like
that of a person who is fond of generous wine, and who, when he drinks
wine of an inferior quality, does not lose his taste and appetite for
that which is generous. 3. The reason why the above concubinage is only
a clothing of conjugial love encompassing it, is, because the love of
concubinage is natural, and the love of marriage spiritual; and natural
love is a veil or covering to spiritual, when the latter is interrupted:
that this is the case, is unknown to the lover; because spiritual love
is not made sensible of itself, but by natural love, and it is made
sensible as delight, in which there is blessedness from heaven: but
natural love by itself is made sensible only as delight. 4. The reason
why this veil is taken away after death, is, because then a man from
natural becomes spiritual, and instead of a material body enjoys a
substantial one, wherein natural delight grounded in spiritual is made
sensible in its perfection. That this is the case, I have heard from
communication with some in the spiritual world, even from kings there,
who in the natural world had engaged in concubinage from really
excusatory causes.

476. XII. WHILE THIS CONCUBINAGE CONTINUES, ACTUAL CONNECTION WITH A
WIFE IS NOT ALLOWABLE. The reason of this is, because in such case
conjugial love, which in itself is spiritual, chaste, pure, and holy,
becomes natural, is defiled and disregarded, and thereby perishes;
wherefore in order that this love may be preserved, it is expedient that
concubinage grounded in really excusatory causes, n. 472, 473, be
engaged in with one only, and not with two at the same time.

       *       *       *       *       *

477. To the above I will add the following MEMORABLE RELATION. I heard a
certain spirit, a youth, recently deceased, boasting of his libertinism,
and eager to establish his reputation as a man of superior masculine
powers; and in the insolence of his boasting he thus expressed himself;
"What is more dismal than for a man to imprison his love, and to confine
himself to one woman? and what is more delightful than to set the love
at liberty? Who does not grow tired of one? and who is not revived by
several? What is sweeter than promiscuous liberty, variety,
deflorations, schemes to deceive husbands, and plans of adulterous
hypocrisy? Do not those things which are obtained by cunning, deceit,
and theft, delight the inmost principles of the mind!" On hearing these
things, the bystanders said, "Speak not in such terms; you know not
where and with whom you are; you are but lately come hither. Hell is
beneath your feet, and heaven over your head; you are now in the world
which is between those two, and is called the world of spirits. All who
depart out of the world, come here, and being assembled are examined as
to their quality; and here they are prepared, the wicked for hell, and
the good for heaven. Possibly you still retain what you have heard from
priests in the world, that whoremongers and adulterers are cast down
into hell, and that chaste married partners are raised to heaven." At
this the novitiate laughed, saying, "What are heaven and hell? Is it not
heaven where any one is free; and is not he free who is allowed to love
as many as he pleases? and is not it hell where any one is a servant:
and is not he a servant who is obliged to keep to one?" But a certain
angel, looking down from heaven, heard what he said, and broke off the
conversation, lest it should proceed further and profane marriages; and
he said to him, "Come up here, and I will clearly shew you what heaven
and hell are, and what the quality of the latter is to continued
adulterers." He then shewed him the way, and he ascended: after he was
admitted he was led first into the paradisiacal garden, where were
fruit-trees and flowers, which from their beauty, pleasantness and
fragrance, tilled the mind with the delights of life. When he saw these
things, he admired them exceedingly; but he was then in external vision,
such as he had enjoyed in the world when he saw similar objects, and in
this vision he was rational; but in the internal vision, in which
adultery was the principal agent, and occupied every point of thought,
he was not rational; wherefore the external vision was closed, and the
internal opened; and when the latter was opened, he said, "What do I see
now? is it not straw and dry wood? and what do I smell now? is it not a
stench? What is become of those paradisiacal objects?" The angel said,
"They are near at hand and are present; but they do not appear before
your internal sight, which is adulterous, for it turns celestial things
into infernal, and sees only opposites. Every man has an internal and an
external mind, thus an internal and an external sight: with the wicked
the internal mind is insane, and the external wise; but with the good
the internal mind is wise, and from this also the external; and such as
the mind is, so a man in the spiritual world sees objects." After this
the angel, from the power which was given him, closed his internal
sight, and opened the external, and led him away through gates towards
the middle point of the habitations: there he saw magnificent palaces of
alabaster, marble, and various precious stones, and near them porticos,
and round about pillars overlaid and encompassed with wonderful
ornaments and decorations. When he saw these things, he was amazed, and
said, "What do I see? I see magnificent objects in their own real
magnificence, and architectonic objects in their own real art." At that
instant the angel again closed his external sight, and opened the
internal, which was evil because filthily adulterous: hereupon he
exclaimed, "What do I now see? Where am I? What is become of those
palaces and magnificent objects? I see only confused heaps, rubbish, and
places full of caverns." But presently he was brought back again to his
external sight, and introduced into one of the palaces; and he saw the
decorations of the gates, the windows, the walls, and the ceilings, and
especially of the utensils, over and round about which were celestial
forms of gold and precious stones, which cannot be described by any
language, or delineated by any art; for they surpassed the ideas of
language and the notions of art. On seeing these things he again
exclaimed, "These are the very essence of whatever is wonderful, such as
no eye had ever seen." But instantly, as before, his internal sight was
opened, the external being closed, and he was asked what he then saw? He
replied, "Nothing but decayed piles of bulrushes in this place, of straw
in that, and of fire brands in a third." Once again he was brought into
an external state of mind, and some maidens were introduced, who were
extremely beautiful, being images of celestial affection; and they, with
the sweet voice of their affection, addressed him; and instantly, on
seeing and hearing them, his countenance changed, and he returned of
himself into his internals, which were adulterous; and since such
internals cannot endure any thing of celestial love, and neither on the
other hand can they be endured by celestial love, therefore both parties
vanished,--the maidens out of sight of the man, and the man out of sight
of the maidens. After this, the angel informed him concerning the ground
and origin of the changes of the state of his sights; saying, "I
perceive that in the world, from which you are come, you have been
two-fold, in internals having been quite a different man from what you
were in externals; in externals you have been a civil, moral, and
rational man; whereas in internals, you have been neither civil, moral,
nor rational, because a libertine and an adulterer: and such men, when
they are allowed to ascend into heaven, and are there kept in their
externals, can see the heavenly things contained therein; but when their
internals are opened, instead of heavenly things they see infernal.
Know, however, that with every one in this world, externals are
successively closed, and internals are opened, and thereby they are
prepared for heaven or hell; and as the evil of adultery defiles the
internals of the mind above every other evil, you must needs be conveyed
down to the defiled principles of your love, and these are in the hells,
where the caverns are full of stench arising from dunghills. Who cannot
know from reason, that an unchaste and lascivious principle in the world
of spirits, is impure and unclean, and thus that nothing more pollutes
and defiles a man, and induces in him an infernal principle? Wherefore
take heed how you boast any longer of your whoredoms, as possessing
masculine powers therein above other men. I advertise you before hand,
that you will become feeble, so that you will scarce know where your
masculine power is. Such is the lot which awaits those who boast of
their adulterous ability." On hearing these words he descended, and
returned into the world of spirits, to his former companions, and
converse with them modestly and chastely, but not for any considerable
length of time.

       *       *       *       *       *

ON ADULTERIES AND THEIR GENERA AND DEGREES.

478. None can know that there is any evil in adultery, who judge of it
only from its externals; for in these it resembles marriage. Such
external judges, when they hear of internals, and are told that
externals thence derive their good or their evil, say with themselves,
"What are internals? Who sees them? Is not this climbing above the
sphere of every one's intelligence?" Such persons are like those who
accept all pretended good as genuine voluntary good, and who decide upon
a man's wisdom from the elegance of his conversation; or who respect the
man himself from the richness of his dress and the magnificence of his
equipage, and not from his internal habit, which is that of judgement
grounded in the affection of good. This also is like judging of the
fruit of a tree, and of any other eatable thing, from the sight and
touch only, and not of its goodness from a knowledge of its flavor: such
is the conduct of all those who are unwilling to perceive any thing
respecting man's internal. Hence comes the wild infatuation of many at
this day, who see no evil in adulteries, yea, who unite marriages with
them in the same chamber, that is, who make them altogether alike; and
this only on account of their apparent resemblance in externals. That
this is the case, was shewn me by this experimental proof: on a certain
time, the angels assembled from Europe some hundreds of those who were
distinguished for their genius, their erudition, and their wisdom, and
questioned them concerning the distinction between marriage and
adultery, and in treated them to consult the rational powers of their
understandings: and after consultation, all, except ten, replied, that
the judicial law constitutes the only distinction, for the sake of some
advantage; which distinction may indeed be known, but still be
accommodated by civil prudence. They were next asked, Whether they saw
any good in marriage, and any evil in adultery? They returned for
answer, that they did not see any rational evil and good. Being
questioned whether they saw any sin in it? they said, "Where is the sin?
Is not the act alike?" At these answers the angels were amazed, and
exclaimed, Oh, the gross stupidity of the age! Who can measure its
quality and quantity? On hearing this exclamation, the hundreds of the
wise ones turned themselves, and said one among another with loud
laughter, "Is this gross stupidity? Is there any wisdom that can bring
conviction that to love another person's wife merits eternal damnation?"
But that adultery is spiritual evil, and thence moral and civil evil,
and diametrically contrary to the wisdom of reason; also that the love
of adultery is from hell and returns to hell, and the love of marriage
is from heaven and returns to heaven, has been demonstrated in the first
chapter of this part, concerning the opposition of adulterous and
conjugial love. But since all evils, like all goods, partake of latitude
and altitude, and according to latitude have their genera, and according
to altitude their degrees, therefore, in order that adulteries may be
known as to each dimension, they shall first be arranged into their
genera, and afterwards into their degrees; and this shall be done in the
following series: I. _There are three genera of adulteries,--simple,
duplicate, and triplicate._ II. _Simple adultery is that of an unmarried
man with another's wife, or of an unmarried woman with another's
husband._ III. _Duplicate adultery is that of a husband with another's
wife, or of a wife with another's husband._ IV. _Triplicate adultery is
with relations by blood._ V. _There are four degrees of adulteries,
according to which they have their predications, their charges of blame,
and after death their imputations._ VI. _Adulteries of the first degree
are adulteries of ignorance, which are committed by those who cannot as
yet, or cannot at all, consult the understanding, and thence check
them._ VII. _In such cases adulteries are mild._ VIII. _Adulteries of
the second degree are adulteries of lust, which are committed by those
who indeed are able to consult the understanding, but from accidental
causes at the moment are not able._ IX. _Adulteries committed by such
persons are imputatory, according as the understanding afterwards favors
them or not._ X. _Adulteries of the third degree are adulteries of the
reason, which are committed by those who with the understanding confirm
themselves in the persuasion that they are not evils of sin._ XI. _The
adulteries committed by such persons are grievous, and are imputed to
them according to confirmations._ XII. _Adulteries of the fourth degree
are adulteries of the will, which are committed by those who make them
lawful and pleasing, and who do not think them of importance enough, to
consult the understanding respecting them._ XIII. _The adulteries
committed by these persons are exceedingly grievous, and are imputed to
them as evils of purpose, and remain with them as guilt._ XIV.
_Adulteries of the third and fourth degrees are evils of sin, according
to the quantity and quality of understanding and will in them, whether
they are actually committed or not._ XV. _.Adulteries grounded in
purpose of the will, and adulteries grounded in confirmation of the
understanding render men natural, sensual, and corporeal._ XVI. _And
this to such a degree, that at length they reject from themselves all
things of the church and of religion._ XVII. _Nevertheless they have the
powers of human rationality like other men._ XVIII. _But they use that
rationality while they are in externals, but abuse it while in their
internals._ We proceed to an explanation of each article.

479. I. THERE ARE THREE GENERA OF ADULTERIES,--SIMPLE, DUPLICATE, AND
TRIPLICATE. The Creator of the universe has distinguished all the things
which he has created into genera, and each genus into species, and has
distinguished each species, and each distinction in like manner, and so
forth, to the end that an image of what is infinite may exist in a
perpetual variety of qualities. Thus the Creator of the universe has
distinguished goods and their truths, and in like manner evils and their
falses, after they arose. That he has distinguished all things in the
spiritual world into genera, species, and differences, and has collected
together into heaven all goods and truths, and into hell all evils and
falses, and has arranged the latter in an order diametrically opposite
to the former, may appear from what is explained in a work concerning
HEAVEN AND HELL, published in London in the year 1758. That in the
natural world he has also thus distinguished and does distinguish goods
and truths, and likewise evils and falses, appertaining to men, and
thereby men themselves, may be known from their lot after death, in that
the good enter into heaven, and the evil into hell. Now, since all
things relating to good, and all things relating to evil, are
distinguished into genera, species, and so forth, therefore marriages
are distinguished into the same, and so are their opposites, which are
adulteries.

480. II. SIMPLE ADULTERY IS THAT OF AN UNMARRIED MAN WITH ANOTHER'S
WIFE, OR AN UNMARRIED WOMAN WITH ANOTHER'S HUSBAND. By adultery here and
in the following pages we mean the adultery which is opposite to
marriage; it is opposite because it violates the covenant of life
contracted between married partners: it rends asunder their love, and
defiles it, and closes the union which was begun at the time of
betrothing, and strengthened in the beginning of marriage: for the
conjugial love of one man with one wife, after engagement and covenant,
unites their souls. At the Panorama, _Florence_ is in the upper circle,
and _Milan_ in the lower one. The main attraction of the latter is the
celebrated cathedral, which forms, as it were, the nucleus of the scene.
The point of view has been objected to, as the spectator is placed about
mid-way up the cathedral, and thus looks down into the streets and
squares of the city; but, it should be remembered, that he also enjoys
the distant country, which he could not have done had the view been
from the area of the city; and, as we have before said, the beauty of
the _paysage_ is one of the perfections of Mr.

Burford's paintings. Its present success may be told from the
_Description:_
"Beyond, the eye ranges to an immense distance over the rich and fertile
plains of Lombardy, Piedmont, and the Venetian States, luxuriant
with every description of rural beauty, intersected by rivers and
lakes, and thickly studded with towns and villages, with their attendant
gardens, groves, and vineyards. The Northern horizon, from East to West,
is bounded by the vast chain of the Alps, which form a magnificent
semicircle at from eighty to one hundred and twenty miles distant, Monte
Rosa, Monte Cenis, Monte St. Gothard, the Simplon, &c. covered with
eternal snow, being conspicuous from their towering height; towards the
South the view is bounded by the Apennines, extending across the
peninsula from the Mediterranean to the Adriatic; and on the South-west,
the Piedmontese hills, in the neighbourhood of Turin, appear a faint
purple line on the horizon, so small as to be scarcely visible; the
purity of the atmosphere enables the eye to discern the most distant
objects with accuracy, and the brilliant sunshine gives inconceivable
splendour to every part of the scene; each antique spire and curiously-wrought
tower sparkles brightly in its beams, whilst the dark foliage
of fine trees, even in the heart of the city, relieves the eye, and
produces a beautiful and pleasing effect."
The cathedral will be recollected as the finest specimen extant of pointed
Gothic architecture, and termed by the Milanese, the eighth wonder of
the world. It is entirely of white marble, and its highest point four
hundred feet from the base. A better idea of its minute as well as vast
beauty will be afforded by the reader turning to our engraving
of the exterior in vol. xiv. of _The Mirror_. It is successfully painted
in the Panorama, although it has not the dazzling whiteness that a
stranger might expect; and, on it are those beautiful tinges which are
thought to be shed by the atmosphere upon buildings of any considerable
age. This effect is visible ever in the fine climate of Italy: it is
ingeniously referred to by Sir Humphry Davy in his last work[6] to
the chemical agency of water.But he replied, that he entertained no
such thoughts in the former life: he wished to reason whether the case
was so or not; but he was told that truth does not admit of reasonings,
since they favor the delights of the flesh against those of the spirit,
the quality of which latter delights he was ignorant of; and that he
ought first to think about the things which I had told him, because they
are true; or to think from the well-known maxim, that no one should do
to another what he is unwilling another should do to him; and thus, if
any one had in such a manner violated his wife, whom he had loved, as is
the case in the beginning of every marriage, and he had then been in a
state of wrath, and had spoken from that state, whether he himself also
would not then have detested adulteries, and being a man of strong
parts, would not have confirmed himself against them more than other
men, even to condemning them to hell; and being the general of an army,
and having brave companions, whether he would not, in order to prevent
disgrace, either have put the adulterer to death, or have driven the
adulteress from his house.

482. III. DUPLICATE ADULTERY IS THAT OF A HUSBAND WITH ANOTHER'S WIFE,
OR OF A WIFE WITH ANOTHER'S HUSBAND. This adultery is called duplicate,
because it is committed by two, and on each side the marriage-covenant
is violated; wherefore also it is twofold more grievous than the former.
It was said above, n. 480, that the conjugial love of one man with one
wife, after engagement and covenant, unites their souls, and that such
union is that very love in its origin; and that this origin is closed
and stopped up by adultery, as the source and stream of a fountain. That
the souls of two unite themselves together, when love to the sex is
confined to one of the sex, which is the case when a maiden engages
herself wholly to a youth, and on the other hand a youth engages himself
wholly to a maiden, is clearly manifest from this consideration, that
the lives of both unite themselves, consequently their souls, because
souls are the first principles of life. This union of souls can only
take place in monogamical marriages, or those of one man with one wife,
but not in polygamical marriages, or those of one man with several
wives; because in the latter case the love is divided, in the former it
is united. The reason why conjugial love in its supreme abode is
spiritual, holy, and pure, is because the soul of every man from its
origin is celestial; wherefore it receives influx immediately from the
Lord, for it receives from him the marriage of love and wisdom, or of
good and truth; and this influx makes him a man, and distinguishes him
from the beasts. From this union of souls, conjugial love, which is
there in its spiritual sanctity and purity, flows down into the life of
the whole body, and fills with blessed delights, so long as its channel
remains open; which is the case with those who are made spiritual by the
Lord. That nothing but adultery closes and stops up this abode of
conjugial love, thus its origin or fountain and its channel, is evident
from the Lord's words, that it is not lawful to put away a wife and
marry another, except on account of adultery: Matt. xix. 3-9; and also
from what is said in the same passage, that he that marries her that is
put away commits adultery, verse 9. When therefore, as was said above,
that pure and holy fountain is stopped up, it is clogged about with
filthiness of sundry kinds, as a jewel with ordure, or bread with vomit;
which things are altogether opposite to the purity and sanctity of that
fountain, or of conjugial love: from which opposition comes conjugial
cold, and according to this cold is the lascivious voluptuousness of
adulterous love, which consumes itself of its own accord. The reason why
this is an evil of sin is because the holy principle is covered and
thereby its channel into the body is obstructed, and in the place
thereof a profane principle succeeds, and its channel into the body is
opened, whence a man from celestial becomes infernal.

483. To the above I will add some particulars from the spiritual world,
which are worthy to be recorded. I have been informed in that world,
that some married men are inflamed with the lust of committing whoredom
with maidens or virgins; some with those who are not maidens but
harlots; some with married women or wives; some with women of the above
description who are of noble descent; and some with such as are not of
noble descent: that this is the case, was confirmed to me by several
instances from the various kingdoms in that world. While I was
meditating concerning the variety of such lusts, I asked whether there
are any who find all their delight with the wives of others, and none
with unmarried women? Wherefore to convince me that there are some such
spirits, several were brought to me from a certain kingdom, who were
obliged to speak according to their libidinous principles. These
declared that it was, and still is their sole pleasure and delight to
commit whoredom with the wives of others; and that they look out for
such as are beautiful, and hire them for themselves at a great price
according to their wealth, and in general bargain about the price with
the wife alone. I asked, why they do not hire for themselves unmarried
women? They said, that they consider this would be cheap and worthless,
and therefore undelightful to them. I asked also, whether those wives
afterwards return to their husbands and live with them? They replied,
that they either do not return, or they return cold, having become
courtezans. Afterwards I asked them seriously, whether they ever
thought, or now think, that this is twofold adultery, because they
commit this at the time they have wives of their own, and that such
adultery deprives a man of all spiritual good? But at this several who
were present laughed, saying, "What is spiritual good?" Nevertheless I
was still urgent, and said, "What is more detestable than for a man to
mix his soul with the soul of a husband in his wife? Do you not know,
that the soul of a man is in his seed?" Hereupon they turned themselves
away and muttered, "What harm can this do her?" At length I said,
"Although you do not fear divine laws, do you not fear civil laws?" They
replied, "No, we only fear certain of the ecclesiastical order; but we
conceal this in their presence; and if we cannot conceal it, we keep
upon good terms with them." I afterwards saw the former divided into
companies, and some of the latter cast into hell.

484. IV. TRIPLICATE ADULTERY IS WITH RELATIONS BY BLOOD. This adultery
is called triplicate, because it is threefold more grievous than the two
former. The relations, or remains of the flesh, which are not to be
approached, are mentioned in Levit. xviii. 6-18. There are internal and
external reasons why these adulteries are threefold more grievous than
the two above-mentioned: the internal reasons are grounded in the
correspondence of those adulteries with the violation of spiritual
marriage, which is that of the Lord and the church, and thence of good
and truth; and the external reasons are for the sake of guards, to
prevent a man's becoming a beast. We have no leisure, however, to
proceed to the further disclosure of these reasons.

485. V. THERE ARE FOUR DEGREES OF ADULTERIES, ACCORDING TO WHICH THEY
HAVE THEIR PREDICATIONS, THEIR CHARGES OF BLAME, AND AFTER DEATH THEIR
IMPUTATIONS. These degrees are not genera, but enter into each genus,
and cause its distinctions between more and less evil or good; in the
present case, deciding whether adultery of every genus from the nature
of the circumstances and contingencies, is to be considered milder or
more grievous. That circumstances and contingencies vary every thing is
well known. Nevertheless things are considered in one way by a man from
his rational light, in another by a judge from the law, and in another
by the Lord from the state of a man's mind: wherefore we mention
predications, charges of blame, and after death imputations; for
predications are made by a man according to his rational light, charges
of blame are made by a judge according to the law, and imputations are
made by the Lord according to the state of the man's mind. That these
three differ exceedingly from each other, may be seen without
explanation: for a man, from rational conviction according to
circumstances and contingencies, may acquit a person, whom a judge, when
he sits in judgement, cannot acquit from the law: and also a judge may
acquit a person, who after death is condemned. The reason of this is,
because a judge gives sentence according to the actions done, whereas
after death every one is judged according to the intentions of the will
and thence of the understanding, and according to the confirmations of
the understanding and thence of the will. These intentions and
confirmations a judge does not see; nevertheless each judgement is just;
the one for the sake of the good of civil society, the other for the
sake of the good of heavenly society.

486. VI. ADULTERIES OF THE FIRST DEGREE ARE ADULTERIES OF IGNORANCE,
WHICH ARE COMMITTED BY THOSE WHO CANNOT AS YET, OR CANNOT AT ALL,
CONSULT THE UNDERSTANDING, AND THENCE CHECK THEM. All evils, and thus
also all adulteries, viewed in themselves, are at once of the internal
and the external man; the internal intends them, and the external does
them; such therefore as the internal man is in the deeds done by the
external, such are the deeds viewed in themselves: but since the
internal man with his intention, does not appear before man, every one
must be judged in a human court from deeds and words according to the
law in force and its provisions: the interior sense of the law is also
to be regarded by the judge. But to illustrate the case by example: if
adultery be committed by a youth, who does not as yet know that adultery
is a greater evil than fornication; if the like be committed by a very
simple man; if it be committed by a person who is deprived by disease of
the full powers of judgement; or by a person, as is sometimes the case,
who is delirious by fits, and is at the time in a state of actual
delirium; yet further, if it be committed in a fit of insane
drunkenness, and so forth, it is evident, that in such cases, the
internal man, or mind, is not present in the external, scarcely any
otherwise than in an irrational person. Adulteries in these instances
are predicated by a rational man according to the above circumstances;
nevertheless the perpetrator is charged with blame by the same rational
man as a judge, and is punished by the law; but after death those
adulteries are imputed according to the presence, quality, and faculty
of understanding in the will of the perpetrators.

487. VII. IN SUCH CASES ADULTERIES ARE MILD. This is manifest from what
was said just above, n. 486, without further confirmation; for it is
well known that the quality of every deed and in general the quality of
every thing, depends upon circumstances, and which mitigate or aggravate
it; but adulteries of this degree are mild at the first times of their
commission; and also remain mild so far as the offending party of either
sex, in the future course of life, abstains from them for these
reasons;--because they are evils against God, or against the neighbour,
or against the goods of the state, and because, in consequence of their
being such evils, they are evils against reason; but on the other hand,
if they are not abstained from for one of the abovementioned reasons,
they are reckoned amongst grievous adulteries; thus it is according to
the divine law, Ezek. xviii, 21, 22, 24, and in other places: but they
cannot, from the above circumstances, be pronounced either blameless or
culpable, or be predicated and judged as mild or grievous, because they
do not appear before man, neither are they within the province of his
judgement; wherefore it is meant, that after death they are so accounted
or imputed.

488. VIII. ADULTERIES OF THE SECOND DEGREE ARE ADULTERIES OF LUST, WHICH
ARE COMMITTED BY THOSE WHO INDEED ARE ABLE TO CONSULT THE UNDERSTANDING,
BUT FROM ACCIDENTAL CAUSES AT THE MOMENT ARE NOT ABLE. There are two
things which, in the beginning, with every man who from natural is made
spiritual, are at strife together, which are commonly called the spirit
and the flesh; and since the love of marriage is of the spirit, and the
love of adultery is of the flesh, in such case there is also a combat
between those loves. If the love of marriage conquers, it gains dominion
over and subjugates the love of adultery, which is effected by its
removal; but if it happens that the lust of the flesh is excited to a
heat greater than what the spirit can control from reason, it follows
that the state is inverted, and the heat of lust infuses allurements
into the spirit, to such a degree, that it is no longer master of its
reason, and thence of itself: this is meant by adulteries of the second
degree, which are committed by those who indeed are able to consult the
understanding, but by reason of accidental causes at the moment are not
able. But the matter may be illustrated by particular cases; as in case
a meretricious wife by her craftiness captivates a man's mind
(_animum_), enticing him into her chamber, and inflaming his passions to
such a degree as to leave him no longer master of his judgement; and
especially if, at the same time, she also threatens to expose him if he
does not consent: in like manner, in case any meretricious wife is
skilled in deceitful allurements, or by powerful stimulants inflames the
man to such a degree, that the raging lust of the flesh deprives the
understanding of the free use of reason: in like manner, in case a man,
by powerful enticements, so far works upon another's wife, as to leave
her no longer mistress of herself, by reason of the fire kindled in her
will; besides other like cases. That these and similar accidental
circumstances lessen the grievousness of adultery, and give a milder
turn to the predications of the blame thereof in favor of the party
seduced, is agreeable to the dictates and conclusions of reason. The
imputation of this degree of adultery comes next to be treated of.

489. IX. ADULTERIES COMMITTED BY SUCH PERSONS ARE IMPUTATORY, ACCORDING
AS THE UNDERSTANDING AFTERWARDS FAVORS THEM OR NOT. So far as the
understanding favors evils, so far a man appropriates them to himself
and makes them his own. Favor implies consent; and consent induces in
the mind a state of the love of them: the case is the same with
adulteries, which in the beginning were committed without the consent of
the understanding, and are favored: the contrary comes to pass if they
are not favored. Memory, recognition, showed in her face.

With a wild cry her gaunt arms stretched across, and caught the great
head to her breast.

"Where have you been so long, Parpon--my son?" she said.

CHAPTER XV
Valmond's strength came back quickly, but something had given his
mind a new colour. He felt, by a strange telegraphy of fate, that
he had been spared death by fever to meet an end more in keeping with
the strange exploit which now was coming to a crisis. The next day he was
going back to Dalgrothe Mountain, the day after that there should be
final review, and the succeeding day the march to the sea would begin.
A move must be made.

There could be no more delay. He had so lost himself in the dream,
that it had become real, and he himself was the splendid adventurer,
the maker of empires. True, he had only a small band of ill-armed men,
but better arms could be got, and by the time they reached
the sea--who could tell!

As he sat alone in the quiet dusk of his room at the Louis Quinze waiting
for Parpon, there came a tap at his door. It opened, the garcon mumbled
something, and Madame Chalice entered slowly.

Her look had no particular sympathy, but there was a sort of friendliness
in the rich colour of her face, in the brightness of her eyes.

"The avocat was to have accompanied me," she said; "but at the last I
thought it better to come without him, because--"
She paused. "Yes, madame--because?" he asked, offering her a chair. He
was dressed in simple black, as on that first day when he called at the
Manor, and it set off the ivory paleness of his complexion, making his
face delicate yet strong.

She looked round the room, almost casually, before she went on
"Because what I have to say were better said to you alone--much better."

"I am sure you are right," he answered, as though he trusted her
judgment utterly; and truly there was always something boy-like in
his attitude towards her. The compliment was unstudied and pleasant,
but she steeled herself for her task. She knew instinctively that she
had influence with him, and she meant to use it to its utmost limit.

"I am glad, we are all glad, you are better," she said cordially;
then added, "how do your affairs come on? What are your plans?"
Valmond forgot that she was his inquisitor; he only saw her as his
ally, his friend. So he spoke to her, as he had done at the Manor, with
a sort of eloquence, of his great theme. He had changed greatly. The
rhetorical, the bizarre, had left his speech. There was no more
grandiloquence than might be expected of a soldier who saw things in
the bright flashes of the battle-field--sharp pinges of colour, the
dyes well soaked in. He had the gift of telling a story: some peculiar
timbre in the voice, some direct dramatic touch. She listened quietly,
impressed and curious. The impossibilities seemed for a moment to
vanish in the big dream, and she herself was a dreamer, a born
adventurer among the wonders of life. Were she a man, she would have been
an explorer or a soldier.

But good judgment returned, and she gathered herself together for the
unpleasant task that lay before her.

She looked him steadily in the eyes. "I have come to tell you that you
must give up this dream," she said slowly. "It can come to nothing but
ill; and in the mishap you may be hurt past repair."
"I shall never give up--this dream," he said, surprised, but firm, almost
dominant.

"Think of these poor folk who surround you, who follow you. Would you
see harm come to them?"
"As soldiers, they will fight for a cause."
"What is--the cause?" she asked meaningly.

"France," was the quiet reply; and there was a strong ring in the tone.

"Not so--you, monsieur!"
"You called me 'sire' once," he said tentatively.

"I called my maid a fool yesterday, under some fleeting influence; one
has moods," she answered.

"If you would call me puppet to-morrow, we might strike a balance and
find--what should we find?"
"An adventurer, I fear," she remarked.

He was not taken aback. "An adventurer truly," he said. "It is a far
travel to France, and there is much to overcome!"
She could scarcely reconcile this acute, self-contained man with the
enthusiast and comedian she had seen in the Cure's garden.

"Monsieur Valmond," she said, "I neither suspect nor accuse; I only
feel.
There is something terribly uncertain in this cause of yours, in your
claims. You have no right to waste lives."

"To waste lives?" he asked mechanically.

"Yes; the Government is to proceed against you."
"Ah, yes," he answered. "Monsieur De la Riviere has seen to that; but
he must pay for his interference."
"That is beside the point. If a force comes against you--what then?"
"Then I will act as becomes a Napoleon," he answered, rather
grandly.

So there was a touch of the bombastic in his manner even yet! She
laughed a little ironically. Then all at once her thoughts reverted
to Elise, and some latent cruelty in her awoke. Though she
believed the girl, she would accuse the man, the more so, because she
suddenly became aware that his eyes were fixed on herself in ardent
admiration.

"You might not have a convenient window," she said, with deliberate,
consuming suggestion.

His glance never wavered, though he understood instantly what she
meant.
Well, she had discovered that! He flushed.

"Madame," he said, "I hope that I am a gentleman at heart."
The whole scene came back on him, and a moisture sprang to his eyes.

"She is innocent," he continued--"upon my sacred honour! Yes, yes, I know
that the evidence is all against me, but I speak the absolute
truth. You saw--that night, did you?"
She nodded.

"Ah, it is a pity--a pity. But, madame, as you are a true woman, believe
what I say; for, I repeat, it is the truth."
Then, with admirable reticence, even great delicacy, he told the
story as Elise had told it, and as convincingly.

"I believe you, monsieur," she said frankly, when he had done, and
stretched out her hand to him with a sudden impulse of regard. "Now,
follow up that unselfishness by another."
He looked inquiringly at her.

"Give up this mad chase," she added eagerly.

"Never!" was his instant reply. "Never!"
"I beg of you, I appeal to you-my friend," she urged, with that ardour
of the counsel who pleads a bad cause.

"I do not impeach you or your claims, but I ask that you leave this
village as you found it, these happy people undisturbed in their
homes.
Ah, go! Go now, and you will be a name to them, remembered always with
admiration. You have been courageous, you have been loved, you have
been inspiring--ah, yes, I admit it, even to me!--inspiring! The spirit
of adventure in you, your hopes, your plans to do great things,
roused me.
It was that made me your ally more than aught else. Truly and frankly,
I do not think that I am convinced of anything save that you are
no coward, and that you love a cause.

Let it go at that--you must, you must. You came in the night, privately
and mysteriously; go in the night, this night, mysteriously--an inscrutable,
romantic figure. If you are all you say, and I should be glad to
think so,--go where your talents will have greater play, your
claims larger recognition. This is a small game here.
Leave us as you found us. We shall be the better for it; our poor folk
here will be the better. Proceed with this, and who can tell what may
happen? I was wrong, wrong--I see that now-to have encouraged you at
all.
I repent of it. Here, as I talk to you, I feel, with no doubt whatever,
that the end of your bold exploit is near. Can you not see that? Ah
yes, you must, you must! Take my horses to-night, leave here, and
come back no more; and so none of us shall feel sorrow in thinking of
the time when Valmond came to Pontiac."
Variable, accusing, she had suddenly shown him something beyond
caprice, beyond accident of mood or temper. The true woman had spoken;
all outer modish garments had dropped away from her real nature, and
showed its abundant depth and sincerity. All that was roused in him
this moment was never known; he never could tell it; there were
eternal spaces between them. She had been speaking to him just now
with no personal sentiment.
She was only the lover of honest things, the friend, the good ally, obliged
to flee a cause for its terrible unsoundness, yet trying to prevent wreck
and ruin.

He arose and turned his head away for an instant, her eloquence had been
so moving. His glance caught the picture of the Great Napoleon, and
his eyes met hers again with new resolution.

"I must stay," he answered; "I will not turn back, whatever comes. This
is but child's play, but a speck beside what I mean to do. True, I came
in the dark, but I will go in the light. I shall not leave them behind,
these poor folk; they shall come with me. I have money, France is
waiting, the people are sick of the Orleans, and I--"
"But you must, you must listen to me, monsieur!" she said desperately.

She came close to him, and, out of the frank eagerness of her nature, laid
her hand upon his arm, and looked him in the eyes with an almost
tender appealing.

At that moment the door opened, and Monsieur De la Riviere was
announced.

"Ah, madame!" said the young Seigneur in a tone more than a little
carbolic; "secrets of State, no doubt?"
"Statesmen need not commit themselves to newsmongers, monsieur," she
answered, still standing very near Valmond, as though she would continue
a familiar talk when the disagreeable interruption had passed.

She was thoroughly fearless, clear of heart, above all littlenesses.

"I had come to warn Monsieur Valmond once again, but I find him with his
ally, counsellor--and comforter," he retorted, with perilous
suggestion.

Time would move on, and Madame Chalice might forget that wild remark, but
she never would forgive it, and she never wished to do so. The
insolent, petty, provincial Seigneur!

"Monsieur De la Riviere," she returned, with cold dignity, "you
cannot live long enough to atone for that impertinence."
"I beg your pardon, madame," he returned earnestly, awed by the look
in her face; for she was thoroughly aroused. "I came to stop a filibustering
expedition, to save the credit of the place where I was born, where my
people have lived for generations."
She made a quick, deprecatory gesture. "You saw me enter here," she
said, "and you thought to discover treason of some kind--Heaven knows
what a mind like yours may imagine! You find me giving better counsel
to His Highness than you could ever hope to give--out of a better heart
and from a better understanding. You have been worse than intrusive;
you have been rash and stupid. You call His Highness filibuster and
impostor. I assure you it is my fondest hope that Prince Valmond
Napoleon will ever count me among his friends, in spite of all his
enemies."
She turned her shoulder on him, and took Valmond's hand with a pronounced
obeisance, saying, "Adieu, sire" (she was never sorry she had said
it), and passed from the room. Valmond was about to follow her.

"Thank you, no; I will go to my carrriage alone," she said, and he
did not insist.

When she had gone he stood holding the door open, and looking at
De la Riviere. He was very pale; there was a menacing fire in his
eyes. The young Seigneur was ready for battle also.
"I am occupied, monsieur," said Valmond meaningly.
"I have come to warn you--"
"The old song; I am occupied, monsieur."
"Charlatan!" said De la Riviere, and took a step angrily towards
him, for he was losing command of himself.
At that moment Parpon, who had been outside in the hall for a
half-hour or more, stepped into the room, edged between the two,
and looked up with a wicked, mocking leer at the young Seigneur.
"You have twenty-four hours to leave Pontiac," cried De la Riviere,
as he left the room.
"My watch keeps different time, monsieur," said Valmond coolly, and
closed the door.

CHAPTER XVI
From the depths where Elise was cast, it was not for her to see
that her disaster had brought light to others; that out of the
pitiful confusion of her life had come order and joy. A half-mad
woman, without memory, knew again whence she came and whither she
was going; and bewildered and happy, with a hungering tenderness,
moved her hand over the head of her poor dwarf, as though she would
know if he were truly her own son. A new spirit also had come into
Parpon's eyes, gentler, less weird, less distant. With the advent
of their joy a great yearning came to save Elise. They hung watchful,
solicitous, over her bed.
It must go hard with her, and twenty-four hours would see the end
or a fresh beginning. She had fought back the fever too long, her
brain and emotions had been strung to a fatal pitch, and the disease,
like a hurricane, carried her on for hours, tearing at her being.
Her own mother sat in a corner, stricken and numb. At last she fell
asleep in her chair, but Parpon and his mother slept not at all.
Now and again the dwarf went to the door and looked out at the
night, so still, and full of the wonder of growth and rest.
Far up on Dalgrothe Mountain a soft brazen light lay like a shield
against the sky, a strange, hovering thing. Parpon knew it to be
the reflection of the campfires in the valley, where Lagroin and
his men were sleeping. There came, too, out of the general stillness,
a long, low murmur, as though nature were crooning: the untiring
rustle of the river, the water that rolled on and never came back
again. Where did they all go--those thousands of rivers for ever
pouring on, lazily or wildly? What motive? What purpose? Just to
empty themselves into the greater waters, there to be lost? Was it
enough to travel on so inevitably to the end, and be swallowed
up?
And these millions of lives hurrying along? Was it worth while
living, only to grow older and older, and, coming, heavy with sleep,
to the Homestead of the Ages, enter a door that only opened inwards,
and be swallowed up in the twilight? Why arrest the travelling,
however swift it be? Sooner or later it must come--with dusk the
end of it.
The dwarf heard the moaning of the stricken girl, her cry,
"Valmond!
Valmond!" the sobs that followed, the woe of her self-abnegation,
even in delirium.
For one's self it mattered little, maybe, the attitude of the mind,
whether it would arrest or be glad of the terrific travel; but for
another human being, who might judge? Who might guess what was best
for the other; what was most merciful, most good? Destiny meant us
to prove our case against it, as well as we might; to establish our
right to be here as long as we could, so discovering the world day
by day, and ourselves to the world, and ourselves to ourselves. To
live it out, resisting the power that destroys so long as might
be--that was the divine secret.
"Valmond! Valmond! O Valmond!"
The voice moaned out the words again and again. Through the sounds
there came another inner voice, that resolved all the crude, primitive
thoughts here defined; vague, elusive, in Parpon's own brain.
The girl's life should be saved at any cost, even if to save it
meant the awful and certain doom his mother had whispered to him
over the bed an hour before.
He turned and went into the house. The old woman bent above Elise,
watching intently, her eyes straining, her lips anxiously
compressed.
"My son," she said, "she will die in an hour if I don't give her
more. If I do, she may die at once. If she gets well, she will be--"
She made a motion to her eyes.
"Blind, mother, blind!" he whispered, and he looked round the room.
How good was the sight of the eyes! "Perhaps she'd rather die,"
said the old woman. "She is unhappy." She was thinking of her own
far, bitter past, remembered now after so many years. "Misery and
blindness too--ah!There are three degrees of the natural man; in the first degree are
those who love only the world, placing their heart on wealth; these are
properly meant by the natural: in the second degree are those who love
only the delights of the senses, placing their heart on every kind of
luxury and pleasure; these are properly meant by the sensual: in the
third degree are those who love only themselves, placing their heart on
the quest of honor; these are properly meant by the corporeal, because
they immerse all things of the will, and consequently of the
understanding, in the body, and look backward at themselves from others,
and love only what belongs to themselves: but the sensual immerse all
things of the will and consequently of the understanding in the
allurements and fallacies of the senses, indulging in these alone;
whereas the natural pour forth into the world all things of the will and
understanding, covetously and fraudulently acquiring wealth, and
regarding no other use therein and thence but that of possession. The
above-mentioned adulteries change men in these degenerate degrees, one
into this, another into that, each according to his favorite taste for
what is pleasurable, in which taste his peculiar genius is grounded.

497. XVI. AND THIS TO SUCH A DEGREE THAT AT LENGTH THEY REJECT FROM
THEMSELVES ALL THINGS OF THE CHURCH AND OF RELIGION. The reason why
determined and continued adulterers reject from themselves all things of
the church and religion is, because the love of marriage and the love of
adultery are opposite, n. 425, and the love of marriage acts in unity
with the church and religion; see n. 130, and throughout the former
part; hence the love of adultery, as being opposite, acts in unity with
those things which are contrary to the church. A further reason why
those adulterers reject from themselves all things of the church and of
religion, is, because the love of marriage and the love of adultery are
opposite, as the marriage of good and truth is opposite to the
connection of evil and the false: see n. 427, 428; and the marriage of
good and truth constitutes the church, whereas the connection of evil
and the false constitutes the anti-church. A further reason why those
adulterers reject from themselves all things of the church and of
religion, is because the love of marriage and the love of adultery are
as opposite as heaven and hell, n. 429; and in heaven there is the love
of all things of the church, whereas in hell there is hatred against
them. A further reason why those adulterers reject from themselves all
things of the church and of religion, is, because, their delights
commence from the flesh, and are of the flesh also in the spirit, n.
440, 441; and the flesh is contrary to the spirit, that is, contrary to
the spiritual things of the church: hence also the delights of
adulterous love are called the pleasures of insanity. If you desire
demonstration in this case, go, I pray, to those whom you know to be
such adulterers, and ask them privately, what they think concerning God,
the church, and eternal life, and you will hear. The genuine reason is,
because as conjugial love opens the interiors of the mind; and thereby
elevates them above the sensual principles of the body, even into the
light and heat of heaven, so, on the other hand, the love of adultery
closes the interiors of the mind, and thrusts down the mind itself, as
to its will, into the body, even into all things which its flesh lusts
after; and the deeper it is so thrust down, the further it is removed
and set at a distance from heaven.

498. XVII. NEVERTHELESS THEY HAVE THE POWERS OF HUMAN RATIONALITY LIKE
OTHER MEN. That the natural man, the sensual, and the corporeal, is
equally rational, in regard to understanding, as the spiritual man, has
been proved to me from satans and devils arising by leave out of hell,
and conversing with angelic spirits in the world of spirits; concerning
whom, see the MEMORABLE RELATIONS throughout; but as the love of the
will makes the man, and this love draws the understanding into consent,
therefore such are not rational except in a state removed from the love
of the will; when they return again into this love, they are more
dreadfully insane than wild beasts. But a man, without the faculty of
elevating the understanding above the love of the will, would not be a
man but a beast; for a beast does not enjoy that faculty; consequently
neither would he be able to choose any thing, and from choice to do what
is good and expedient, and thus he would not be in a capacity to be
reformed, and to be led to heaven, and to live for ever. Hence it is,
that determined and confirmed adulterers, although they are merely
natural, sensual, and corporeal, still enjoy, like other men, the powers
of understanding or rationality: but when they are in the lust of
adultery, and think and speak from that lust concerning it, they do not
enjoy that rationality; because then the flesh acts on the spirit, and
not the spirit on the flesh. It is however to be observed, that these at
length after death become stupid; not that the faculty of growing wise
is taken away from them, but that they are unwilling to grow wise,
because wisdom is undelightful to them.

499. XVIII. BUT THEY USE THAT RATIONALITY WHILE THEY ARE IN EXTERNALS,
BUT ABUSE IT WHILE THEY ARE IN INTERNALS. They are in externals when
they converse abroad and in company, but in their internals when at home
or with themselves. If you wish, make the experiment; bring some person
of this character, as, for example, one of the order called Jesuits, and
cause him to speak in company, or to teach in a temple, concerning God,
the holy things of the church, and heaven and hell, and you will hear
him a more rational zealot than any other; perhaps also he will force
you to sighs and tears for your salvation; but take him into your house,
praise him excessively, call him the father of wisdom, and make yourself
his friend, until he opens his heart, and you will hear what he will
then preach concerning God, the holy things of the church, and heaven
and hell,--that they are mere fancies and delusions, and thus bonds
invented for souls, whereby great and small, rich and poor, may be
caught and bound, and kept under the yoke of their dominion. Let these
observations suffice for illustration of what is meant by natural men,
even to corporeal, enjoying the powers of human rationality like others,
and using it when they are in externals, but abusing it when in their
internals. The conclusion to be hence deduced is, that no one is to be
judged of from the wisdom of his conversation, but of his life in union
therewith.

       *       *       *       *       *

500. To the above I will add the following MEMORABLE RELATION. On a
certain time in the spiritual world I heard a great tumult: there were
some thousands of people gathered together, who cried out, LET THEM BE
PUNISHED, LET THEM BE PUNISHED: I went nearer, and asked what the cry
meant? A person that was separate from the crowd, said to me, "They are
enraged against three priests, who go about and preach every where
against adulterers, saying, that adulterers have no acknowledgement of
God, and that heaven is closed to them and hell open; and that in hell
they are filthy devils, because they appear there at a distance like
swine wallowing in mire, and that the angels of heaven abominate them."
I inquired, "Where are the priests? and why is there such a vociferation
on that account?" He replied, "The three priests are in the midst of
them, guarded by attendants; and those who are gathered together are of
those who believe adulteries not to be sins, and who say, that
adulterers have an acknowledgement of God equally with those who keep to
their wives. They are all of them from the Christian world; and the
angels have been to see how many there were there who believe adulteries
to be sins; and out of a thousand they did not find a hundred." He then
told me that the nine hundred say concerning adulteries, "Who does not
know that the delight of adultery is superior to the delight of
marriage; that adulterers are in continual heat, and thence in alacrity,
industry, and active life, superior to those who live with only one
woman; and that on the other hand, love with a married partner grows
cold, and sometimes to such a degree, that at length scarce a single
expression or act of fellowship with her is alive; that it is otherwise
with harlots; that the mortification of life with a wife, arising from
defect of ability, is recruited and vivified by adulteries; and is not
that which recruits and vivifies of more consequence than that which
mortifies? What is marriage but allowed adultery? Who knows any
distinction between them? Can love be forced? and yet love with a wife
is forced by a covenant and laws. Is not love with a married partner the
love of the sex, which is so universal that it exists even among birds
and beasts? What is conjugial love but the love of the sex? and the love
of the sex is free with every woman. The reason why civil laws are
against adulteries is, because lawgivers have believed that to prohibit
adultery was connected with the public good; and yet lawgivers and
judges sometimes commit adultery, and say among themselves, 'Let him
that is without sin cast the first stone.' Who does not know that the
simple and religious alone believe adulteries to be sins, and that the
intelligent think otherwise, who like us view them by the light of
nature? Are not adulteries as prolific as marriages? Are not
illegitimate children as alert and qualified for the discharge of
offices and employments as the legitimate? Moreover families, otherwise
barren, are provided with offspring; and is not this an advantage and
not a loss? What harm can come to a wife from admitting several rivals?
And what harm can come to a man? To say that it brings disgrace upon a
man, is a frivolous idea grounded in mere fancy. The reason why adultery
is against the laws and statutes of the church, is owing to the
ecclesiastic order for the sake of power; but what have theological and
spiritual things to do with a delight merely corporeal and carnal? Are
not there instances of adulterous presbyters and monks? and are they
incapable on that account of acknowledging and worshipping God? Why
therefore do those three priests preach that adulterers have no
acknowledgement of God? We cannot endure such blasphemies; wherefore let
them be judged and punished." Afterwards I saw that they called judges,
whom they requested to pass sentence of punishment upon them: but the
judges said, "This is no part of our jurisdiction; for the point in
question is concerning the acknowledgement of God, and concerning sin,
and thus concerning salvation and damnation; and sentence in these cases
must come from heaven: but we will suggest a method to you, whereby you
may know whether these three priests have preached truths. There are
three places which we judges know, where such points are examined and
revealed in a singular manner: One place is, where a way into heaven is
open to all; but when they come into heaven, they themselves perceive
their own quality as to the acknowledgement of God: the second is, where
also a way is open into heaven; but no one can enter into that way
unless he has heaven in himself: and the third is where there is a way
to hell; and those who love infernal things enter that way of their own
accord, because from delight. We judges charge all to go to those places
who require judgement from us concerning heaven and hell." On hearing
this, those who were gathered together, said, "Let us go to those
places;" and while they were going to the first, where a way into heaven
is open to all, it suddenly became dark; wherefore some of them lighted
torches and carried them before. The judges who were with them said,
"This happens to all who go to the first place; as they approach, the
fire of the torches becomes more dim, and is extinguished in that place
by the light of heaven flowing in, which is a sign that they are there;
the reason of this is, because at first heaven is closed to them, and
afterwards is opened." They then came to that place, and when the
torches were extinguished of themselves, they saw a way tending
obliquely upwards into heaven: this those entered who were enraged
against the priests; among the first, these who were determined
adulterers, after them those who were confirmed adulterers; and as they
ascended, the first cried out, "Follow;" and those who followed cried
out, "Make haste;" and they pressed forward. After near an hour, when
they were all within in the heavenly society, there appeared a gulph
between them and the angels; and the light of heaven above the gulph
flowing into their eyes, opened the interiors of their minds, whereby
they were bound to speak as they interiorly thought; and then they were
asked by the angels, whether they acknowledged that God is? The first,
who were determined adulterers, replied, "What is God?" And they looked
at each other, and said, "Which of you has seen him?" The second, who
were confirmed adulterers, said, "Are not all things of nature? What is
there above nature but the sun?" And instantly the angels said to them,
"Depart from us; now you yourselves perceive that you have no
acknowledgement of God: when you descend, the interiors of your mind
will be closed and its exteriors opened, and then you can speak against
the interiors, and say that God is. Be assured that as soon as a man
actually becomes an adulterer, heaven is closed to him; and when heaven
is closed, God is not acknowledged. Hear the reason; every filthy
principle of hell is from adulterers, and it stinks in heaven like
putrid mire of the streets." On hearing these things they turned
themselves and descended by three ways; and when they were below, the
first and second groups conversing together said, "The priests have
conquered there; but we know that we can speak of God equally with them:
and when we say that he is, do we not acknowledge him? The interiors and
exteriors of the mind, of which the angels told us, are devised
fictions. But let us go to the second place pointed out by the judges,
where a way is open into heaven to those who have heaven in themselves,
thus to those who are about to come into heaven." When they were come
thither, a voice proceeded from that heaven, saying, "Shut the gates;
there are adulterers at hand." Then suddenly the gates were shut, and
the keepers with sticks in their hands drove them away; and they
delivered the three priests, against whom they had been tumultuous, from
the hands of their keepers, and introduced them into heaven: and
instantly, when the gates were open for the priests, there issued from
heaven upon the rebels the delightful principle of marriage, which, from
its being chaste and pure, almost deprived them of animation; wherefore,
for fear of fainting away through suffocation, they hastened to the
third place, concerning which the judges said, that thence there was a
way to hell; and instantly there issued from thence the delight of
adultery, whereby those who were either determined or confirmed
adulterers, were so vivified, that they descended as it were dancing,
and there like swine immersed themselves in filth.

       *       *       *       *       *

ON THE LUST OF DEFLORATION.

501. The lusts treated of in the four following chapters, are not only
lusts of adultery, but are more grievous than those since they exist
only from adulteries, being taken to after adulteries are become
loathsome; as the lust of defloration, which is first treated of, and
which cannot previously exist with any one; in like manner the lust of
varieties, the lust of violation, and the lust of seducing innocencies,
which are afterwards treated of. They are called lusts, because
according to the quantity and quality of the lust for those things, such
and so great is their appropriation. In reference specifically to the
lust of defloration, its infamous villany shall be made manifest from
the following considerations: I. _The state of a maiden or undeflowered
woman before and after marriage._ II. _Virginity is the crown of
chastity, and the certificate of conjugial love._ III. _Defloration,
without a view to marriage as an end, is the villany of a robber._ IV.
_The lot of those who have confirmed themselves in the persuasion that
the lust of defloration is not an evil of sin, after death is grievous._
We proceed to explain them.

502. I. THE STATE OF A MAIDEN OR UNDEFLOWERED WOMAN BEFORE AND AFTER
MARRIAGE. What is the quality of the state of a maiden, before she has
been instructed concerning the various particulars of the conjugial
torch, has been made known to me by wives in the spiritual world, who
have departed out of the natural world in their infancy, and have been
educated in heaven. They said, that when they arrived at a marriageable
state, from seeing conjugial partners they began to love the conjugial
life, but only for the end that they might be called wives, and might
maintain friendly and confidential society with one man; and also, that
being removed from the house of obedience, they might become their own
mistresses: they also said, that they thought of marriage only from the
blessedness of mutual friendship and confidence with a husband, and not
at all from the delight of any flame; but that their maiden state after
marriage was changed into a new one, of which they previously had not
the least knowledge: and they declared, that this was a state of the
expansion of all things of the life of their body from first principles
to last, to receive the gifts of their husband, and to unite these gifts
to their own life, that thus they might become his love and his wife;
and that this state commenced from the moment of defloration, and that
after this the flame of love burned to the husband alone, and that they
were sensible of the heavenly delights of that expansion; and further,
that as each wife was introduced into this state by her own husband, and
as it is from him, and thereby his in herself, it is altogether
impossible for her to love any other than him alone. From this account
it was made manifest what is the quality of the state of maidens before
and after marriage in heaven. That the state of maidens and wives on
earth, whose first attachments prove successful, is similar to this of
the maidens in heaven, is no secret. What maiden can know that new state
before she is in it? Inquire, and you will hear. The case is different
with those who before marriage catch allurement from being taught.

503. II. VIRGINITY IS THE CROWN OF CHASTITY AND THE CERTIFICATE OF
CONJUGIAL LOVE. Virginity is called the crown of chastity, because it
crowns the chastity of marriage: it is also the badge of chastity;
wherefore the bride at the nuptials wears a crown on her head: it is
also a badge of the sanctity of marriage; for the bride, after the
maiden flower, gives and devotes herself wholly to the bridegroom, at
that time the husband, and the husband in his turn gives and devotes
himself wholly to the bride, at that time the wife. Virginity is also
called the certificate of conjugial love, because a certificate has
relation to a covenant; and the covenant is, that love may unite them
into one man, or into one flesh. The men themselves also before marriage
regard the virginity of the bride as a crown of her chastity, and as a
certificate of conjugial love, and as the very dainty from which the
delights of that love are about to commence and to be perpetuated. From
these and the foregoing considerations, it is manifest, that after the
zone is taken away, and the virginity is sipped, a maiden becomes a
wife, and if not a wife, she becomes a harlot; for the new state into
which she is then introduced, is a state of love for her husband, and if
not for her husband, it is a state of lust.

504. III. DEFLORATION, WITHOUT A VIEW TO MARRIAGE AS AN END, IS THE
VILLANY OF A ROBBER. Some adulterers are impelled by the cupidity of
deflowering maidens, and thence also of deflowering young girls in their
state of innocence: the enticements offered are either persuasions
suggested by pimps, or presents made by the men, or promises of
marriage; and those men after defloration leave them, and continually
seek for others: moreover, they are not delighted with the objects they
have left, but with a continual supply of new ones; and this lust
increases even till it becomes the chief of the delights of their flesh.
They add also to the above this abominable deed, that by various cunning
artifices they entice maidens about to be married or immediately after
marriage, to offer them the first-fruits of marriage, which also they
thus filthily defile. I have heard also, that when that heat with its
potency has failed, they glory in the number of virginities, as in so
many golden fleeces of Jason. This villany, which is that of committing
a rape, since it was begun in an age of strength, and afterwards
confirmed by boastings, remains rooted in, and thereby infixed after
death. What the quality of this villany is, appears from what was said
above, that virginity is the crown of chastity, the certificate of
future conjugial love, and that a maiden devotes her soul and life to
him to whom she devotes it; conjugial friendship and the confidence
thereof are also founded upon it. A woman likewise, deflowered by a man
of the above description, after this door of conjugial love is broken
through, loses all shame, and becomes a harlot, which is likewise to be
imputed to the robber as the cause. Such robbers, if, after having run
through a course of lewdness and profanation of chastity, they apply
their minds (_animus_) to marriage, have no other object in their mind
(_mens_) than the virginity of her who is to be their married partner;
and when they have attained this object, they loathe both bed and
chamber, yea also the whole female sex, except young girls: and whereas
such are violators of marriage, and despisers of the female sex, and
thereby spiritual robbers, it is evident that the divine Nemesis pursues
them.

505. IV. THE LOT OF THOSE WHO HAVE CONFIRMED THEMSELVES IN THE
PERSUASION THAT THE LUST OF DEFLORATION IS NOT AN EVIL OF SIN, AFTER
DEATH IS GRIEVOUS. Their lot is this: after they have passed the first
time of their stay in the spiritual world, which is a time of modesty
and morality, because spent in company with angelic spirits, they are
next, from their externals, led into their internals, and in this case
into the concupiscences with which they had been ensnared in the world,
and the angelic spirits into theirs, to the intent that it may appear in
what degree they had been ensnared; and if a lesser degree, that after
they have been let into them, they may be let out again, and may be
covered with shame. But those who had been principled in this malignant
lust to such a degree as to be made sensible of its eminent delight, and
to make a boast of those thefts as of the choicest spoils, do not suffer
themselves to be drawn away from it; wherefore they are let into their
freedom, and then they instantly wander about, and inquire after
brothels, and also enter them when they are pointed out; (these brothels
are on the sides of hell:) but when they meet with none but prostitutes
there, they go away, and inquire where there are maidens; and then they
are carried to harlots, who by phantasy can assume supereminent beauty,
and a florid girlish complexion, and boast themselves of being maidens;
and on seeing these they burn with desire towards them as they did in
the world: wherefore they bargain with them; but when they are about to
enjoy the bargain, the phantasy induced from heaven is taken away, and
then those pretended maidens appear in their own deformity, monstrous
and dark, to whom nevertheless they are compelled to cleave for a time:
those harlots are called sirens. But if by such fascinations they do not
suffer themselves to be draw away from that wild lust, they are cast
down into the hell lying to the south and west, beneath the hell of the
crafty courtezans, and there they are associated with their companions.
I have also been permitted to see them in that hell, and have been told
that many of noble descent, and the more opulent, are therein; but as
they had been such in the world, all remembrance of their descent and of
the dignity derived from their opulence is taken from them, and a
persuasion is induced on them that they have been vile slaves, and
thence were unworthy of all honor. Among themselves indeed they appear
as men: but when seen by others, who are allowed to look in thither,
they appear as apes, with a stern look instead of a courteous one, and a
horrid countenance instead of one of pleasantry. They walk with their
loins contracted, and thereby bent, the upper part of the body hanging
forward in front, as if they were ready to fall, and they emit a
disagreeable smell. They loathe the sex, and turn away from those they
see; for they have no desire towards them. Such they appear when seen
near at hand; but when viewed from afar, they appear like dogs of
indulgences, or whelps of delight; and there is also heard somewhat like
barking in the tone of their speech.

       *       *       *       *       *

ON THE LUST OF VARIETIES.

506. The lust of varieties here treated of, does not mean the lust of
fornication, which was treated of above in its proper chapter: the
latter lust, notwithstanding its being usually promiscuous and vague,
still does not occasion the lust of varieties, unless when it is
immoderate, and the fornicator looks to number, and boasts thereof from
a principle of cupidity. This idea causes a beginning of this lust; but
what its quality is as it advances, cannot be distinctly perceived,
unless in some such series as the following: I. _By the lust of
varieties is meant the entirely dissolute lust of adultery._ II. _That
lust is love and at the same time loathing in regard to the sex._ III.
_That lust altogether annihilates conjugial love appertaining to
itself._ IV. _The lot of those (who have been addicted to that lust),
after death, is miserable, since they have not the inmost principle of
life._ We proceed to an explanation of each article.

507. I. BY THE LUST OF VARIETIES IS MEANT THE ENTIRELY DISSOLUTE LUST OF
ADULTERY. This lust insinuates itself with those who in youth have
relaxed the bonds of modesty, and have had opportunities of association
with many loose women, especially if they have not wanted the means of
satisfying their pecuniary demands. They implant and root this lust in
themselves by immoderate and unlimited adulteries, and by shameless
thoughts concerning the love of the female sex, and by confirming
themselves in the idea that adulteries are not evils, and not at all
sins. This lust increases with them as it advances, so much so that they
desire all the women in the world, and wish for whole troops, and a
fresh one every day. Whereas this love separates itself from the common
love of the sex implanted in every man, and altogether from the love of
one of the sex, which is conjugial love, and inserts itself into the
exteriors of the heart as a delight of love separate from those loves,
and yet derived from them; therefore it is so thoroughly rooted in the
cuticles, that it remains in the touch when the powers are decayed.
Persons addicted to this lust make light of adulteries; wherefore they
think of the whole female sex as of a common harlot, and of marriage as
of a common harlotry, and thereby mix immodesty in modesty, and from the
mixture grow insane. From these considerations it is evident what is
here meant by the lust of varieties, that it is the lust of entirely
dissolute adultery.

508. II. THAT LUST IS LOVE AND AT THE SAME TIME LOATHING IN REGARD TO
THE SEX. Persons addicted to that lust have a love for the sex, because
they derive variety from the sex; and they have a loathing for the sex,
because after enjoying a woman they reject her and lust after others.
This obscene lust burns towards a fresh woman, and after burning, it
grows cold towards her; and cold is loathing. That this lust is love and
at the same time loathing in regard to the sex, may be illustrated as
follows: set on the left side a company of the women whom they have
enjoyed, and on the right side a company of those whom they have not;
would not they look at the latter company from love, but at the former
from loathing? and yet each company is the sex.

509. III. THAT LUST ALTOGETHER ANNIHILATES CONJUGIAL LOVE APPERTAINING
TO ITSELF. The reason of this is, because that lust is altogether
opposite to conjugial love, and so opposite, that it not only rends it
asunder, but as it were grinds it to powder, and thereby annihilates it:
for conjugial love is confined to one of the sex; whereas that lust does
not stop at one, but within an hour or a day is as intensely cold as it
was before hot towards her; and since cold is loathing, the latter by
forced cohabitation and dwelling together is so accumulated as to become
nauseous, and thus conjugial love is consumed to such a degree that
nothing of it is left. From these considerations it may be seen, that
this lust is fatal to conjugial love; and as conjugial love constitutes
the inmost principle of life with man, that it is fatal to his life; and
that that lust, by successive interceptions and closings of the
interiors of the mind, at length becomes cuticular, and thus merely
alluring; while the faculty of understanding or rationality still
remains.

510. IV. THE LOT OF THOSE (WHO HAVE BEEN ADDICTED TO THAT LUST) AFTER
DEATH IS MISERABLE, SINCE THEY HAVE NOT THE INMOST PRINCIPLE OF LIFE.
Every one has excellence of life according to his conjugial love; for
that excellence conjoins itself with the life of the wife, and by
conjunction exalts itself; but as with those of whom we are speaking
there does not remain the least principle of conjugial love, and
consequently not anything of the inmost principle of life, therefore
their lot after death is miserable. After passing a certain period of
time in their externals, in which they converse rationally and act
civilly, they are let into their internals, and in this case into a
similar lust and its delights, in the same degree as in the world: for
every one after death is let into the same state of life which he had
appropriated to himself, to the intent that he may be withdrawn from it;
for no one can be withdrawn from this evil, unless he has first been led
into it; if he were not to be led into it, the evil would conceal
itself, and defile the interiors of the mind, and spread itself as a
plague, and would next burst through all barriers and destroy the
external principles of the body. For this end there are opened to them
brothels, which are on the side of hell, where there are harlots with
whom they have an opportunity of varying their lusts; but this is
granted with the restriction to one harlot in a day, and under a penalty
in case of communication with more than one on the same day. Afterwards,
when from examination it appears that that lust is so inbred that they
cannot be withdrawn from it, they are conveyed to a certain place which
is next above the hell assigned for them, and then they appear to
themselves as if they fall into a swoon, and to others as if they fall
down with the face upward; and also the ground beneath their backs is
actually opened, and they are absorbed, and sink down into hell among
their like; thus they are gathered to their own. I have been permitted
to see them there, and likewise to converse with them. Among themselves
they appear as men, which is granted them lest they should be a terror
to their companions; but at a certain distance they seem to have white
faces consisting only of skin, and this because they have no spiritual
life in them, which every one has according to the conjugial principle
sown in him. Their speech is dry, parched, and sorrowful: when they are
hungry, they lament; and their lamentations are heard as a peculiar
clashing noise. Their garments are tattered, and their lower garments
are drawn above the belly round about the breast; because they have no
loins, but their ankles commence from the region of the bottom of the
belly: the reason of this is, because the loins with men (_homines_)
correspond to conjugial love, and they are void of this love. They said
that they loathe the sex on account of their having no potency.
Nevertheless, among themselves they can reason as from rationality; but
since they are cutaneous, they reason from the fallacies of the senses.
This hell is in the western quarter towards the north. These same
persons, when seen from afar, appear not as men or as monsters, but as
frozen substances. It is however to be observed, that those become of
this description who have indulged in the above lust to such a degree as
to rend and annihilate in themselves the conjugial human principle.

       *       *       *       *       *

ON THE LUST OF VIOLATION.

511. The lust of violation does not mean the lust of defloration, which
is the violation of virginities, but not of maidens when it is effected
from consent; whereas the lust of violation, which is here treated of,
retreats in consequence of consent, and is sharpened in consequence of
refusal; and it is the passion of violating all women whatever, who
altogether refuse, and violently resist, whether they be maidens, or
widows, or wives. Persons addicted to this lust are like robbers and
pirates, who are delighted with spoil and plunder, and not with what is
given and justly acquired; and they are like malefactors, who covet what
is disallowed and forbidden, and despise what is allowed and granted.
These violators are altogether averse to consent, and are set on fire by
resistance, which if they observe to be not internal, the ardor of their
lust is instantly extinguished, as fire is by water thrown upon it. It
is well known, that wives do not spontaneously submit themselves to the
disposal of their husbands as to the ultimate effects of love, and that
from prudence they resist as they would resist violation, to the end
that they may take away from their husbands the cold arising from the
consideration of enjoyments being cheap in consequence of being
continually allowed, and also in consequence of an idea of
lasciviousness on their part. These repugnancies, although they
enkindle, still are not the causes, but only the beginnings of this
lust: its cause is, that after conjugial love and also adulterous love
have grown insipid by practice, they are willing, in order that those
loves may be repaired, to be set on fire by absolute repugnances. This
lust thus begun, afterwards increases, and as it increases it despises
and breaks through all bounds of the love of the sex, and exterminates
itself, and from a lascivious, corporeal, and fleshly love, becomes
cartilaginous and bony; and then, from the periosteurns, which have an
acute feeling, it becomes acute. Nevertheless this lust is rare, because
it exists only with those who had entered into the married state, and
then had lived in the practice of adulteries until they became insipid.
Besides this natural cause of this lust, there is also a spiritual
cause, of which something will be said in what follows.

512. The lot of persons of this character after death is as follows:
these violators then separate themselves from those who are in the
limited love of the sex, and altogether from those who are in conjugial
love, thus from heaven: afterwards they are sent to the most cunning
harlots, who not only by persuasion, but also by imitation perfectly
like that of a stage-player, can feign and represent as if they were
chastity itself. These harlots clearly discern those who are principled
in the above lust: in their presence they speak of chastity and its
value; and when the violator comes near and touches them, they are full
of wrath, and fly away as through terror into a closet, where there is a
couch and a bed, and slightly close the door after them, and recline
themselves; and hence by their art they inspire the violator with an
ungovernable desire of breaking down the door, of rushing in, and
attacking them; and when this is effected, the harlot raising herself
erect with the violator begins to fight with her hands and nails,
tearing his face, rending his clothes, and with a furious voice crying
to the harlots her companions, as to her female servants, for
assistance, and opening the window with a loud outcry of thief, robber,
and murderer; and when the violator is at hand she bemoans herself and
weeps: and after violation she prostrates herself, howls, and calls out
that she is undone, and at the same time threatens in a serious tone,
that unless he expiates the violation by paying a considerable sum, she
will attempt his destruction. While they are engaged in these venereal
scenes, they appear at a distance like cats, which nearly in like manner
before their conjunctions combat together, run forward, and make an
outcry. After some such brothel-contests, they are taken away, and
conveyed into a cavern, where they are forced to some work: but as their
smell is offensive, in consequence of having rent asunder the conjugial
principle, which is the chief jewel of human life, they are sent to the
borders of the western quarters, where at a certain distance they appear
lean, as if consisting of bones covered over with skin only; but when
seen at a distance they appear like panthers. When I was permitted to
see them nearer, I was surprised that some of them held books in their
hands, and were reading; and I was told that this is the case, because
in the world they said various things concerning the spiritual things of
the church, and yet defiled them by adulteries, even to their
extremities, and that such was the correspondence of this lust with the
violation of spiritual marriage. But it is to be observed, that the
instances of those who are principled in this lust are rare: certain it
is, that women, because it is unbecoming for them to prostitute love,
are repugnant thereto, and that repugnance enervates; nevertheless this
is not from any lust of violation.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE LUST OF SEDUCING INNOCENCIES.

513. The lust of seducing innocencies is neither the lust of
defloration, nor the lust of violation, but is peculiar and singular by
itself; it prevails more especially with the deceitful. The women, who
appear to them as innocencies, are such as regard the evil of adultery
as an enormous sin, and who therefore highly prize chastity, and at the
same time piety: these women are the objects which set them on fire. In
Roman Catholic countries there are maidens devoted to the monastic life;
and because they believe these maidens to be pious innocencies above the
rest of their sex, they view them as the dainties and delicacies of
their lust. With a view of seducing either the latter or the former
because they are deceitful, they first devise arts, and next, when they
have well digested them, without receiving any check from shame, they
practise them as from nature. These arts are principally pretences of
innocence, love, chastity, and piety; by these and other cunning
stratagems, they enter into the interior friendship of such women, and
thence into their love, which they change from spiritual into natural by
various persuasions and at the same time by insinuations, and afterwards
into corporeal-carnal by irritations, and then they take possession of
them at pleasure; and when they have attained this end, they rejoice in
heart, and make a mock of those whom they have violated.

514. The lot of these seducers after death is sad, since such seduction
is not only impiety, but also malignity. After they have passed through
their first period in the spiritual world, which is in externals,
wherein they excel many others in the elegance of their manners and the
courteousness of their speech, they are reduced to another period of
their life, which is in internals, wherein their lust is set at liberty,
and commences its sport; and then they are first conveyed to women who
had made vows of chastity, and with these they are examined as to the
quality of their malignant concupiscence, to the intent that they may
not be judged except on conviction: when they are made sensible of the
chastity of those women, their deceit begins to act, and to attempt its
crafty arts; but as this is to no purpose, they depart from them. They
are afterwards introduced to women of genuine innocence; and when they
attempt to deceive these in like manner, by virtue of a power given to
those women, they are heavily fined; for they occasion in their hands
and feet a grievous numbness; likewise in their necks, and at length
make them feel as it were a swoon; and when they have inflicted this
punishment, they run away and escape from the sufferers. After this
there is a way opened to them to a certain company of courtezans, who
have been versed in the art of cunningly feigning innocence: and these
first expose them to laughter among themselves, and at length after
various engagements suffer themselves to be violated. After some such
scenes, a third period takes place, which is that of judgement; and in
this case, being convicted, they sink down, and are gathered to their
like in the hell which is in the northern quarter, and there they appear
at a distance like weasels; but if they have allured by deceit, they are
conveyed down from this hell to that of the deceitful, which is in the
western quarter at a depth to the back; in this hell they appear at a
distance like serpents of various kinds; and the most deceitful like
vipers: but in the hell into which I was permitted to look, they
appeared to me as if they were ghastly pale, with faces of chalk: and as
they are mere concupiscences, they do not like to speak: and if they do
speak, they only mutter and stammer various things, which are understood
by none but their companions who are near them; but presently, as they
sit or stand, they make themselves unseen, and fly about in the cavern
like phantoms; for on this occasion they are in phantasy, and phantasy
appears to fly: after flying they rest themselves, and then, what is
wonderful, one does not know another; the cause of this is, because they
are principled in deceit, and deceit does not believe another, and
thereby withdraws itself. When they are made sensible of any thing
proceeding from conjugial love, they fly away into hiding places and
conceal themselves. They are also void of all love of the sex, and are
real impotencies, and are called infernal genii.

       *       *       *       *       *

ON THE CORRESPONDENCE OF ADULTERIES WITH THE VIOLATION OF SPIRITUAL
MARRIAGE.

515. I should here say something, in the way of preface, concerning
correspondence; but the subject does not properly belong to the present
work. The nature and meaning of correspondence may be seen in a brief
summary above, n. 76, and n. 342; and fully in the APOCALYPSE REVEALED,
from beginning to end, that it is between the natural sense of the Word
and the spiritual sense. That in the Word there is a natural and a
spiritual sense, and a correspondence between them, has been
demonstrated in the DOCTRINE OF THE NEW JERUSALEM CONCERNING THE SACRED
SCRIPTURE, and especially, n. 5-26.

516. The spiritual marriage means the marriage of the Lord and the
church, spoken of above, n. 116-131; and hence also the marriage of good
and truth, likewise spoken of above, n. 83-102; and as this marriage of
the Lord and the church, and the consequent marriage of good and truth,
is in everything of the Word, it is the violation of this which is here
meant by the violation of the spiritual marriage; for the church is from
the Word, and the Word is the Lord: the Lord is the Word, because he is
divine good and divine truth therein. That the Word is that marriage,
may be seen fully confirmed in the DOCTRINE OF THE NEW JERUSALEM
CONCERNING THE SACRED SCRIPTURE, n. 80-90.

517. Since therefore the violation of the spiritual marriage is the
violation of the Word, it is evident that this violation is the
adulteration of good and the falsification of truth, for the spiritual
marriage is the marriage of good and truth; whence it follows, that when
the good of the Word is adulterated, and its truth falsified, the above
marriage is violated. How this violation is effected, and by whom, is in
some measure evident from what follows.

518. Above, in treating of the marriage of the Lord and the church, n.
116, and the following numbers, and in treating of the marriage of good
and truth, n. 83, and the following numbers, it was shewn, that that
marriage corresponds to marriages in the world: hence it follows, that
the violation of that marriage corresponds to whoredoms and adulteries.
That this is the case, is very manifest from the Word itself, in that
whoredoms and adulteries there signify the falsifications of truth and
the adulterations of good, as may be plainly seen from numerous passages
adduced out of the Word in the APOCALYPSE REVEALED, n. 134.

519. The Word is violated by those in the Christian church who
adulterate its goods and truths; and those do this who separate truth
from good and good from truth; also, who assume and confirm appearances
of truth and fallacies for genuine truths; and likewise, who know truths
of doctrine derived from the Word, and live evil lives, not to mention
other like cases. These violations of the Word and the church correspond
to the prohibited degrees, mentioned in Levit, chap. xviii.

520. As the natural principle and the spiritual appertaining to every
man (_homo_), cohere as soul and body, (for a man without the spiritual
principle which flows into and vivifies his natural principle, is not a
man), it hence follows, that whoever is in spiritual marriage is also in
happy natural marriage; and on the contrary, that whoever is in
spiritual adultery is also in natural adultery, and whoever is in
natural adultery is also in spiritual adultery. Now since all who are in
hell are in the nuptial connection of evil and the false, and this is
essential spiritual adultery; and all who are in heaven are in the
marriage of good and truth, and this is essential marriage; therefore
hell in the total is called adultery, and heaven in the total is called
marriage.

       *       *       *       *       *

521. To the above shall be added this MEMORABLE RELATION. My sight being
opened, I saw a shady forest, and therein a crowd of satyrs: the satyrs
as to their breasts were rough and hairy, and as to their feet some were
like calves, some like panthers, and some like wolves, and they had
beasts' claws instead of toes. These were running to and fro like wild
beasts, crying out, "Where are the women?" and instantly I saw some
harlots who were expecting them, and who in various ways were monstrous.
The satyrs ran towards them, and laid hold of them, dragging them into a
cavern, which was in the midst of the forest deep beneath the earth; and
upon the ground round about the cavern lay a great serpent in spiral
foldings, breathing poison into the cavern: in the branches of the
forest above the serpent dismal birds of night croaked and screeched.
But the satyrs and harlots did not see these things, because they were
the correspondences of their lasciviousnesses, and therefore their usual
appearances at a distance. Afterwards they came out of the cavern, and
entered a certain low cottage, which was a brothel; and then being
separated from the harlots they talked together, and I listened; for
conversation in the spiritual world may be heard by a distant person as
if he was present, the extent of space in that world being only an
appearance. They talked about marriages, nature, and religion. Those who
as to the feet appeared like calves, spoke concerning MARRIAGES, and
said, "What are marriages but licit adulteries? and what is sweeter than
adulterous hypocrisies, and the making fools of husbands?" At this the
rest clapped their hands with a loud laugh. The satyrs who as to the
feet appeared as panthers, spoke concerning NATURE, and said, "What is
there but nature? What distinction is there between a man and a beast,
except that a man can speak articulately and a beast sonorously? Does
not each derive life from heat, and understanding from light, by the
operation of nature?" Hereupon the rest exclaimed, "Admirable! you speak
from judgement." Those who as to the feet appeared like wolves, spoke
concerning RELIGION, saying, "What is God or a divine principle, but the
inmost principles of nature in action? What is religion but a device to
catch and bind the vulgar?" Hereupon the rest vociferated, "Bravo!"
After a few minutes they rushed forth, and in so doing they saw me at a
distance looking attentively at them. Being provoked at this, they ran
out from the forest, and with a threatening countenance directed their
course hastily towards me, and said, "What are you doing here, listening
to our whispers?" I replied, "Why should I not? what is to hinder me?
you were only talking together:" and I related what I had heard from
them. Hereupon their minds (_animi_) were appeased, which was through
fear lest their sentiments should be divulged; and then they began to
speak modestly and to act bashfully; from which circumstance I knew that
they were not of mean descent but of honorable birth; and then I told
them, how I saw them in the forest as satyrs, twenty as calf-satyrs, six
as panther-satyrs, and four as wolf-satyrs; they were thirty in number.
They were surprised at this, because they saw themselves there as men,
and nothing else, in like manner as they saw themselves here with me. I
then taught them, that the reason of their so appearing was from their
adulterous lust, and that this satyr-like form was a form of dissolute
adultery, and not a form of a person. This happened, I said, because
every evil concupiscence presents a likeness of itself in some form,
which is not perceived by those who are in the concupiscence, but by
those who are at a distance: I also said, "To convince you of it, send
some from among you into that forest, and do you remain here, and look
at them." They did so, and sent away two; and viewing them from near the
above brothel-cottage, they saw them altogether as satyrs; and when they
returned, they saluted those satyrs, and said, "Oh what ridiculous
figures!" While they were laughing, I jested a good deal with them, and
told them that I had also seen adulterers as hogs; and then I
recollected the fable of Ulysses and the Circe, how she sprinkled the
companions and servants of Ulysses with poisonous herbs, and touched
them with a magic wand, and turned them into hogs,--perhaps into
adulterers, because she could not by any art turn any one into a hog.
After they had made themselves exceedingly merry on this and other like
subjects, I asked them whether they then knew to what kingdoms in the
world they had belonged? They said, they had belonged to various
kingdoms, and they named Italy, Poland, Germany, England, Sweden; and I
enquired, whether they had seen any one from Holland of their party? And
they said, Not one. After this I gave the conversation a serious turn,
and asked them, whether they had ever thought that adultery is sin? They
replied, "What is sin? we do not know what it means." I then inquired,
whether they ever remembered that adultery was contrary to the sixth
commandment of the Decalogue. [Footnote: According to the division of
the commandments adopted by the Church of England, it is the _seventh_
that is here referred to.] They replied, "What is the Decalogue? Is not
it the catechism? What have we men to do with that childish pamphlet?" I
asked them, whether they had ever thought at all about hell. They
replied, "Who ever came up thence to give us information?" I asked,
whether they had ever thought at all in the world about a life after
death. They said, "Just as much as about the future life of beasts, and
at times as about phantoms, which exhale from dead bodies and float
about." I further asked them, whether they had heard any thing from the
priests on any of these subjects. They replied, that they had attended
only to the sound of their voices, and not to the matter; and what is
it? Being astonished at these answers, I said to them, "Turn your faces,
and direct your eyes to the midst of the forest, where the cavern is in
which you have been;" and they turned themselves, and saw that great
serpent around the cavern in spiral foldings, breathing poison, and also
the doleful birds in the branches over the serpents. I then asked them,
"What do you see?" But being much terrified, they did not answer; and I
said, "Do you see the dreadful sight? Know then that this is a
representative of adultery in the baseness of its lust." Suddenly at
that instant an angel presented himself, who was a priest, and opened
the hell in the western quarter into which such spirits are at length
collected; and he said, "Look thither:" and they saw that firy lake, and
knew there some of their friends in the world, who invited them to
themselves. Having seen and heard these things, they turned themselves
away, and rushed out of my sight, and retired from the forest; but I
observed their steps, that they only pretended to retire, and that by
winding ways they returned into the forest.

522. After this I returned home, and the next day, from a recollection
of these sad scenes, I looked to the same forest, and saw that it had
disappeared, and in its place there was a sandy plain, and in the midst
thereof a lake, in which were some red serpents. But some weeks after
when I was looking thither again, I saw on its right side some fallow
land, and upon it some husbandmen; and again, after some weeks I saw
springing out of that fallow land some tilled land surrounded with
shrubs; and I then heard a voice from heaven, "Enter into your chamber,
and shut the door, and apply to the work begun on the Apocalypse, and
finish it within two years."

       *       *       *       *       *

ON THE IMPUTATION OF EACH LOVE, ADULTEROUS AND CONJUGIAL.

523. THE LORD SAITH, JUDGE NOT, THAT YE BE NOT CONDEMNED, Matt. vii. 1;
which cannot in any wise mean judgement respecting any one's moral and
civil life in the world, but respecting his spiritual and celestial
life. Who does not see, that unless a man was allowed to judge
respecting the moral life of those who live with him in the world,
society would perish? What would society be if there were no public
judicature, and if every one did not exercise his judgement respecting
another? But to judge what is the quality of the interior mind, or soul,
thus what is the quality of any one's spiritual state, and thence what
his lot is after death, is not allowed; for that is known only to the
Lord: neither does the Lord reveal this till after the person's decease,
to the intent that every one may act freely in whatever he does, and
thereby that good or evil may be from him, and thus be in him, and that
thence he may live to himself and live his own to eternity. The reason
why the interiors of the mind, which are kept hid in the world, are
revealed after death is, because this is of importance and advantage to
the societies into which the man then comes; for in them all are
spiritual. That those interiors are then revealed, is plain from these
words of the Lord: _There is nothing concealed, which shall not be
revealed, or hidden, which shall not be known: therefore whatsoever
things ye have said in darkness, shall be heard in light: and that which
ye have spoken into the ear in closets shall be preached on the
house-tops_, Luke xii. 2, 3. A common judgement, as this for
instance,--"If you are such in internals as you appear to be in
externals, you will be saved or condemned," is allowed; but a particular
judgement, as this, for instance,--"You are such in internals, therefore
you will be saved or condemned," is not allowed. Judgement concerning
the spiritual life of a man, or the internal life of the soul, is meant
by the imputation which is here treated of. Can any human being know and
decide who is in heart an adulterer, and who a conjugial partner? And
yet the thoughts of the heart, which are the purposes of the will, judge
every one. But we will explain this subject in the following order: I.
_The evil in which every one is principled is imputed to him after
death; and so also the good._ II. _The transference of the good of one
person into another is impossible._ III. _Imputation, if by it is meant
such transference, is a frivolous term._ IV. _Evil is imputed to every
one according to the quality of his will and his understanding; in like
manner good._ V. _Thus adulterous love is imputed to every one._ VI. _In
like manner conjugial love._ We proceed to the explanation of each
article.

524. I. THE EVIL IN WHICH EVERY ONE IS PRINCIPLED, IS IMPUTED TO HIM
AFTER DEATH; AND SO ALSO THE GOOD. To make this proposition in some
degree evident, it shall be considered according to the following
arrangement: 1. That every one has a life peculiar to himself. 2. That
every one's life remains with him after death. 3. That to an evil person
is then imputed the evil of his life, and to a good person the good of
his life. As to the first point,--that everyone has a life peculiar to
himself, thus distinct from that of another, it is well known; for there
is a perpetual variety, and there is not any thing the same as another,
consequently everyone has his own peculiar principle. This is evident
from men's faces, the faces of no two persons being absolutely alike,
nor can there be two alike to eternity: the reason of this is, because
there are no two minds (_animi_) alike, and faces are derived from
minds; for the face, as it is said, is a type of the mind, and the mind
derives its origin and form from the life. Unless a man (_homo_) had a
life peculiar to himself, as he has a mind and a face peculiar to
himself, he would not have any life after death, separate from that of
another; yea, neither would there be a heaven, for heaven consists of
perpetual varieties; its form is derived solely from the varieties of
souls and minds arranged into such an order as to make a one; and they
make a one from the One, whose life is in every thing therein as the
soul is in a man: unless this was the case, heaven would be dispersed,
because form would be dissolved. The One from whom all things have life,
and from whom form coheres, is the Lord. In general every form consists
of various things, and is such as is their harmonic co-ordination and
arrangement to a one: such is the human form; and hence it is that a
man, consisting of so many members, viscera, and organs, is not sensible
of any thing in himself and from himself but as of a one. As to the
SECOND point,--that every one's life remains with him after death, it is
known in the church from these passages of the Word: _The Son of Man
will come and will then render to every one according to his deeds_,
Matt. xvi. 27. _I saw the books open; and all were judged according to
their works_, Rev. xx. 12. _In the day of judgement God will render to
every one according to his works_, Rom. ii. 6; 2 Cor. v. 10. The works,
according to which it will be rendered to every one, are the life,
because the life does the works, and they are according to the life. As
I have been permitted for several years to be associated with angels,
and to converse with the deceased, I can testify for certain, that every
one is then examined as to the quality of the life which he has led, and
that the life which he has contracted in the world abides with him to
eternity. I have conversed with those who lived ages ago, whose life I
have been acquainted with from history, and I have known it to be like
the description given of it; and I have heard from the angels, that no
one's life after death can be changed, because it is organized according
to his love and consequent works; and that if it were changed the
organization would be rent asunder, which cannot be done in any case;
also that a change of organization can only be effected in the material
body, and is utterly impossible in the spiritual body, after the former
has been laid aside. In regard to the THIRD point--that to an evil
person is then imputed the evil of his life, and to a good person the
good of his life, it is to be observed, that the imputation of evil is
not accusation, inculpation, and judication, as in the world, but evil
itself produces this effect; for the evil freely separate themselves
from the good, since they cannot remain together. The delights of the
love of evil are different from those of the love of good; and delights
exhale from every one, as odors do from every vegetable in the world;
for they are not absorbed and concealed by the material body as
heretofore, but flow freely from their loves into the spiritual _aura_;
and as evil is there made sensible as in its odor, it is in this which
accuses, fixes blame, and judges,--not before any judge, but before
every one who is principled in good; and this is what is meant by
imputation. Moreover, an evil person chooses companions with whom he may
live in his delights; and because he is averse from the delight of good,
he spontaneously betakes himself to his own in hell. The imputation of
good is effected in like manner, and takes place with those who in the
world have acknowledged that all good in them is from the Lord, and
nothing from themselves. These, after they have been prepared, are let
into the interior delights of good, and then there is opened to them a
way into heaven, to the society where its homogeneous delights are: this
is effected by the Lord.

525. II. THE TRANSFERENCE OF THE GOOD OF ONE PERSON TO ANOTHER IS
IMPOSSIBLE. The evidence of this proposition may also be seen from the
following points: 1. That every man is born in evil. 2. That he is led
into good by regeneration from the Lord. 3. That this is effected by a
life according to his precepts. 4. Wherefore good, when it is thus
implanted, cannot be transferred. The FIRST point,--that every man is
born in evil, is well known in the church. It is generally said that
this evil is derived hereditarily from Adam; but it is from a man's
parents. Every one derives from his parents his peculiar temper, which
is his inclination. That this is the case, is evinced both by reason and
experience; for the likenesses of parents as to face, genius, and
manners, appear extant in their immediate offspring and in their
posterity; hence families are known by many, and a judgement is also
formed concerning their minds (_animi_); wherefore the evils which
parents themselves have contracted, and which they have transmitted to
their offspring, are the evils in which men are born. The reason why it
is believed that the guilt of Adam is inscribed on all the human race,
is, because few reflect upon any evil with themselves, and thence know
it; wherefore they suppose that it is so deeply hid as to appear only in
the sight of God. In regard to the SECOND point,--that a man is led into
good by regeneration from the Lord, it is to be observed that there is
such a thing as regeneration, and that unless a person be regenerated,
he cannot enter into heaven, as appears clearly from the Lord's words in
John iii. 3, 5. The regeneration consists in purification from evils,
and thereby renovation of life, cannot be unknown in the Christian
world; for reason also sees this when it acknowledges that every one is
born in evil, and that evil cannot be washed and wiped away like filth
by soap and water, but by repentance. As to the THIRD point,--that a man
is led into good by the Lord, by a life according to his precepts, it is
plain from this consideration, that there are live precepts of
regeneration; see above, n. 82; among which are these,--that evils are
to be shunned, because they are of and from the devil, and that goods
are to be done, because they are of and from God; and that men ought to
go to the Lord, in order that he may lead them to do the latter. Let any
one consult himself and consider, whether a man derives good from any
other source; and if he has not good, he has not salvation. In regard to
the FOURTH point,--that good, when it is thus implanted, cannot be
transferred, (that is, the good of one person into another,) it is
evident from what has been already said; for from that it follows, that
a man by regeneration is made altogether new as to his spirit, which is
effected by a life according to the Lord's precepts. Who does not see
that this renewing can only be effected from time to time, in nearly the
same manner as a tree successively takes root and grows from a seed, and
is perfected? Those who have other perceptions of regeneration, do not
know any thing about the state of man, or about evil and good, which two
are altogether opposite, and that good can only be implanted so far as
evil is removed; nor do they know, that so long as any one is in evil,
he is averse from the good which in itself is good; wherefore if the
good of one should be transferred into any one who is in evil, it would
be as if a lamb should be cast before a wolf, or as if a pearl should be
tied to a swine's snout: from which considerations it is evident, that
any such transfer is impossible.

526. III. IMPUTATION, IF BY IT IS MEANT SUCH TRANSFERENCE, IS A
FRIVOLOUS TERM. That the evil in which every one is principled, is
imputed to him after death, and so also the good, was proved above, n.
524; hence it is evident what is meant by imputation: but if by
imputation is meant the tranference of good into any one that is in
evil, it is a frivolous term, because any such transference is
impossible, as was also proved above, in 525. In the world, merits may
as it were be transferred by men; that is, good may be done to children
for the sake of their parents, or to the friends of any client out of
favor; but the good of merit cannot be inscribed on their souls, but
only be externally adjoined. The like is not possible with men as to
their spiritual life: this, as was shewn above, must be implanted; and
if it is not implanted by a life according to the Lord's precepts, as
above-mentioned, a man remains in the evil in which he was born. Before
such implantation, it is impossible for any good to reach him, or if it
reaches him, it is instantly struck back and rebounds like an elastic
ball falling upon a rock, or it is absorbed like a diamond thrown into a
bog. A man not reformed as to the Spirit, is like a panther or an owl,
and may be compared to a bramble and a nettle; but a man regenerated is
like a sheep or a dove, and may be compared to an olive and a vine.
Consider, I pray, if you are so disposed, how can a man-panther be
changed into a man-sheep, or an owl into a dove, or a bramble into an
olive, or a nettle into a vine, by any imputation, if by it is meant
transference? In order that such a change may be effected is it not
necessary that the ferine principle of the panther and the owl, or the
noxious principle of the bramble and the nettle, be first taken away,
and thereby the truly human and innocent principle be implanted? How
this is effected, the Lord also teaches in John, chap. xv. 1-7.

527. IV. EVIL OR GOOD IS IMPUTED TO EVERY ONE ACCORDING TO THE QUALITY
OF HIS WILL AND HIS UNDERSTANDING. It is well known that there are two
principles which make a man's life, the will and the understanding; and
that all things which a man does, are done from his will and his
understanding; and that without these acting principles he would have
neither action nor speech other than as a machine; hence it is evident,
that such as are a man's will and understanding, such is the man; and
further, that a man's action in itself is such as is the affection of
his will which produces it, and that a man's conversation in itself is
such as is the thought of his understanding which produces it: wherefore
several men may act and speak alike, and yet they act and speak
differently: one from a depraved will and thought, the other from an
upright will and thought. From these considerations it is evident that
by the deeds or works according to which every one will be judged, are
meant the will and the understanding; consequently that evil works means
the works of an evil will, whatever has been their appearance in
externals, and that good works mean the works of a good will, although
in externals they have appeared like the works done by an evil man. All
things which are done from a man's interior will, are done from purpose,
since that will proposes to itself what it acts by its intention; and
all things which are done from the understanding, are done from
confirmation, since the understanding confirms. From these
considerations it may appear, that evil or good is imputed to every one
according to the quality of his will therein, and of his understanding
concerning them. These observations I am allowed to confirm by the
following relation: In the spiritual world I have met several who in the
natural world had lived like others, being sumptuous in their dress,
giving costly entertainments, frequenting the exhibitions of the stage,
jesting loosely on love topics, with other similar practices; and yet
the angels accounted those things as evils of sin to some, and not to
others, declaring the latter guiltless, and the former guilty. Being
questioned why they did so, when all had done alike, they replied that
they regard all from their purpose, intention, or end, and distinguish
accordingly; and that therefore they excuse or condemn those whom the
end either excuses or condemns, since an end of good influences all in
heaven, and an end of evil all in hell.

528. To the above I will add the following observation: it is said in
the church that no one can fulfil the law, and the less so, because he
that offends against one precept of the decalogue, offends against all:
but this form of speaking is not such as it sounds; for it is to be
understood thus, that he who, from purpose or confirmation, acts against
one precept, acts against the rest; since to act so from purpose or
confirmation is to deny that it is a sin; and he who denies that it is a
sin, makes nothing of acting against the rest of the precepts. Who does
not know, that he that is an adulterer is not on that account a
murderer, a thief, and a false witness, or wishes to be so? But he that
is a determined and confirmed adulterer makes no account of anything
respecting religion, thus neither does he make any account of murder,
theft, and false witness; and he abstains from these evils, not because
they are sins, but because he is afraid of the law and of the loss of
reputation. That determined and confirmed adulterers make no account of
the holy things of the church and religion, may be seen above, n.
490-493, and in the two MEMORABLE RELATIONS, n. 500, 521, 522: it is a
similar case, if any one, from purpose or confirmation, acts against any
other precept of the decalogue; he also acts against the rest because he
does not regard anything as sin.

529. The case is similar with those who are principled in good from the
Lord: if these from will and understanding, or from purpose and
confirmation, abstain from any one evil because it is a sin, they
abstain from all evil, and the more so still if they abstain from
several; for as soon as any one, from purpose or confirmation, abstains
from any evil because it is a sin, he is kept by the Lord in the purpose
of abstaining from the rest: wherefore, if unwittingly, or from any
prevailing bodily concupiscence, he does evil, still this is not imputed
to him, because he did not purpose it to himself, and does not confirm
it with himself. A man comes into this purpose, if once or twice in a
year he examines himself, and repents of the evils which he discovers in
himself: it is otherwise with him who never examines himself. From these
considerations it evidently appears to whom sin is not imputed, and to
whom it is.

530. V. THUS ADULTEROUS LOVE IS IMPUTED TO EVERY ONE;--not according to
his deeds, such as they appear externally before men, nor either such as
they appear before a judge, but such as they appear internally before
the Lord, and from him before the angels, which is according to the
quality of a man's will and of his understanding therein. Various
circumstances exist in the world which mitigate and excuse crimes, also
which aggravate and charge them upon the perpetrator: nevertheless,
imputations after death take place, not according to the external
circumstances of the deed, but according to the internal circumstances
of the mind; and these are viewed according to the state of the church
with every one: as for example, a man impious in will and understanding,
that is, who has no fear of God or love of his neighbour, and
consequently no reverence for any sanctity of the church,--he, after
death, becomes guilty of all the crimes which he did in the body; nor is
there any remembrance of his good actions, since his heart, from whence
as from a fountain those things flowed, was averse from heaven, and
turned to hell; and deeds flow from the place of the habitation of every
one's heart. In order that this may be understood, I will mention an
arcanum: Heaven is distinguished into innumerable societies, and so is
hell, from an opposite principle; and the mind of every man, according
to his will and consequent understanding, actually dwells in one
society, and intends and thinks like those who compose the society. If
the mind be in any society of heaven, it then intends and thinks like
those who compose that society; if it be in any society of hell, it
intends and thinks like those who are in the same society; but so long
as a man lives in the world, so long he wanders from one society to
another, according to the changes of the affections of his will and of
the consequent thoughts of his mind: but after death his wanderings are
collected into one, and a place is accordingly allotted him, in hell if
he is evil, in heaven if he is good. Now since all in hell are
influenced by a will of evil, all there are viewed from that will; and
since all in heaven are influenced by will of good, all there are viewed
from that will; wherefore imputations after death take place according
to the quality of every one's will and understanding. The case is
similar with adulteries, whether they be fornications, whoredoms,
concubinages, or adulteries; for those things are imputed to every one,
not according to the deeds themselves, but according to the state of the
mind in the deeds; for deeds follow the body into the tomb, whereas the
mind rises again.

531. VI. THUS CONJUGIAL LOVE IS IMPUTED TO EVERY ONE. There are
marriages in which conjugial love does not appear, and yet is: and there
are marriages in which conjugial love appears and yet is not: there are
several causes in both cases, which may be known in part from what was
related concerning love truly conjugial, n. 57-73; concerning the cause
of colds and separations, n. 234-260; and concerning the causes of
apparent love and friendship in marriages, n. 271-292: but external
appearances decide nothing concerning imputation; the only thing which
decides is the conjugial principle, which abides in every one's will,
and is guarded, in whatever state of marriage a man is. The conjugial
principle is like a scale, in which that love is weighed; for the
conjugial principle of one man with one wife is the storehouse of human
life, and the reservoir of the Christian religion, as was shewn above,
n. 457, 458; and this being the case, it is possible that that love may
exist with one married partner, and not at the same time with the other;
and that it may lie deeper hid than that the man (_homo_) himself can
observe any thing concerning it; and also it may be inscribed in a
successive progress of the life. The reason of this is, because that
love in its progress accompanies religion, and religion, as it is the
marriage of the Lord and the church, is the beginning and inoculation of
that love; wherefore conjugial love is imputed to every one after death
according to his spiritual rational life; and for him to whom that love
is imputed, a marriage in heaven is provided after his decease, whatever
has been his marriage in the world. From these considerations then
results this short concluding observation, that no inference is to be
drawn concerning any one, from appearances of marriages or of
adulteries, whereby to decide that he has conjugial love, or not;
wherefore _Judge not, lest ye be condemned_. Matt. vii. 1.

       *       *       *       *       *

532. To the above I will add the following MEMORABLE RELATION. I was
once raised, as to my spirit, into one of the societies of the angelic
heaven; and instantly some of the wise men of the society came to me,
and said, "What news from the earth?" I replied, "This is new; the Lord
has revealed arcana which in point of excellence surpass all the arcana
heretofore revealed since the beginning of the church." They asked,
"What are they?" I said, "The following: 1. That in every part of the
Word there is a spiritual sense corresponding to the natural sense; and
that by means of the former sense the men of the church have conjunction
with the Lord and consociation with angels; and that the sanctity of the
Word resides therein. 2. That the correspondences are discovered of
which the spiritual sense of the Word consists." The angels asked, "Have
the inhabitants of the earth had no previous knowledge respecting
correspondences?" I said, "None at all;" and that the doctrine of
correspondences had been concealed for some thousands of years, ever
since the time of Job; and that with those who lived at that time, and
before it, the science of correspondences was their chief science,
whence they derived wisdom, because they derived knowledge respecting
the spiritual things of heaven and the church; but that this science, on
account of its being made idolatrous, was so extirpated and destroyed by
the divine providence of the Lord that no visible traces of it were left
remaining; that nevertheless at this time it has been again discovered
by the Lord, in order that the men of the church may have conjunction
with him, and consociation with the angels; which purposes are effected
by the Word, in which all things are correspondences. The angels
rejoiced exceedingly to hear that it has pleased the Lord to reveal this
great arcanum, which had lain so deeply hid for some thousands of years;
and they said it was done in order that the Christian church, which is
founded on the Word, and is now at its end, may again revive and draw
breath through heaven from the Lord. They inquired whether by that
science it is at this day discovered what are signified by baptism and
the holy supper, which have heretofore given birth to so many various
conjectures about their true meaning. I replied, that it is. 3. I said
further, that a revelation has been made at this day by the Lord
concerning the life of man after death? The angels said, "What
concerning the life after death? Who does not know that a man lives
after death?" I replied, "They know it, and they do not know it: they
say that it is not the man that lives after death, but his soul, and
that this lives a spirit; and the idea they have of a spirit is as of
wind or ether, and that it does not live a man till after the day of the
last judgement, at which time the corporeal parts, which had been left
in the world, will be recollected and again fitted together into a body,
notwithstanding their having been eaten by worms, mice, and fish; and
that thus men will rise again." The angels said, "What a notion is this!
Who does not know that a man lives a man after death, with this
difference alone, that he then lives a spiritual man, and that a
spiritual man sees a spiritual man, as a material man sees a material
man, and that they know no distinction, except that they are in a more
perfect state?" 4. The angels inquired, "What do they know concerning
our world, and concerning heaven and hell?" I said, "Nothing at all; but
at this day it has been revealed by the Lord, what is the nature and
quality of the world in which angels and spirits live, thus what is the
quality of heaven and of hell; and further, that angels and spirits are
in conjunction with men; besides many wonderful things respecting them."
The angels were glad to hear that it has pleased the Lord to reveal such
things, that men may no longer be in doubt through ignorance respecting
their immortality. 5. I further said, that at this day it has been
revealed from the Lord, that in your world there is a sun, different
from that of our world, and that the sun of your world is pure love, and
the sun of our world is pure fire; and that on this account, whatever
proceeds from your sun, since it is pure love, partakes of life, and
whatever proceeds from our sun, since it is pure fire, does not partake
of life; and that hence is the difference between spiritual and natural,
which difference, heretofore unknown, has been also revealed: hereby
also is made known the source of the light which enlightens the human
understanding with wisdom, and the source of the heat which kindles the
human will with heat. 6. It has been further discovered, that there are
three degrees of life, and that hence there are three heavens; and that
the human mind is distinguished into those degrees, and that hence man
(_homo_) corresponds to the three heavens. The angels said, "Did not
they know this heretofore?" I answered, "They were acquainted with a
distinction of degrees in relation to greater and less, but not in
relation to prior and posterior." 7. The angels inquired whether any
other things have been revealed? I replied "Several; namely, concerning
the last judgement: concerning the Lord, that he is God of heaven and
earth; that God is one both in person and essence, in whom there is a
divine trinity; and that he is the Lord: also concerning the new church
to be established by him, and concerning the doctrine of that church;
concerning the sanctity of the sacred scripture; that the Apocalypse
also has been revealed, which could not be revealed even as to a single
verse except by the Lord; moreover concerning the inhabitants of the
planets, and the earths in the universe; besides several memorable and
wonderful relations from the spiritual world, whereby several things
relating to wisdom have been revealed from heaven."

533. The angels were exceedingly rejoiced at this information; but they
perceived that I was sorrowful, and asked the cause of my sorrow. I
said, because the above arcana, at this day revealed by the Lord,
although in excellence and worth exceeding all the knowledges heretofore
published, are yet considered on earth as of no value. The angels
wondered at this, and besought the Lord that they might be allowed to
look down into the world: they did so, and lo! mere darkness was
therein: and they were told, that those arcana should be written on a
paper, which should be let down to the earth, and they would see a
prodigy: and it was done so; and lo! the paper on which those arcana
were written, was let down from heaven, and in its progress, while it
was in the world of spirits, it shone as a bright star; but when it
descended into the natural world, the light disappeared, and it was
darkened in the degree to which it fell: and while it was let down by
the angels in companies consisting of men of learning and erudition,
both clergy and laity, there was heard a murmur from many, in which were
these expressions, "What have we here? Is it any thing or nothing? What
matters it whether we know these things or not? Are they not mere
creatures of the brain?" And it appeared as if some of them took the
paper and folded it, rolling and unrolling it with their fingers, that
they might deface the writing; and it appeared as if some tore it in
pieces, and some were desirous to trample it under their feet: but they
were prevented by the Lord from proceeding to such enormity, and charge
was given to the angels to draw it back and secure it: and as the angels
were affected with sadness, and thought with themselves how long this
was to be the case, it was said, _For a time, and times, and half a
time_, Rev. xii. 14.

534. After this I conversed with the angels, informing them that
somewhat further is revealed in the world by the Lord. They asked,
"What?" I said, "Concerning love truly conjugial and its heavenly
delights." The angels said, "Who does not know that the delights of
conjugial love exceed those of all other loves? and who cannot see, that
into some love are collected all the blessednesses, satisfactions, and
delights, which can possibly be conferred by the Lord, and that the
receptacle thereof is love truly conjugial, which is capable of
receiving and perceiving them fully and sensibly?" I replied, "They do
not know this, because they have not come to the Lord, and lived
according to his precepts, by shunning evils as sins and doing goods;
and love truly conjugial with its delights is solely from the Lord, and
is given to those who live according to his precepts; thus it is given
to those who are received into the Lord's new church, which is meant in
the Apocalypse by the New Jerusalem." To this I added, "I am in doubt
whether in the world at this day they are willing to believe that this
love in itself is a spiritual love, and hence grounded in religion,
because they entertain only a corporeal idea respecting it." Then they
said to me, "Write respecting it, and follow revelation; and afterwards
the book written respecting it shall be sent down from us out of heaven,
and we shall see whether the things contained in it are received; and at
the same time whether they are willing to acknowledge, that that love is
according to the state of religion with man, spiritual with the
spiritual, natural with the natural, and merely carnal with adulterers."

535. After this I heard an outrageous murmur from below, and at the same
time these words, "Do miracles; and we will believe you." And I asked,
"Are not the things above-mentioned miracles?" Answer was made, "They
are not." I again asked, "What miracles then do you mean?" And it was
said, "Disclose and reveal things to come; and we will have faith." But
I replied, "Such disclosures and revelation are not granted from heaven;
since in proportion as a man knows things to come, in the same
proportion his reason and understanding, together with his wisdom and
prudence, fall into an indolence of inexertion, grow torpid, and decay."
Again I asked, "What other miracles shall I do?" And a cry was made, "Do
such miracles as Moses did in Egypt." To this I answered, "Possibly you
may harden your hearts against them as Pharaoh and the Egyptians did."
And reply was made, "We will not." But again I said, "Assure me of a
certainty, that you will not dance about a golden calf and adore it, as
the posterity of Jacob did within a month after they had seen the whole
Mount Sinai on fire, and heard Jehovah himself speaking out of the fire,
thus after the greatest of all miracles;" (a golden calf in the
spiritual sense denotes the pleasure of the flesh;) and reply was made
from below, "We will not be like the posterity of Jacob." But at that
instant I heard it said to them from heaven, "If ye believe not Moses
and the prophets,--that is, the Word of the Lord, ye will not believe
from miracles, any more than the sons of Jacob did in the wilderness,
nor any more than they believed when they saw with their own eyes the
miracles done by the Lord himself, while he was in the world."


GENERAL INDEX.


PART THE FIRST.

PRELIMINARY RELATIONS RESPECTING THE JOYS OF HEAVEN AND NUPTIALS THERE,
n. 1-26.

ON MARRIAGES IN HEAVEN, n. 27-41.

A man lives a man after death, n. 28-31. In this case a male is a male,
and a female a female, n. 32, 33. Every one's peculiar love remains with
him after death, n. 34-36. The love of the sex especially remains; and
with those who go to heaven, which is the case with all who become
spiritual here on earth, conjugial love remains, n. 37, 38. These things
fully confirmed by ocular demonstration, n. 39. Consequently there are
marriages in heaven, n. 40. Spiritual nuptials are to be understood by
the Lord's words, "After the resurrection they are not given in
marriage," n. 41.

ON THE STATE OF MARRIED PARTNERS AFTER DEATH, n. 45-54.

The love of the sex remains with every man after death, according to its
interior quality; that is, such as it had been in his interior will and
thought in the world, n. 46, 47. Conjugial love in like manner remains
such as it has been anteriorly; that is, such as it had been in the
man's interior will and thought in the world, n. 48. Married partners
most commonly meet after death, know each other, again associate, and
for a time live together: this is the case in the first state, thus
while they are in externals as in the world, n. 47*. But successively,
as they put off their externals and enter into their internals, they
perceive what had been the quality of their love and inclination for
each other, and consequently whether they can live together or not, n.
48*. If they can live together, they remain married partners; but if
they cannot, they separate, sometimes the husband from the wife,
sometimes the wife from the husband, and sometimes each from the other,
n. 49. In this case there is given to the man a suitable wife, and to
the woman a suitable husband, n. 50. Married pairs enjoy similar
communications with each other as in the world, but more delightful and
blessed, yet without prolification; in the place of which they
experience spiritual prolification, which is that of love and wisdom, n.
51, 52. This is the case with those who go to heaven; but it is
otherwise with those who go to hell, n. 53, 54.

ON LOVE TRULY CONJUGIAL, n. 57-73.

There exists a love truly conjugial, which at this day is so rare, that
it is not known what is its quality, and scarcely that it exists, n. 58,
59. This love originates in the marriage of good and truth, n. 60, 61.
There is a correspondence of this love with the marriage of the Lord and
the church, n. 62, 63. This love, from its origin and correspondence, is
celestial, spiritual, holy, pure, and clean, above every other love
imparted by the Lord to the angels of heaven and the men of the church,
n. 64. It is also the foundation love of all celestial and spiritual
loves, and thence of all natural loves, n. 65-67. Into this love are
collected all joys and delights from first to last, n. 68, 69. None,
however, come into this love, and can remain in it, but those who
approach the Lord, and love the truths of the church, and practise its
goods, n. 70-72. This love was the love of loves with the ancients, who
lived in the golden, silver, and copper ages, n. 73.

ON THE ORIGIN OF CONJUGIAL LOVE AS GROUNDED IN THE MARRIAGE OF GOOD AND
TRUTH n. 83-102.

Good and truth are the universals of creation, and thence are in all
created things; but they are in created subjects according to the form
of each, n. 84-86. There is neither solitary good nor solitary truth;
but in all cases they are conjoined, n. 87. There is the truth of good,
and from this the good of truth; or truth grounded in good, and good
grounded in that truth; and in those two principles is implanted from
creation an inclination to join themselves together into a one, n. 88,
89. In the subjects of the animal kingdom, the truth of good, or truth
grounded in good, is male (or masculine); and the good of that truth, or
good grounded in that truth, is female (or feminine), n. 90, 91. From
the influx of the marriage of good and truth from the Lord, the love of
the sex and conjugial love are derived, n. 92, 93. The love of the sex
belongs to the external or natural man; and hence it is common to every
animal, n. 94. But conjugial love belongs to the internal or spiritual
man; and hence this love is peculiar to man, n. 95, 96. With man
conjugial love is in the love of the sex as a gem in its matrix, n. 97.
The love of the sex with man is not the origin of conjugial love, but
its first rudiment; thus it is like an external natural principle, in
which an internal spiritual principle is implanted, n. 98. During the
implantation of conjugial love, the love of the sex inverts itself, and
becomes the chaste love of the sex, n. 99. The male and the female were
created to be the essential form of the marriage of good and truth, n.
100. Married partners are that form in their inmost principles, and
thence in what is derived from those principles, in proportion as the
interiors of their minds are opened, n. 101, 102.

ON THE MARRIAGE OF THE LORD AND THE CHURCH, AND ITS CORRESPONDENCE, n.
116-131.

The Lord in the Word is called the Bridegroom and Husband, and the
church the bride and wife; and the conjunction of the Lord with the
church, and the reciprocal conjunction of the church with the Lord, is
called a marriage, n. 117. The Lord is also called a Father, and the
church, a mother, n. 118, 119. The offspring derived from the Lord as a
husband and father, and from the church as a wife and mother, are all
spiritual; and in the spiritual sense of the Word are understood by sons
and daughters, brothers and sisters, sons-in-law and daughters-in-law,
and by other names of relations, n. 120. The spiritual offspring which
are born from the Lord's marriage with the church, are truths and goods;
truths, from which are derived understanding, perception, and all
thought; and goods, from which are derived love, charity, and all
affection, n. 121. From the marriage of good and truth, which proceeds
from the Lord in the way of influx, man receives truth, and the Lord
conjoins good thereto; and thus the church is formed by the Lord with
man, n. 122-124. The husband does not represent the Lord, and the wife
the church; because both together, the husband and the wife, constitute
the church, n. 125. Therefore there is not a correspondence of the
husband with the Lord, and of the wife with the church, in the marriages
of the angels in the heavens, and of men on earth, n. 126. But there is
a correspondence with conjugial love, semination, prolification, the
love of infants, and similar things which exist in marriages and are
derived from them, n. 127. The Word is the medium of conjunction,
because it is from the Lord, and thereby is the Lord, n. 128. The church
is from the Lord, and exists with those who come to him and live
according to his precepts, n. 129. Conjugial love is according to the
state of the church, because it is according to the state of wisdom with
man, n. 130. And as the church is from the Lord, conjugial love is also
from him, n. 131.

ON THE CHASTE PRINCIPLE AND THE NON-CHASTE, n. 138-156.

The chaste principle and the non-chaste are predicated only of marriages
and of such things as relate to marriages, n. 139, 140. The chaste
principle is predicated only of monogamical marriages, or of the
marriage of one man with one wife, n. 141. The Christian conjugial
principle alone is chaste, n. 142. Love truly conjugial is essential
chastity, n. 143. All the delights of love truly conjugial, even the
ultimate, are chaste, n. 144. With those who are made spiritual by the
Lord, conjugial love is more and more purified and rendered chaste, n.
145, 146. The chastity of marriage exists by a total renunciation of
whoredoms from a principle of religion, n. 147-149. Chastity cannot be
predicated of infants, or of boys and girls, or of young men and maidens
before they feel in themselves a love of the sex, n. 150. Chastity
cannot be predicated of eunuchs so made, n. 151. Chastity cannot be
predicated of those who do not believe adulteries to be evils in regard
to religion; and still less of those who do not believe them to be
hurtful to society, n. 152. Chastity cannot be predicated of those who
abstain from adulteries only for various external reasons, n. 153.
Chastity cannot be predicated of those who believe marriages to be
unchaste, n. 154. Chastity cannot be predicated of those who have
renounced marriage by vows of perpetual celibacy, unless there be and
remain in them the love of a life truly conjugial, n. 155. A state of
marriage is to be preferred to a state of celibacy, n. 156.

ON THE CONJUNCTION OF SOULS AND MINDS BY MARRIAGE, WHICH IS MEANT BY THE
LORD'S WORDS,--THEY ARE NO LONGER TWO BUT ONE FLESH, n. 156*-181.

From creation there is implanted in each sex a faculty and inclination,
whereby they are able and willing to be joined together as it were into
a one, n. 157. Conjugial love conjoins two souls, and thence two minds,
into a one, n. 158. The will of the wife conjoins itself with the
understanding of the man, and thence the understanding of the man with
the will of the wife, n. 159. The inclination to unite the man to
herself is constant and perpetual with the wife, but inconstant and
alternate with the man, n. 160. Conjunction is inspired into the man
from the wife according to her love, and is received by the man
according to his wisdom, n. 161. This conjunction is effected
successively from the first days of marriage; and with those who are
principled in love truly conjugial, it is effected more and more
thoroughly to eternity, n. 162. The conjunction of the wife with the
rational wisdom of the husband is effected from within, but with his
moral wisdom from without, n. 163-165. For the sake of this conjunction
as an end, the wife has a perception of the affections of her husband,
and also the utmost prudence in moderating them, n. 166. Wives conceal
this perception with themselves, and hide it from their husbands for
reasons of necessity, in order that conjugial love, friendship, and
confidence, and thereby the blessedness of dwelling together, and the
happiness of life may be secured, n. 167. This perception is the wisdom
of the wife, and is not communicable to the man; neither is the rational
wisdom of the man communicable to the wife, n. 168. The wife from a
principle of love is continually thinking about the man's inclination to
her, with the purpose of joining him to herself; it is otherwise with
the man, n. 169. The wife conjoins herself to the man by applications to
the desires of his will, n. 170. The wife is conjoined to her husband by
the sphere of her life flowing from the love of him, n. 171. The wife is
conjoined to the husband by the appropriation of the powers of his
virtue; which however is effected according to their mutual spiritual
love, n. 172. Thus the wife receives in herself the image of her
husband, and thence perceives, sees, and is sensible of his affections,
n. 173. There are duties proper to the husband, and others proper to the
wife; and the wife cannot enter into the duties proper to the husband,
nor the husband into the duties proper to the wife, so as to perform
them aright, n. 174, 175. These duties also, according to mutual aid,
conjoin the two into a one, and at the same time constitute one house,
n. 176. Married partners, according to these conjunctions, become one
man more and more, n. 177. Those who are principled in love truly
conjugial, are sensible of their being a united man, as it were one
flesh, n. 178. Love truly conjugial, considered in itself, is a union of
souls, a conjunction of minds, and an endeavour towards conjunction in
the bosoms, and thence in the body, n. 179. The states of this love are
innocence, peace, tranquillity, inmost friendship, full confidence, and
a mutual desire of mind and heart to do every good to each other; and
the states derived from these are blessedness, satisfaction, delight,
and pleasure; and from the eternal enjoyment of these is derived
heavenly felicity, n. 180. These things can only exist in the marriage
of one man with one wife, n. 181.

ON THE CHANGE OF THE STATE OF LIFE WHICH TAKES PLACE WITH MEN AND WOMEN
BY MARRIAGE, n. 184-206

The state of a man's life, from infancy even to the end of his life, and
afterwards to eternity, is continually changing, n. 185. In like manner
a man's internal form, which is that of his spirit, is continually
changing n. 186. These changes differ in the case of men and of women;
since men from creation are forms of knowledge, intelligence, and
wisdom, and women are forms of the love of those principles as existing
with men, n. 187. With men there is an elevation of the mind into
superior light, and with women an elevation of the mind into superior
heat; and the woman is made sensible of the delights of her heat in the
man's light, n. 188, 189. With both men and women, the states of life
before marriage are different from what they are afterwards, n. 190.
With married partners the states of life after marriage are changed, and
succeed each other according to the conjunctions of their minds by
conjugial love, n. 191. Marriage also induces other forms in the souls
and minds of married partners, n. 192. The woman is actually formed into
a wife, according to the description in the book of creation, n. 193.
This formation is effected on the part of the wife by secret means: and
this is meant by the woman's being created while the man slept, n. 194.
This formation on the part of the wife, is effected by the conjunction
of her own will with the internal will of the man, n. 195. The end
herein is, that the will of both may become one, and that thus both may
become one man, n. 196. This formation (on the part of the wife) is
effected by an appropriation of the affections of the husband, n. 197.
This formation (on the part of the wife) is effected by a reception of
the propagations of the soul of the husband, with the delight arising
from her desire to be the love of her husband's wisdom, n. 198. Thus a
maiden is formed into a wife, and a youth into a husband, n. 199. In the
marriage of one man with one wife, between whom there exists love truly
conjugial, the wife becomes more and more a wife, and the husband more
and more a husband, n. 200. Thus also their forms are successively
perfected and ennobled from within, n. 201. Children born of parents who
are principled in love truly conjugial, derive from them the conjugial
principle of good and truth, whence they have an inclination and
faculty, if sons, to perceive the things relating to wisdom; and if
daughters, to love those things which wisdom teaches, n. 202-205. The
reason of this is, because the soul of the offspring is from the father,
and its clothing from the mother, n. 206.

UNIVERSALS RESPECTING MARRIAGES, n. 209-230.

The sense proper to conjugial love is the sense of touch, n. 210. With
those who are in love truly conjugial, the faculty of growing wise
increases; but with those who are not, it decreases, n. 211, 212. With
those who are in love truly conjugial, the happiness of dwelling
together increases; but with those who are not, it decreases, n. 213.
With those who are in love truly conjugial, conjunction of minds
increases, and therewith friendship; but with those who are not, they
both decrease, n. 214. Those who are in love truly conjugial,
continually desire to be one man; but those who are not in conjugial
love, desire to be two, n. 215. Those who are in love truly conjugial,
in marriage have respect to what is eternal; but with those who are not,
the case is reversed, n. 216. Conjugial love resides with chaste wives;
but still their love depends on the husbands, n. 216*. Wives love the
bonds of marriage, if the men do, n. 217. The intelligence of women is
in itself modest, elegant, pacific, yielding, soft, tender; but the
intelligence of men is in itself grave, harsh, hard, daring, fond of
licentiousness, n. 218. Wives are in no excitation as men are; but they
have a state of preparation for reception, n. 219. Men have abundant
store according to the love of propagating the truths of wisdom, and to
the love of doing uses, n. 220. Determination is in the good pleasure of
the husband, n. 221. The conjugial sphere flows from the Lord through
heaven into everything in the universe, even to its ultimates, n. 222.
This sphere is received by the female sex, and through that is
transferred to the male sex, n. 223. Where there is love truly
conjugial, this sphere is received by the wife, and only through her by
the husband, n. 224. Where there is love not conjugial, this sphere is
received indeed by the wife, but not by the husband through her, n. 225.
Love truly conjugial may exist with one of the married partners, and not
at the same time with the other, n. 226. There are various similitudes
and dissimilitudes, both internal and external, with married partners,
n. 227. Various similitudes can be conjoined, but not with
dissimilitudes, n. 228. The Lord provides similitudes for those who
desire love truly conjugial, and if not on earth he yet provides them in
heaven, n. 229. A man, according to the deficiency and loss of conjugial
love, approaches to the nature of a beast, n. 230.

ON THE CAUSES OF COLDNESS, SEPARATION, AND DIVORCE IN MARRIAGES, n.
234-260.

There are spiritual heat and spiritual cold; and spiritual heat is love,
and spiritual cold is the privation thereof, n. 235. Spiritual cold in
marriages is a disunion of souls and a disjunction of minds, whence come
indifference, discord, contempt, disdain, and aversion; from which, in
several cases, at length comes separation as to bed, chamber, and house,
n. 236. There are several successive causes of cold, some internal, some
external, and some accidental, n. 237. Internal causes of cold are from
religion, n. 238, 239. Of internal causes of cold the first is the
rejection of religion by each of the parties, n. 240. Of internal causes
of cold the second is that one of the parties has religion and not the
other, n. 241. Of internal causes of cold the third is, that one of the
parties is of one religion and the other of another, n. 242. Of internal
causes of cold the fourth is, the falsity of the religion, n. 243. With
many, the above-mentioned are causes of internal cold, but not at the
same time of external, n. 244, 245. There are also several external
causes of cold, the first of which is dissimilitude of minds and manner,
n. 246. Of external causes of cold the second is, that conjugial love is
believed to be the same as adulterous love, only that the latter is not
allowed by law, but the former is, n. 247. Of external causes of cold
the third is, a striving for preeminence between married partners, n.
248. Of external causes of cold the fourth is, a want of determination
to any employment or business, whence comes wandering passion, n. 249.
Of external causes of cold the fifth is, inequality of external rank and
condition, n. 250. There are also causes of separation, n. 251. The
first cause of legitimate separation is a vitiated state of mind, n.
252. The second cause of legitimate separation is a vitiated state of
body, n. 253. The third cause of legitimate separation is impotence
before marriage, n. 254. Adultery is the cause of divorce, n. 255. There
are also several accidental causes of cold; the first of which is, that
enjoyment is common (or cheap), because continually allowed, n. 256. Of
accidental causes of cold the second is, that living with a married
partner, from a covenant and contract, seems forced and not free, n.
257. Of accidental causes of cold the third is, affirmation on the part
of the wife, and her talking incessantly about love, n. 258. Of
accidental causes of cold the fourth is, the man's continually thinking
that his wife is willing, and on the other hand, the wife's thinking
that the man is not willing, n. 259. As cold is in the mind, it is also
in the body; and according to the increase of that cold, the externals
also of the body are closed, n. 260.

ON THE CAUSES OF APPARENT LOVE, FRIENDSHIP, AND FAVOR IN MARRIAGES, n.
271-292.

In the natural world almost all are capable of being joined together as
to external, but not as to internal affections, if these disagree and
are apparent, n. 272. In the spiritual world all are conjoined according
to internal, but not according to external affections, unless these act
in unity with the internal, n. 273. It is the external affections,
according to which matrimony is generally contracted in the world, n.
274. But in case they are not influenced by internal affections which
conjoin minds, the bonds of matrimony are loosed in the house, n. 275.
Nevertheless those bonds must continue in the world till the decease of
one of the parties, n. 276. In cases of matrimony, in which the internal
affections do not conjoin, there are external affections, which assume a
semblance of the internal, and tend to consociate, n. 277. Thence come
apparent love, friendship, and favor between married partners, n. 278.
These appearances are assumed conjugial semblances, and they are
commendable, because useful and necessary, n. 279. These assumed
conjugial semblances, in the case of a spiritual man conjoined to a
natural, are founded in justice and judgement, n. 280. For various
reasons, these assumed conjugial semblances with natural men are founded
in prudence, n. 281. They are for the sake of amendment and
accommodation, n. 282. They are for the sake of preserving order in
domestic affairs, and for the sake of mutual aid, n. 283. They are for
the sake of unanimity in the care of infants and the education of
children, n. 284. They are for the sake of peace in the house, n. 285.
They are for the sake of reputation out of the house, n. 286. They are
for the sake of various favors expected from the married partner, or
from his or her relations, and thus from the fear of losing such favors,
n. 287. They are for the sake of having blemishes excused, and thereby
of avoiding disgrace, n. 288. They are for the sake of reconciliations,
n. 289. In case favor does not cease with the wife, when faculty ceases
with the man, there may exist a friendship resembling conjugial
friendship when the parties grow old, n. 290. There are various species
of apparent love and friendship between married partners, one of whom is
brought under the yoke, and therefore is subject to the other, n. 291.
In the world there are infernal marriages between persons who interiorly
are the most inveterate enemies, and exteriorly are as the closest
friends, n. 292.

ON BETROTHINGS AND NUPTIALS, n. 295-314.

The right of choice belongs to the man, and not to the woman, n. 296.
The man ought to court and intreat the woman respecting marriage with
him, and not the woman the man, n. 297. The woman ought to consult her
parents, or those who are in the place of parents, and then deliberate
with herself before she consents, n. 298, 299. After a declaration of
consent, pledges are to be given, n. 300. Consent is to be secured and
established by solemn betrothing, n. 301. By betrothing, each party is
prepared for conjugial love, n. 302. By betrothing, the mind of the one
is united to the mind of the other, so as to effect a marriage of the
spirit previous to a marriage of the body, n. 303. This is the case with
those who think chastely of marriages; but it is otherwise with those
who think unchastely of them, n. 304. Within the time of betrothing it
is not allowable to be connected corporeally, n. 305. When the time of
betrothing is completed, the nuptials ought to take place, n. 306.
Previous to the celebration of the nuptials, the conjugial covenant is
to be ratified in the presence of witnesses, n. 307. Marriage is to be
consecrated by a priest, n. 308. The nuptials are to be celebrated with
festivity, n. 309. After the nuptials, the marriage of the spirit is
made also the marriage of the body, and thereby a full marriage, n. 310.
Such is the order of conjugial love with its modes, from its first heat
to its first torch, n. 311. Conjugial love precipitated without order
and the modes thereof, burns up the marrows, and is consumed, n. 312.
The states of the minds of each of the parties proceeding in successive
order, flow into the state of marriage; nevertheless in one manner with
the spiritual and in another with the natural, n. 313. There are
successive and simultaneous order, and the latter is from the former and
according to it, n. 314.

ON REPEATED MARRIAGES, n. 317-355.

After the death of a married partner, again to contract wedlock, depends
on the preceding conjugial love, n. 318. After the death of a married
partner, again to contract wedlock, depends also on the state of
marriage in which the parties had lived, n. 319. With those who have not
been in love truly conjugial, there is no obstacle or hindrance to their
again contracting wedlock, n. 320. Those who had lived together in love
truly conjugial, are unwilling to marry again, except for reasons
separate from conjugial love, n. 321. The state of a marriage of a youth
with a maiden differs from that of a youth with a widow, n. 322. Also
the state of marriage of a widower with a maiden differs from that of a
widower with a widow, n. 323. The varieties and diversities of these
marriages, as to love and its attributes, are innumerable, n. 324. The
state of a widow is more grievous that that of a widower n. 325.

ON POLYGAMY, n. 332-352.

Love truly conjugial can only exist with one wife, consequently neither
can friendship, confidence, ability truly conjugial, and such a
conjunction of minds that two may be one flesh, n. 333, 334. Thus
celestial blessedness, spiritual satisfactions, and natural delights,
which from the beginning were provided for those who are in love truly
conjugial, can only exist with one wife, n. 335. All those things can
only exist from the Lord alone; and they do not exist with any but those
who come to him alone, and live according to his commandments, n. 336.
Consequently love truly conjugial with its felicities can only exist
with those who are of the Christian church, n. 337. Therefore a
Christian is not allowed to marry more than one wife, n. 338. If a
Christian marries several wives, he commits not only natural but also
spiritual adultery, n. 339. The Israelitish nation was permitted to
marry several wives, because they had not the Christian church, and
consequently love truly conjugial could not exist with them, n. 340. At
this day the Mahometans are permitted to marry several wives, because
they do not acknowledge the Lord Jesus Christ to be one with Jehovah the
Father, and thereby to be the God of heaven and earth, and hence cannot
receive love truly conjugial, n. 341. The Mahometan heaven is out of the
Christian heaven, and is divided into two heavens, the inferior and the
superior; and only those are elevated into their superior heaven, who
renounce concubines, and live with one wife, and acknowledge our Lord as
equal to God the Father, to whom is given dominion over heaven and
earth, n. 342-344. Polygamy is lasciviousness, n. 345. Conjugial
chastity, purity, and sanctity, cannot exist with polygamists, n. 346. A
polygamist, so long as he remains such, cannot become spiritual, n. 347.
Polygamy is not sin with those who live in it from a religious notion,
n. 348. Polygamy is not sin with those who are in ignorance respecting
the Lord, n. 349, 350. Of these, although polygamists, such are saved as
acknowledge a God, and from a religious notion live according to the
civil laws of justice, n. 351. But none either of the latter or of the
former can be associated with the angels in the Christian heavens, n.
352.

ON JEALOUSY, n. 357-379.

Zeal considered in itself is like the ardent fire of love, n. 358. The
burning or flame of that love, which is zeal, is a spiritual burning or
flame, arising from an infestation and assault of the love, n. 356-361.
The quality of a man's zeal is according to the quality of his love;
thus it differs according as the love is good or evil, n. 362. The zeal
of a good love and the zeal of an evil love, are alike in externals, but
altogether different in internals, n. 363, 364. The zeal of a good love
in its internals contains a hidden store of love and friendship: but the
zeal of an evil love in its internals contains a hidden store of hatred
and revenge, n. 365, 366. The zeal of conjugial love is called jealousy,
n. 367. Jealousy is like an ardent fire against those who infest love
exercised towards a married partner, and like a terrible fear for the
loss of that love, n. 368. There is spiritual jealousy with monogamists,
and natural with polygamists, n. 369, 370. Jealousy with those married
partners who tenderly love each other, is a just grief grounded in sound
reason, lest conjugial love should be divided, and should thereby
perish, n. 371, 372. Jealousy, with married partners who do not love
each other, is grounded in several causes; arising in some instances
from various mental weaknesses, n. 373-375. In some instances there is
not any jealousy; and this also from various causes, n. 376. There is a
jealousy also in regard to concubines, but not such as in regard to
wives, n. 377. Jealousy likewise exists among beasts and birds, n. 378.
The jealousy of men and husbands is different from that of women and
wives, n. 379.

ON THE CONJUNCTION OF CONJUGIAL LOVE WITH THE LOVE OF INFANTS, n.
385-414.

Two universal spheres proceed from the Lord to preserve the universe in
its created state; of which the one is the sphere of procreating, and
the other the sphere of protecting the things procreated, n. 386. These
two universal spheres make a one with the sphere of conjugial love and
the sphere of the love of infants, n. 387. These two spheres universally
and singularly flow into all things of heaven and all things of the
world, from first to last, n. 388-390. The sphere of the love of infants
is a sphere of protection and support of those who cannot protect and
support themselves, n. 391. This sphere affects both the evil and the
good, and disposes every one to love, protect, and support his offspring
from his own love, n. 392. This sphere principally affects the female
sex, thus mothers; and the male sex, or fathers, by derivation from
them, n. 393. This sphere is also a sphere of innocence and peace (from
the Lord,) n. 394. The sphere of innocence flows into infants, and
through them into the parents, and affects them, n. 395. It also flows
into the souls of the parents, and unites with the same sphere with the
infants; and it is principally insinuated by means of the touch, n. 396,
397. In the degree in which innocence retires from infants, affection
and conjunction also abate, and this successively, even to separation,
n. 398. A state of rational innocence and peace with parents towards
infants, is grounded in the circumstance, that they know nothing and can
do nothing from themselves, but from others, especially from the father
and mother; and this state successively retires, in proportion as they
know and have ability from themselves, and not from others, n. 399. The
sphere of the love of procreating advances in order from the end through
causes into effects, and makes periods; whereby creation is preserved in
the state foreseen and provided for, n. 400, 401. The love of infants
descends, and does not ascend, n. 402. Wives have one state of love
before conception, and another state after, even to the birth, n. 403.
Constat enim, aditus insulae esse munitos mirificis molibus. Etiam
illud jam cognitum est, neque argenti scrupulum esse ullum in illâ insulâ,
neque ullam spem praedae, nisi ex mancipiis: ex quibus nullos puto te
litteris aut musicis eruditos exspectare."--_Ad Atticum_, iv. 16. It
does not appear what Cicero meant by the "mirificae moles" which
guarded the approaches to Britain, whether Dover Cliff or the masses of
sand under water at the Goodwins.

CHAPTER XVII.

The summer had passed off gloriously for the Roman arms.

The expedition to Britain had produced all the effects which Caesar
expected from it, and Gaul was outwardly calm.

Below the smooth appearance the elements of disquiet were silently
working, and the winter was about to produce the most serious
disaster and the sharpest trials which Caesar had yet experienced.

On his return from Britain he held a council at Amiens.

The harvest had been bad, and it was found expedient, for their
better provision, to disperse the troops over a broader area than usual.
There were in all eight legions, with part of another to be disposed of,
and they were distributed in the following order. Lucius Roscius was
placed at Séex, in Normandy; Quintus Cicero at Charleroy, not far from
the scene of the battle with the Nervii. Cicero had chosen this position
for himself as peculiarly advantageous; and his brother speaks of
Caesar's acquiescence in the arrangement as a special mark of favor
to himself. Labienus was at Lavacherie, on the Ourthe, about
seventy miles to the south-east of Cicero; and Sabinus and Cotta were
at Tongres, among the Aduatuci, not far from Liége, an equal distance
from him to the north-east. Caius Fabius had a legion at St. Pol, between
Calais and Arras; Trebonius one at Amiens; Marcus Crassus one at
Montdidier; Munatius Plancus one across the Oise, near Compiègne.
Roscius was far off, but in a comparatively quiet country.
The other camps lay within a circle, two hundred miles in diameter, of
which Bavay was the centre. Amiens was at one point on the
circumference.
Tongres, on the opposite side of it, to the north-east. Sabinus, being
the most exposed, had, in addition to his legion, a few cohorts lately
raised in Italy. Caesar, having no particular business to take him over
the Alps, remained, with Trebonius attending to general business.
His dispositions had been carefully watched by the Gauls. Caesar, they
supposed, would go away as usual; they even believed that he had gone;
and a conspiracy was formed in the north to destroy the legions in
detail.

The instigator of the movement was Induciomarus, the leader of the patriot
party among the Treveri, whose intrigues had taken Caesar to the Moselle
before the first visit to Britain. At that time Induciomarus had been
able to do nothing; but a fairer opportunity had arrived. The overthrow
of the great German horde had affected powerfully the semi-Teutonic
populations on the left bank of the Rhine. The Eburones, a
large tribe of German race occupying the country between Liége and
Cologne, had given in their submission; but their strength was still
undiminished, and Induciomarus prevailed on their two chiefs,
Ambiorix and Catavoleus, to attack Sabinus and Cotta. It was midwinter.
The camp at Tongres was isolated. The nearest support was seventy
miles distant. If one Roman camp was taken, Induciomarus calculated
that the country would rise; the others could be separately surrounded,
and Gaul would be free. The plot was well laid. An entrenched camp
being difficult to storm, the confederates decided to begin by treachery.
Ambiorix was personally known to many of the Roman officers. He
sent to Sabiuus to say that he wished to communicate with him on a
matter of the greatest consequence. An interview being granted, he
stated that a general conspiracy had been formed through the whole of
Gaul to surprise and destroy the legions. Each station was to be
attacked on the same day, that they might be unable to support each
other. He pretended himself to have remonstrated; but his tribe,
he said, had been carried away by the general enthusiasm for
liberty, and he could not keep them back. Vast bodies of Germans had
crossed the Rhine to join in the war.

In two days at the furthest they would arrive.

He was under private obligations to Caesar, who had rescued his son and
nephew in the fight with the Aduatuci, and out of gratitude he wished
to save Sabinus from destruction, which was otherwise inevitable.
He urged him to escape while there was still time, and to join
either Labienus or Cicero, giving a solemn promise that he should not
be molested on the road.

A council of officers was held on the receipt of this unwelcome
information. It was thought unlikely that the Eburones would rise by
themselves. It was probable enough, therefore, that the conspiracy
was more extensive. Cotta, who was second in command, was of opinion
that it would be rash and wrong to leave the camp without Caesar's
orders. They had abundant provisions. They could hold their own lines
against any force which the Germans could bring upon them, and help
would not be long in reaching them. It would be preposterous to take so
grave a step on the advice of an enemy. Sabinus unfortunately thought
differently. He had been over-cautious in Brittany, though he had
afterward redeemed his fault.
Caesar, he persuaded himself, had left the country; each commander therefore
must act on his own responsibility.

The story told by Ambiorix was likely in itself.

The Germans were known to be furious at the passage of the
Rhine, the destruction of Ariovistus, and their other defeats. Gaul
resented the loss of its independence. Ambiorix was acting like a true
friend, and it would be madness to refuse his offer. Two days' march
would bring them to their friends. If the alarm was false, they could
return. If there was to be a general insurrection, the legions
could not be too speedily brought together. If they waited, as Cotta
advised, they would be surrounded, and in the end would be starved into
surrender.

Cotta was not convinced, and the majority of officers supported him.
The first duty of a Roman army, he said, was obedience to orders. Their
business was to hold the post which had been committed to them, till they
were otherwise directed. The officers were consulting in the midst of the
camp, surrounded by the legionaries. "Have it as you wish," Sabinus
exclaimed, in a tone which the men could hear; "I am not afraid
of being killed. If things go amiss, the troops will understand where
to lay the blame. If you allowed it, they might in forty-eight hours be
at the next quarters, facing the chances of war with their comrades,
instead of perishing here alone by sword or hunger."
Neither party would give way. The troops joined in the discussion. They
were willing either to go or to stay, if their commanders would agree;
but they said that it must be one thing or the other; disputes
would be certain ruin. The discussion lasted till midnight. Sabinus was
obstinate, Cotta at last withdrew his opposition, and the fatal
resolution was formed to march at dawn. The remaining hours of the night
were passed by the men in collecting such valuables as they wished to
take with them. Everything seemed ingeniously done to increase the
difficulty of remaining, and to add to the perils of the march by the
exhaustion of the troops. The Meuse lay between them and Labienus,
so they had selected to go to Cicero at Charleroy. Their course lay up
the left bank of the little river _Geer_. Trusting to the promises of
Ambiorix, they started in loose order, followed by a long train of carts
and wagons. The Eburones lay, waiting for them, in a large valley, two
miles from the camp.

When most of the cohorts were entangled in the middle of the hollow,
the enemy appeared suddenly, some in front, some on both sides of
the valley, some behind threatening the baggage.

Wise men, as Caesar says, anticipate possible difficulties, and decide
beforehand what they will do if occasions arise.
Sabinus had foreseen nothing and arranged nothing. Cotta, who had
expected what might happen, was better prepared, and did the best
that was possible. The men had scattered among the wagons, each to save
or protect what he could.

Cotta ordered them back, bade them leave the carts to their fate,
and form together in a ring.

He did right, Caesar thought; but the effect was unfortunate. The
troops lost heart, and the enemy was encouraged, knowing that the baggage
would only be abandoned when the position was desperate. The Eburones
were under good command. They did not, as might have been expected,
fly upon the plunder.

They stood to their work, well aware that the carts would not escape
them.

They were not in great numbers.

Caesar specially says that the Romans were as numerous as they. But
everything else was against the Romans.

Sabinus could give no directions.

They were in a narrow meadow, with wooded hills on each side of them
filled with enemies whom they could not reach. When they charged, the
light-footed barbarians ran back; when they retired, they closed in upon
them again, and not a dart, an arrow, or a stone missed its mark among
the crowded cohorts. Bravely as the Romans fought, they were
in a trap where their courage was useless to them. The battle lasted from
dawn till the afternoon, and though they were falling fast, there
was no flinching and no cowardice.

Caesar, who inquired particularly into the minutest circumstances
of the disaster, records by name the officers who distinguished
themselves; he mentions one whose courage he had marked before, who
was struck down with a lance through his thighs, and another who
was killed in rescuing his son.

The brave Cotta was hit in the mouth by a stone as he was cheering on
his men. The end came at last.

Sabinus, helpless and distracted, caught sight of Ambiorix in the confusion,
and sent an interpreter to implore him to spare the remainder of
the army.

Ambiorix answered that Sabinus might come to him, if he pleased;
he hoped he might persuade his tribe to be merciful; he promised
that Sabinus himself should suffer no injury.

Sabinus asked Cotta to accompany him.
Cotta said he would never surrender to an armed enemy; and, wounded
as he was, he stayed with the legion.

Sabinus, followed by the rest of the surviving officers whom he
ordered to attend him, proceeded to the spot where the chief was
standing.

They were commanded to lay down their arms.

They obeyed, and were immediately killed; and with one wild yell
the barbarians then rushed in a mass on the deserted cohorts.

Cotta fell, and most of the others with him.

The survivors, with the eagle of the legion, which they had still
faithfully guarded, struggled back in the dusk to their deserted
camp.

The standard-bearer, surrounded by enemies, reached the fosse, flung
the eagle over the rampart, and fell with the last effort. Those that
were left fought on till night, and then, seeing that hope was
gone, died like Romans on each other's swords--a signal illustration
of the Roman greatness of mind, which had died out among the
degenerate patricians, but was living in all its force in Caesar's
legions.

A few stragglers, who had been cut off during the battle from their
comrades, escaped in the night through the woods, and carried the
news to Labienus.

Cicero, at Charleroy, was left in ignorance. The roads were beset, and no
messenger could reach him.

Induciomarus understood his countrymen.

The conspiracy with which he had frightened Sabinus had not as yet
extended beyond a few northern chiefs, hut the success of Ambiorix
produced the effect which he desired.

As soon as it was known that two Roman generals had been cut off, the
remnants of the Aduatuci and the Nervii were in arms for their own
revenge.

The smaller tribes along the Meuse and Sambre rose with them; and Cicero,
taken by surprise, found himself surrounded before he had a thought
of danger.

The Gauls, knowing that their chances depended on the capture of the
second camp before assistance could arrive, flung themselves so
desperately on the entrenchments that the legionaries were barely
able to repel the first assault.

The assailants were driven back at last, and Cicero despatched messengers
to Caesar to Amiens, to give him notice of the rising; but not a
man was able to penetrate through the multitude of enemies which
now swarmed in the woods.

The troops worked gallantly, strengthening the weak points of their
fortifications.

In one night they raised a hundred and twenty towers on their walls.
Again the Gauls tried a storm, and, though they failed a second
time, they left the garrison no rest either by day or night.

There was no leisure for sleep; not a hand could be spared from
the lines to care for the sick or wounded.

Cicero was in bad health, but he clung to his work till the men
carried him by force to his tent and obliged him to lie down.

The first surprise not having succeeded, the Nervian chiefs, who
knew Cicero, desired a parley.

They told the same story which Ambiorix had told, that the Germans
had crossed the Rhine, and that all Gaul was in arms.

They informed him of the destruction of Sabinus; they warned him
that the same fate was hanging over himself, and that his only
hope was in surrender.

They did not wish, they said, to hurt either him or the Roman people;
he and his troops would be free to go where they pleased, but they
were determined to prevent the legions from quartering themselves
permanently in their country.

There was but one Sabinus in the Roman army.

Cicero answered, with a spirit worthy of his country, that Romans
accepted no conditions from enemies in arms.

The Gauls might, if they pleased, send a deputation to Caesar, and hear
what he would say to them.

For himself, he had no authority to listen to them.

Force and treachery being alike unavailing, they resolved to starve
Cicero out.

They had watched the Roman strategy.
They had seen and felt the value of the entrenchments.

They made a bank and ditch all round the camp, and, though they had
no tools but their swords with which to dig turf and cut trees,
so many there were of them that the work was completed in three
hours.[1] Having thus pinned the Romans in, they slung red-hot balls
and flung darts carrying lighted straw over the ramparts of the
camp on the thatched roofs of the soldiers' huts.

The wind was high, the fire spread, and amidst the smoke and the blaze the
Gauls again rushed on from all sides to the assault. Roman discipline was
never more severely tried, and never showed its excellence more
signally.

The houses and stores of the soldiers were in flames behind them.

The enemy were pressing on the walls in front, covered by a storm
of javelins and stones and arrows, but not a man left his post to
save his property or to extinguish the fire.

They fought as they stood, striking down rank after rank of the
Gauls, who still crowded on, trampling on the bodies of their
companions, as the foremost lines fell dead into the ditch.

ACUTION.--The spiritual purification of conjugial love may be compared
with the purification of natural spirits effected by chemists, and
called acution, 145.

ADAM.--In what his sin consisted, 444. Error of those who believe that
Adam was wise and did good from himself, and that this was his state of
integrity, 135. The evil in which each man is born, is not derived
hereditarily from Adam, but from his parents, 525. If it is believed
that the guilt of Adam is inscribed on all the human race, it is because
few reflect on any evil in themselves, and thence know it, 525. Adam and
man are one expression in the Hebrew tongue, 156*.

ADJUNCTION.--The union of the soul and mind of one married partner to
those of the other, is an actual adjunction, and cannot possibly be
dissolved, 321. This adjunction is close and near according to the love,
and approaching to contact with those who are principled in love truly
conjugial, 158. It may be called spiritual cohabitation, which takes
place with married partners who love each other tenderly, however remote
their bodies may be from each other, 158.

ADMINISTRATIONS in the spiritual world, 207. The discharge of them is
attended with delight, 207.

ADMINISTRATORS.--In the spiritual world there are administrators, 207.

ADORATIONS.--Why the ancients in their adorations turned their faces to
the rising sun, 342.

ADRAMANDONI is the name of a garden in the spiritual world; this word
signifies the delight of conjugial love, 183.

ADULTERERS.--As soon as a man actually becomes an adulterer, heaven is
closed to him, 500. Adulterers become more and more not men, 432. There
are four kinds of adulterers:--1st, Adulterers from a purposed principle
are those who are so from the lust of the will; 2d, adulterers from a
confirmed principle are those who are so from the persuasion of the
understanding; 3d, adulterers from a deliberate principle are those who
are so from the allurements of the senses; 4th, adulterers from a
non-deliberate principle are those who are not in the faculty or not in
the liberty of consulting the understanding, 432. Those of the two
former kinds become more and more not men, but the two latter kinds
become men as they recede from those errors, 432. Reasonings of
adulterers, 500. Every unclean principle of hell is from adulterers,
500, 477. Whoever is in spiritual adultery is also in natural adultery,
520.

ADULTERERS from a deliberate principle and from a non-deliberate
principle, 432.

ADULTERY, by, is meant scortation opposite to marriage, 480. The
horrible nature of adultery, 483. Spiritual adultery is the connection
of evil and the false, 520. Adulteries are the complex of all evils,
356. Why hell in the total is called adultery, 520. There are three
genera of adulteries, simple, duplicate, and triplicate, 478, 484. There
are four degrees of adulteries, according to which they have their
predications, their charges of blame, and after death, their
imputations, 485-499:--1st, Adulteries of ignorance, &c., 486, 487; 2d,
adulteries of lust, 488, 489; 3d, adulteries of the reason or
understanding, &e., 490, 491; 4th, adulteries of the will, 492, 493. The
distinction between adulteries of the will and those of the
understanding, 490. The adultery of the reason is less grievous than the
adultery of the will, 490.--Accessories of adultery and aggravations of
it, 454. Adultery is the cause of divorce, 255. Representative of
adultery in its business, 521.

AFFECT.

_Obs._--This word signifies to impress with affection either good or
bad.

AFFECTIONS which are merely derivations of the love, form the will, and
make and compose it, 197. Every affection of love belongs to the will,
for what a man loves, that he also wills, 196. Every affection has its
delight, 272. Affections, with the thoughts thence derived, appertain to
the mind, and sensations, with the pleasures thence derived, appertain
to the body, 273. In the natural world, almost all are capable of being
joined together as to external affections, but not as to internal
affections, if these disagree and appear, 272. In the spiritual world
all are conjoined as to internal affections, but not according to
external, unless these act in unity with the internal, 273. The
affections according to which wedlock is commonly contracted in the
world, are external, 274; but in that case they are not influenced by
internal affections, which conjoin minds, the bonds of wedlock are
loosed in the house, 275. By internal affections are meant the mutual
inclinations which influence the mind of each of the parties from
heaven; whereas by external affections are meant the inclinations which
influence the mind of each of the parties from the world, 277. The
external affections by death follow the body, and are entombed with it,
those only remaining which cohere with internal principles, 320. Women
were created by the Lord affections of the wisdom of men, 56. Their
affection of wisdom is essential beauty, 56. All the angels are
affections of love in a human form, 42: the ruling affection itself
shines forth from their faces; and from their affection, and according
to it, the kind and quality of their raiment is derived and determined,
42.

AFFLICTION, great, Matt. xxiv. 21, signifies the state of the church
infested by evils and falses, 80.

AFFLUX, 293.

_Obs._--Afflux is that which flows _upon_ or _towards_, and remains
generally in the external, without penetrating interiorly, _A.C._, n.
7955. Efflux is that which flows _from_, and is generally predicated of
that which proceeds from below upwards. Influx is that which flows
_into_, or which penetrates interiorly, provided it meets with no
obstacle; it is generally used when speaking of that which comes from
above, thus from heaven, that is, from the Lord through heaven.

AFRICANS more intelligent than the learned of Europe, 114.

AGE.--The common states of a man's life are called infancy, childhood,
youth, manhood, and old age, 185. Unequal ages induce coldness in
marriage, 250. In the heavens there is no inequality of age, all there
are in one flower of youth, and continue therein to eternity, 250.
Golden age, 75. Silver age or period, 76. Copper age, 77. Iron age, 78.
Age of iron mixed with miry clay, 79. Age of gold, 42, 75; of silver,
76; of copper, 77; of iron, 78; of iron mixed with clay, 79. The ages of
gold, silver, and copper are anterior to the time of which we have any
historical records, 73. Men of the golden age knew and acknowledged that
they were forms receptive of life from God, and that on this account
wisdom was inscribed on their souls and hearts, and hence that they saw
truth from the light of truth, and by truths perceived good from the
delight of the love thereof, 153*. All those who lived in the silver age
had intelligence grounded in spiritual truths, and thence in natural
truths, 76.

AID, mutual, of husband and wife, 176.

ALACRITY is one of those moral virtues which have respect to life, and
enter into it, 164.

ALCOHOL.--Wisdom purified may be compared with alcohol, which is a
spirit highly rectified, 145.

ALCORAN, 342.

ALPHA, the, and the Omega.--Why the Lord is so called, 326.

ALPHABET in the spiritual world, each letter of it is significative,
326.

AMBASSADOR in the spiritual world discussing with two priests on the
subject of human prudence, 354.

ANCIENTS.--Of marriages among the ancients, and the most ancient, 75,
77. The most ancient people in this world did not acknowledge any other
wisdom than the wisdom of life; but the ancient people acknowledged the
wisdom of reason as wisdom, 130. Precepts concerning marriages left by
the ancient people to their posterity, 77. Angels are men; their form is
the human form, 30. They appear to man when the eyes of his spirit are
opened, 30. All the angels are affections of love in the human form, 42.
Angels who are loves, and thence wisdoms, are called celestial, and with
them conjugial love is celestial; angels who are wisdoms, and thence
loves, are called spiritual, and similar thereto is their conjugial
principle, 64. There are among the angels some of a simple, and some of
a wise character, and it is the part of the wise to judge, when the
simple, from their simplicity and ignorance, are doubtful about what is
just, or through mistake wander from it, 207. Every angel has conjugial
love with its virtue, ability, and delights, according to his
application to the genuine use in which he is, 207. Every man has angels
associated to him from the Lord, and such is his conjunction with them,
that if they were taken away, he would instantly fall to pieces, 404.

ANGER.--Why it is attributed to the Lord, 366.

ANIMALS.--Wonderful things conspicuous in the productions of animals,
416. Every animal is led by the love implanted in his science, as a
blind person is led through the streets by a dog, 96. See _Beasts_.

ANIMUS.--By _animus_ is meant the affections, and thence the external
inclinations, which are principally insinuated after birth by education,
social intercourse, and consequent habits of life, 246.

_Obs._--These affections and inclinations constitute a sort of inferior
mind.

ANTIPATHY.--In the spiritual world, antipathies are not only felt, but
also appear in the face, the discourse, and the gesture, 273. It is
otherwise in the natural world, where antipathies may be concealed, 272.
Among certain married partners in the natural world, there is an
antipathy in their internals, and an apparent sympathy in their
externals, 292. Antipathy derives its origin from the opposition of
spiritual spheres which emanate from subjects, 171.

ANTIQUITY.--Memorable things of antiquity seen in heaven amongst a
nation that lived in the copper age, 77.

AORTA, 315.

APES.--Of those in hell who appear like apes, 505.

APOCALYPSE.--A voice from heaven commanded Swedenborg to apply to the
work begun in the Apocalypse, and finish it within two years, 522, 532.

APOPLEXY.--Permanent infirmity, arising from apoplexy, a cause of
separation, 253, 470.

APPEARANCE.--Spaces in the spiritual world are appearances; distances,
also, and presences are appearances, 158. The appearances of distances
and presences there, are according to the proximities, relationships,
and affinities of love, 158. Those things which, from their origin, are
celestial and spiritual, are not in space, but in the appearances of
space, 158.

_Obs._--Those things which in the spiritual world are present to the
sight of spirits and angels are called _appearances_; those things are
called appearances, because, corresponding to the interiors of spirits
and of angels, they vary according to the states of those interiors.
There are real appearances and appearances unreal; the unreal
appearances are those which do not correspond to the interiors. See
_Heaven and Hell_.

APPROPRIATION of evil how it is effected, 489.

ARCANA of wisdom respecting conjugial love; it is important that they
should be discovered, 43. Arcana of conjugial love concealed with wives,
166, 155*, 293. Arcanum relative to conception, which takes place though
the souls of two married partners be disjoined, 245. Arcanum respecting
the actual habitation of every man in some society, either of heaven or
hell, 530. Arcana known to the ancients, and at this day lost, 220.
Arcana revealed, which exceed in excellence all the arcana heretofore
revealed since the beginning of the church, 532. These arcana are yet
reputed on earth as of no value, 533.

ARCHITECTONIC ART, the, is in its essential perfection in heaven, and
hence are derived all the rules of that art in the world, 12.

ARISTIPPUS, 151*.

ARISTOTLE, 151*.

ARMIES of the Lord Jehovah. Thus the most ancient people called
themselves, 75.

ARTIFICERS in the spiritual world, 207: wonderful works which they
execute there, 207.

AS FROM HIMSELF, 132, 134, 269, 340.

ASSAULT.--How love defends itself when assaulted, 361.

ASSES.--Of those who, in the spiritual world, appear at a distance like
asses heavily laden, 232. Blazing ass upon which a pope was seated in
hell, 265.

ASSOCIATE, to.--All in the heavens are associated according to
affinities and relationships of love, and have habitations accordingly,
50.

ASTRONOMY is one of those sciences by which an entrance is made into
things rational, which are the ground of rational wisdom, 163.

ATHEISTS, who are in the glory of reputation arising from self-love, and
thence in a high conceit of their own intelligence, enjoy a more sublime
rationality than many others; the reason why, 269. Why the understanding
of atheists, in spiritual light, appeared open beneath but closed above,
421.

ATHENAEUM, city of, in the spiritual world, 151*, 182, 207. Sports of
the Athenaeides, 207. These games were spiritual exercises, 207.

ATMOSPHERES.--The world is distinguished into regions as to the
atmospheres, the lowest of which is the watery, the next above is the
aerial, and still higher is the etherial, above which there is also the
highest, 188, The reason why the atmosphere appears of a golden color in
the heaven in which the love of uses reigns, 266.

AURA.--Thus the superior atmosphere is named, 145. The aura is the
continent of celestial light and heat, or of the wisdom and love in
which the angels are principled, 145. See _Atmospheres_.

AUTHORESSES, learned.--Examination of their writings in the spiritual
world in their presence, 175.

AVERSION between married partners arises from spiritual cold, 236.
Whence arises aversion on the part of the husband towards the wife, 305.
Aversion between married partners arises from a disunion of souls and a
disjunction of minds, 236.

BACK, the.--The sphere which issues forth from man encompasses him on
the back and on the breast, lightly on the back, but more densely on the
breast, 171, 224. The effect of this on married partners, who are of
different minds and discordant affections. 171.

BALANCE.--Love truly conjugal is like a balance in which the
inclinations for iterated marriages are made, 318. The mind is kept
balancing to another marriage, according to the degree of love in which
it was principled in the former marriage, 318.

BANK of roses, 8, 294.

BATS, in the spiritual world, are correspondences and consequent
appearances of the thoughts of confirmators, 233.

BEARS signify those who read the Word in the natural sense, and see
truths therein, without understanding, 193. Those who only read the
Word, and imbibe thence nothing of doctrine, appear at a distance, in
the spiritual world, like bears, 78.

BEASTS are born into natural loves, and thereby into sciences
corresponding to them; still they do not know, think, understand, and
relish any sciences, but are led through them by their loves, almost as
blind persons are led through the streets by dogs, 134. Beasts are born
into all the sciences of their loves, thus into all that concerns their
nourishment, habitation, love of the sex, and the education of their
young, 133. Difference between man and beasts, 133, 134. Every beast
corresponds to some quality, either good or evil, 76. Beasts in the
spiritual world are representative, but in the natural world they are
real, 133. Wild beasts in the spiritual world are correspondences, and
thus representatives of the lusts in which the spirits are, 79. The
state of men compared with that of beasts, 151*. Men like beasts, found
in the forests, 151*. Beast-men, 233.

BEAUTY.--The affection of wisdom is essential beauty, 56. Cause of
beauty in the female sex, 56. Women have a two-fold beauty, one natural,
which is that of the face and the body, and the other spiritual, which
is that of the love and manners, 330. Beauty in the spiritual world is
the form of the love and manners, 330. Discussion on the beauty of
woman, 330. Origin of that beauty, 382-384. Ineffable beauty of a wife
in the third heaven, 42.

BEES.--Their wonderful instinct, 419.

BEHIND.--In the spiritual world, it is not allowed any one to stand
behind another, and speak to him, 444.

BEINGS.--The desire to continue in its form is implanted by creation in
all living beings, 361.

BENEVOLENCE is one of those virtues which have respect to life and enter
into it, 164.

BETROTHINGS, of, 295-314. Reasons of betrothings, 301. By betrothing
each party is prepared for conjugial love, 302. By betrothing, the mind
of one is conjoined to the mind of the other, so as to effect a marriage
of the spirit, previous to marriage, 303, 305. Of betrothings in heaven,
20; 21.

BIRDS in the spiritual world are representative forms, 76. Every bird
corresponds to some good or bad quality, 76.

BIRDS OF PARADISE.--In heaven the forms under which the chaste delights
of conjugial love are presented to the view, are birds of paradise, &c.,
430. A pair of birds of paradise represent the middle region of
conjugial love, 270.

BLESSEDNESS, 69, 180. Love receives its blessedness from communication
by uses with others, 266. The infinity of all blessedness is in the
Lord, 335.

BLESSING of marriages by the priests, 308

BLUE.--What the color blue signifies, 76.

BODY, the material, is composed of watery and earthy elements, and of
aerial vapors thence arising, 192. The material body of man is
overcharged with lusts, which are in it as dregs that precipitate
themselves to the bottom when the must of wine is clarified, 272. Such
are the constituent substances of which the bodies of men in the world
are composed, 272. The bodies of men viewed interiorly are merely forms
of their minds exteriorly organized to effect the purposes of the soul,
310. See _Mind_. Every thing which is done in the body is from a
spiritual origin, 220. All things which are done in the body by man flow
in from his spirit, 310. Man when stripped of his body is in his
internal affections, which his body had before concealed, 273. What is
in the spirit as derived from the body does not long continue, but the
love which is in the spirit and is derived from the body does continue,
162, 191. Marriages of the spirit ought to precede marriages of the
body, 310.

BOND.--The internal or spiritual bond must keep the external or natural
in its order and tenor, 320. Wives love the bonds of marriage if the men
do, 217. Unless the external affections are influenced by internal,
which conjoin minds, the bonds of wedlock are loosed in the house, 275.

BOOKS.--In heaven, as in the world, there are books, 207.

BORN, to be.--Man is born in total ignorance, 134. Every man by birth is
merely corporeal, and from corporeal he becomes natural more and more
interiorly, and thus rational, and at length spiritual, 59, 305, 447. He
becomes rational in proportion as he loves intelligence, and spiritual
if he loves wisdom, 94, 102. Man is not born into any knowledge, and if
he does not receive instruction from others, is viler than a beast, 350.
Man is born without sciences, to the end that he may receive them all,
and he is born into no love, to the intent that he may come into all
love, 134. Every man is born for heaven and no one for hell, and every
one comes into heaven (by influence) from the Lord, and into hell (by
influence) from self, 350.

BREAST, the, of man signifies wisdom, 198. All things which by
derivation from the soul and mind have their determination in the body,
first flow into the bosom, 179. The breast is as it were a place of
public assembly, and a royal council chamber, and the body is as a
populous city around it, 179. The sphere of the man's life encompasses
him more densely on the breast, but lightly on the back, 171, 224. See
_Back_.

BRETHREN.--The Lord calls those brethren and sisters who are of his
church, 120.

BRIDE.--The church in the Word is called the bride and wife, 117.
Clothing of a bride in heaven, 20.

BRIDEGROOM.--The Lord in the Word is called the bridegroom and husband,
117. Clothing of a bridegroom in heaven, 20.

BRIMSTONE signifies the love of what is false, 80. Lakes of fire and
brimstone, 79, 80.

CABINET of antiquities in the spiritual world, 77.

CALF, a golden, signifies the pleasure of the flesh, 535.

CAP, a, signifies intelligence, 293. Turreted cap, 78.

CAROTID ARTERIES, 315.

CASTIGATION.--The spiritual purification of conjugial love may be
compared with the purification of natural spirits effected by chemists,
and named castigation, 145.

CATS.--Comparison concerning them, 512.

CAUSE.--See _End_. To speak from causes is the speech of wisdom, 75.
Causes of coldness, separations, and divorces in marriages, 234-260.
Causes of concubinage, 467-474.

CAUSES, the various, of legitimate separation, 253, 470.

CELEBRATION of the Lord from the Word, 81.

CELESTIAL.--In proportion as a man loves his wife he becomes celestial
and internal, 77.

CELIBACY ought not to be preferred to marriage, 156. Chastity cannot be
predicated of those who have renounced marriage by vows of perpetual
celibacy, unless there be and remain in them the love of a life truly
conjugial, 155. The sphere of perpetual celibacy infests the sphere of
conjugial love, which is the very essential sphere of heaven, 54. Those
who live in celibacy, if they are spiritual, are on the side of heaven,
54. Those who in the world have lived a single life, and have altogether
alienated their minds from marriage, in case they be spiritual, remain
single; but if natural, they become whoremongers, 54. For those who in
their single state have desired marriage, and have solicited it without
success, if they are spiritual, blessed marriages are provided, but not
until the; come into heaven, 54.

CENTRE of nature and of life, 380.

CERBERUS, 79.

CEREBELLUM, the, is beneath the hinder part of the head, and is designed
for love and the goods thereof, 444.

CEREBRUM, the, is beneath the anterior and upper part of the head, and
is designed for wisdom and the truths thereof, 444.

CHANGE, the, of the state of life which takes place with men and with
women by marriage, 184-206. By changes of the state of life are meant
changes of quality as to the things appertaining to the understanding,
and as to those appertaining to the will, 184. The changes which take
place in man's internal principles are more perfectly continuous than
those which take place in his external principles, 185. The changes
which take place in internal principles are changes of the state of the
will as to affections, and changes of the state of the understanding as
to thoughts, 185. The changes of these two faculties are perpetual with
man from infancy even to the end of his life, and afterwards to
eternity, 185. These changes differ in the case of men and in the case
of women, 187.

CHARGES of blame are made by a judge according to the law, 485.
Difference between predications, charges of blame, and imputations, 485.

CHARIOT, a, signifies the doctrine of truth, 76.

CHARITY is love, 10.

CHARITY AND FAITH.--Good has relation to charity, and truth to faith,
115, 124. To live well is charity, and to believe well is faith, 233.
Charity and faith are the life of God in man, 135.

CHASTE PRINCIPLE, concerning the, and the non-chaste, 138-156. The
chaste principle and the non-chaste are predicated solely of marriages,
and of such things as relate to marriages, 139. The Christian conjugial
principle alone is chaste, 142. See _Conjugial_.

CHASTITY OF MARRIAGE, 138, and following. See _Contents_. The chastity
of marriage exists by a total abdication of what is opposed to it from a
principle of religion, 147-149. The purity of conjugial love is what is
called chastity, 139. Love truly conjugial is essential chastity, 139,
143. Non-chastity is a removal of what is unchaste from what is chaste,
138.

CHEMISTRY is one of the sciences by which, as by doors, an entrance is
made into things rational, which are the ground of rational wisdom, 163.

CHEMISTS.--Spiritual purification compared to the natural purification
of spirits effected by chemists, 145.

CHILDREN born of parents who are principled in love truly conjugial,
derive from their parents the conjugial principle of good and truth,
202-205. Infants in heaven become men of stature and comeliness,
according to the increments of intelligence with them; it is otherwise
with infants on earth, 187. When they have attained the stature of young
men of eighteen, and young girls of fifteen years of age, in this world,
then marriages are provided by the Lord for them, 444. The love of
infants remains after death, especially with women, 410. Infants are
educated under the Lord's auspices by such women, 411. Little children
in the Word signify those who are in innocence, 414. The love of infants
corresponds to the defence of good and truth, 127.

CHRIST.--The kingdom of Christ, which is heaven, is a kingdom of uses,
7. To reign with Christ signifies to be wise, and to perform uses, 7.

CHRISTIAN.--Love truly conjugial with its delights can only exist among
those who are of the Christian church, 337. Not a single person
throughout the Christian world is acquainted with the true nature of
heavenly joy and eternal happiness, 4.

CHRYSALISES, 418.

CHURCH, the, is from the Lord, and exists with those who come to Him,
and live according to His precepts, 129. The church is the Lord's
kingdom in the world, corresponding to his kingdom in the heavens; and
also the Lord conjoins them together, that they may make a one, 431. The
church in general and in particular is a marriage of good and of truth,
115. The church with man is formed by the Lord by means of truths to
which good is adjoined, 122-124. The church with its goods and truths
can never exist but with those who live in love truly conjugial with one
wife, 76. The church is of both sexes, 21. The husband and wife together
are the church; with these the church first implanted in the man and by
the man in the wife, 125. How the church is formed by the Lord with two
married partners, and how conjugial love is formed thereby, 68. The
origin of the church and of conjugial love are in one place of abode,
238.

CIRCE, 521.

CIRCLE.--What circles round the head represent in the spiritual life,
269. Circle and increasing progression of conjugial love, 78.

CIRCUMSTANCES and contingencies vary every thing, 485. The quality of
every deed, and in general the quality of every thing, depends upon
circumstances, 487.

CIVIL things have relation to the world, they are statutes, laws, and
rules, which bind men, so that a civil society and state may be composed
of them in a well-connected order, 130. Civil things with man reside
beneath spiritual things, and above natural things, 130.

CIVILITY is one of the moral virtues which have respect to life, and
enter into it, 164. In heaven they show each other every token of
civility, 16.

CLAY mixed with iron, 79.

COHABIT, to.--When married partners have lived in love truly conjugial,
the spirit of the deceased cohabits continually with that of the
survivor, and this even to the death of the latter, 321.

COHABITATION, spiritual, takes place with married partners who love each
other tenderly, however remote their bodies may be from each other, 158.
See _Adjunction_. Internal and external cohabitation, 322. With those
who are principled in love truly conjugial the happiness of cohabitation
increases, but it decreases with those who are not principled in
conjugial love, 213.

COHOBATION.--The spiritual purification of conjugial love may be
compared to the purification of natural spirits, as effected by
chemists, and called cohobation, 145.

COLD.--Spirits merely natural grow intensely cold while they apply
themselves to the side of some angel, who is in a state of love, 235.
Spiritual cold in marriages is a disunion of souls, 236. Causes of cold
in marriages, 237-250. Cold arises from various causes, internal,
external, and accidental, all of which originate in a dissimilitude of
internal inclinations, 275. Spiritual cold is the privation of spiritual
heat, 285. Whence it arises, 235. Whence conjugial cold arises, 294.
Every one who is insane in spiritual things is cold towards his wife,
and warm towards harlots, 294.

COLUMN.--Comparison of successive and simultaneous order to a column of
steps, which, when it subsides, becomes a body ushering in a plane, 314.

COMMUNICATIONS.--After death, married pairs enjoy similar communications
with each other as in the world, 51.

CONATUS is the very essence of motion, 215. From the endeavor of the two
principles of good and truth to join themselves together into one,
conjugial love exists by derivation, 288.

CONCEPTIONS.--Between the disjoined souls of married partners there is
effected conjunction in a middle love, otherwise there would be no
conceptions, 245.

CONCERTS of music and singing in the heavens, 17.

CONCLUDE, to, from an interior and prior principle, is to conclude from
ends and causes to effects, which is according to order; but to conclude
from an exterior or posterior principle, is to conclude from effects to
causes and ends, which is contrary to order, 408.

CONCUBINAGE, 462-476. Difference between concubinage and pellicacy, 462.
See _Pellicacy_. There are two kinds of concubinage which differ
exceedingly from each other, the one conjointly with a wife, the other
apart from a wife, 463. Concubinage conjointly with a wife is illicit to
Christians and detestable, 464. See also 467, 476.

CONCUBINE, 462.

CONCUPISCENCE, concerning, 267. Every one is by truth interiorly in
concupiscence, but by education exteriorly in intelligence, 267.
Interesting particulars concerning concupiscence not visionary or
fantastic, in which all men are born, 269. All the concupiscences of
evil reside in the lowest region of the mind, which is called the
natural; but in the region above, which is called the spiritual, there
are not any concupiscences of evil, 305. In every thing that proceeds
from the natural man there is concupiscence, 448. Imputation of
concupiscence, 455. In the spiritual world every evil concupiscence
presents a likeness of itself in some form, which is not perceived by
those who are in the concupiscence, but by those who are at a distance,
521.

CONFIDENCE, full, is in conjugial love, and is derived from it, 180.
Full confidence relates to the heart, 180.

CONFINES OF HEAVEN.--Those who enter into extra-conjugial life are sent
to their like, on the confines of heaven, 155.

CONFIRM, to.--The understanding alone confirms, and when it confirms it
engages the will to its party, 491. Every one can confirm evil equally
as well as good, in like manner what is false as well as what is true.
The reason why the confirmation of evil is perceived with more delight
than the confirmation of good, and the confirmation of what is false
with greater lucidity than the confirmation of what is true, 491.
Intelligence does not consist in being able to confirm whatever a man
pleases, but in being able to see that what is true is true, and that
what is false is false, 233. Every one may confirm himself in favor of
the divine principle or Being, by the visible things of nature, 416-419.
Those who confirm themselves in favor of a divine principle or Being,
attend to the wonderful things which are conspicuous in the productions
both of vegetables and animals, 416. Those who had confirmed themselves
in favor of nature, by what is visible in this world, so as to become
atheists, appeared in spiritual light with the understanding open
beneath, but closed above, 421.

CONFIRMATIONS are effected by reasonings, which the mind seizes for its
use, deriving them either from its superior region or its inferior, 491.
The form of the human mind is according to confirmations turned towards
heaven, if its confirmations are in favor of marriages, but turned to
hell, if they are in favor of adulteries, 491. Confirmations of
falsities, so as to make them appear like truths, are represented in the
spiritual world under the forms of birds of night, 233. See _To
Confirm_.

CONFIRMATORS.--They are called such in the spiritual world who cannot at
all see whether truth be truth, but yet can make whatever they will to
be truth, 233. Their fate in the other life, 233.

CONJUGIAL PAIRS.--It is provided by the Lord that conjugial pairs be
born, and that these pairs be continually educated for marriage, neither
the maiden nor the youth knowing any thing of the matter, 316.

CONJUGIAL PRINCIPLE, the, of good and truth is implanted from creation
in every soul, and also in the principles derived from the soul, 204.
The conjugial principle fills the universe from first principles to
last, and from a man even to a worm, 204. It is inscribed on the soul,
to the end that soul may be propagated from soul, 236. It is inscribed
on both sexes from inmost principles to ultimates, and a man's quality
as to his thoughts and affections, and consequently as to his bodily
actions and behavior, is according to that principle, 140. In every
substance, even the smallest, there is a conjugial principle, 316. In
the minutest things with man, both male and female, there is a conjugial
principle: still the conjugial principle with the male is different from
what it is with the female, 316. There is implanted in every man from
creation, and consequently from his birth, an internal conjugial
principle, and an external conjugial principle; man comes first into the
latter, and as he becomes spiritual he comes into the former. 148, 188.
Children derive from their parents the conjugial principle of good and
truth, for it is that principle which flows into man from the Lord, and
constitutes his human life, 203. The conjugial human principle ever goes
hand in hand with religion, 80. This conjugial principle is the desire
of living with one wife, and every Christian has this desire according
to his religion, 80. The Christian conjugial principle alone is chaste,
142. By the Christian conjugial principle is meant the marriage of one
man with one wife, 142. The conjugial principle of one man with one
wife, is the storehouse of human life, and the reservoir of the
Christian religion, 457, 458. The conjugial principle is like a scale in
which conjugial love is weighed, 531.

CONJUNCTION.--In every part, and even in every particular, there is a
principle tending to conjunction, 33, 37; it was implanted from
creation, and thence remains perpetually, 37. The conjunctive principle
lies concealed in every part of the male, and in every part of the
female, 37, 46. In the male conjugial principle there is what is
conjunctive with the female conjugial principle, and _vice versa_, even
in the minutest things, 316.

CONJUNCTION of souls and minds by marriage, so that they are no longer
two but one flesh, 156, 181. Spiritual conjunction cannot possibly be
dissolved, 321. How there is a conjunction of the created universe with
its Creator, and by conjunction everlasting conservation, 85. There is
conjunction with the Lord by a life according to his commandments, 341.
There is no conjunction unless it be reciprocal, for conjunction on one
part, and not on the other in its turn, is dissolved of itself, 61.

CONNECTION, the connubial, of what is evil and false is the spiritual
origin of adultery, 428, 520. It is the anti-church, 497. In hell all
are in this _conmibium_, 520.

CONNUBIAL PRINCIPLE, the, of what is evil and false, is the opposite of
the conjugial principle of good and truth, 203. Beneath heaven there are
only nuptial connections which are tied and loosed, 192.

CONSCIENCE is a spiritual virtue which flows from love towards God, and
love towards the neighbor, 164. See _To Flow_.

CONSCIENTIOUSNESS in regard to marriage, 271.

CONSECRATION of marriages, 308.

CONSENT constitutes marriage and initiates the spirit into conjugial
love, 299. Consent against the will, or extorted, does not initiate the
spirit, 299.

CONSOCIATION, 45, 153*.

CONSUMMATION of the Age, signifies the last time or end of the church,
80.

CONTEMPT between married partners springs from disunion of souls, 236.

CONTINGENCIES and circumstances vary every thing, 485, 488.

CONTRARIES arise from an opposite principle in contrariety thereto, 425.

CONVICTION of the spirit of man, how it is effected, 295. Those things
in which the spirit is convinced, obtain a place above those which,
without consulting reason, enter from authority, and from the faith of
authority, 295.

COPPER, the, signifies natural good, 77. The age or period of copper,
77.

CORPORA STRIATA, 315.

CORPOREAL PRINCIPLE, the, is like ground wherein things natural,
rational, and spiritual, are implanted in their order, 59. Man is born
corporeal as a worm, and he remains corporeal, unless he learns to know,
to understand, and to be wise from others, 133. Every man by birth is
merely corporeal, and from corporeal he becomes natural more and more
interiorly, and thus rational, and at length spiritual, 59, 148. By
corporeal men are properly meant those who love only themselves, placing
their heart in the quest of honor, 496; they immerse all things of the
will, and consequently of the understanding in the body, and look
backward at themselves from others, and love only what is proper to
themselves, 496. Corporeal spirits, 495.

CORRESPONDENCES, 76, 127, 342, 532. Concerning the correspondence of the
marriage of the Lord and the church, 116. There is a correspondence of
conjugial love with the marriage of the Lord and the church, 62. Of the
correspondence of the opposite with the violation of spiritual marriage,
515. See _Science of Correspondences_.

CORTICAL substance of the brain, 315.

COURAGE is one of the moral virtues which have respect to life and enter
into it, 164.

COVENANT signifies conjunction, 128. As the Word is the medium of
conjunction, it is therefore called the old and the new covenant, 128.
The covenant between Jehovah and the heavens, 75.

CRAB, the.--What it is to think as a crab walks, 295.

CREATE, to.--Why man was so created that whatever he wills, thinks, and
does, appears to him as in himself, and thereby from himself, 444. How
man, created a form of God, could be changed into a form of the devil,
153*.

CREATION cannot be from any other source than from divine love, by
divine wisdom in divine use, 183. All fructifications, propagations, and
prolifications, are continuations of creation, 183. The creation returns
to the Creator, through the angelic heaven which is composed of the
human race, 85. Creation of man for conjugial love, 66.

CROCODILES, in the spiritual world, represent the deceit and cunning of
the inhabitants, 79.

CROWNS of flowers on the head, 183. The crown of chastity, 503.

CUPIDITIES, the, of the flesh are nothing but the conglomerated
concupiscences of what is evil and false, 440.

CUSTOMARY RITES, there are, which are merely formal, and there are
others which at the same time are also essential; among the latter are
the nuptials, 306. Nuptials are to be reckoned among essentials, 306.

DANES, the, 103, 111.

DARKNESS of the north signifies dulness of mind and ignorance of truth,
77.

DAUGHTERS-IN-LAW.--What daughters and sons-in-law signify in the Word,
120.

DAUGHTERS, in the Word, signifies the goods of the church, 120, 220.

DEATH.--Man after death is perfectly a man, yea, more perfectly a man
than before in the world, 182.

DECALOGUE, why the, was promulgated by Jehovah God upon Mount Sinai with
a stupendous miracle, 351.

DECANTATION.--The purification of conjugial love may be compared with
the purification of natural spirits, as effected by the chemists, and
called decantation, 145.

DECEASED.--When married partners have lived in love truly conjugial, the
spirit of the deceased cohabits continually with that of the survivor,
and this even to the death of the latter, 321.

DECLARATION, the, of love belongs to the men, 296.

DEFECATION.--The purification of conjugial love may be compared with the
purification of natural spirits, as effected by the chemists, and called
defecation, 145.

DEGREES.--There are three degrees of life, and hence there are three
heavens, and the human mind is distinguished into those degrees, hence
man corresponds to the three heavens, 532. Heretofore the distinction of
degrees in relation to greater and less has been known, but not in
relation to prior and posterior, 532. There are three degrees of the
natural man; the first degree is that properly meant by the natural, the
second the sensual, and the third the corporeal, 496. Adulteries change
men into these degenerate degrees, 496. Four degrees of adulteries,
485-494. Violations of the Word and the church correspond to the
prohibited degrees enumerated in Levit., ch. xviii., 519.

DELIGHTS, all, whatever, of which man has any sensation, are delights of
his love, 68. By delights love manifests itself, yea, exists and lives,
68. Delights follow use, and are also communicated to man according to
the love thereof, 68. The love of use derives its essence from love, and
its existence from wisdom. The love of use, which derives its origin
from love by wisdom, is the love and life of all celestial joys, 63. The
activity of love makes the sense of delight: its activity in heaven is
with wisdom, its activity in hell is with insanity: each in its objects
presents delights, 461. Delight is the all of life to all in heaven, and
to all in hell, 461. Delights are exalted in the same degree that love
is exalted, and also in the degree that the incident affections touch
the ruling love more nearly, 68. Every delight of love, in the spiritual
world, is presented to the sight under various appearances, to the sense
under various odors, and to the view under various forms of beasts and
birds, 430. Delights of love truly conjugial, 68.

DELIGHTS, external, without internal have no soul, 8. Every delight
without its corresponding soul continually grows more and more languid
and dull, and fatigues the mind (_animus_) more than labor, 8. The
delight of the soul is derived from love and wisdom proceeding from the
Lord, 8. This delight enters into the soul by influx from the Lord, and
descends through the superior and inferior regions of the mind into all
the senses of the body, and in them is complete and full, 8. In
conjugial love are collated all joys and delights from first to last,
68, 69. The delights of conjugial love are the same with the delights of
wisdom, 293, 294. They proceed from the Lord, and now thence into the
souls of men (_homines_), and through their souls into their minds, and
there into the interior affections and thoughts, and thence into the
body, 183, 69, 144, 155*, 193. As good is one with truth in spiritual
marriage, so wives desire to be one with their husband; and hence arise
conjugial delights with them, 198. Paradisiacal delights, 8. The
delights of conjugial love ascend to the highest heaven, and in the way
thither, and there, join themselves with the delights of all heavenly
loves, and thereby enter into their happiness, and endure forever, 294.

DELIRIUM.--An eminent degree of delirium is occasioned by truths which
are falsified until they are believed to be wisdom, 212. Delirium in
which those are, in the spiritual world, who have been in the
unrestrained love of self and the world, 267.

DEMOCRITUS, 182.

DEMOSTHENES, 182.

DEVILS.--Those are called devils who have lived wickedly, and thereby
rejected all acknowledgment of God from their hearts, 380. See _Satans_.
With adulterers who are called devils, the will is the principal agent,
and with those who are called satans, the understanding is the principal
agent, 492. Devil of a frightful form, 263.

DIFFERENCE between the spiritual and the natural, 326-329.

DIGNITIES, concerning, in heaven, 7, 266, there they do not prefer
dignity to use but the excellence of use to dignity, 250.

DIOGENES, 182.

DISCIPLES, the twelve, together represented the church as to all its
constituent principles, 119. Who they are who are called disciples of
the Lord in the spiritual world, 261.

DISCORD between married partners arises from spiritual cold, 236.

DISCOURSE, man's, in itself is such as is the thought of his
understanding which produces it, 527. Discourse itself is grounded in
the thought of the understanding, and the tone of the voice is grounded
in the will affection, 140. Speech which is said to flow from the
thought, flows not from the thought, but from the affection through the
thought, 36. Spiritual language with representatives fully expresses
what is intended to be said, and many things in a moment, 481.
Conversation in the spiritual world may be heard by a distant person as
if he were present, 521. Frequent discourse from the memory and from
recollection, and not at the same time from thought and intelligence,
induces a kind of faith, 415.

DISJUNCTION, all, derives its origin from the opposition of spiritual
spheres, which emanate from their subjects, 171.

DISSIMILITUDES in the spiritual world are separated, 273. See
_Likeness_.

DISTANCES.--Spheres cause distances in the spiritual world, 171.
Distances in the spiritual world are appearances according to the states
of mind, 78.

DISTINCTION, characteristic, of the woman and the man, 217.

DIVERSITIES.--Distinction between varieties and diversities. There are
varieties between those things which are of one genus, or of one
species, also between the genera and species; but there is a diversity
between those things which are in the opposite principle, 324. In heaven
there is infinite variety, and in hell infinite diversity, 324.

DIVIDED.--Every thing divided is more and more multiple, and not more
and more simple, because what is continually divided approaches nearer
and nearer to the Infinite, in which all things are infinitely, 329.

DIVINE GOOD AND TRUTH.--The divine good is the _esse_ of the divine
substance, and the divine truth is the _existere_ of the divine
substance, 115. The divine good and truth proceed as one from the Lord,
87. The Lord God, the Creator, is essential divine good, and essential
divine truth, 84. The divine truth in the Word is united to the divine
good, 129. All divine truth in the heavens gives forth light, 77.

DIVINE ESSENCE, the, is composed of love, wisdom, and use, 183. Nothing
but what is of the divine essence can proceed from the Lord, and flow
into the inmost principle of man, 183. There is not any essence without
a form, nor any form without an essence, 87.

DIVINE LOVE AND WISDOM.--In the Lord God, the Creator, there are divine
love and Divine Wisdom, 84.

DIVISIBLE.--Every grain of thought, and every drop of affection, is
divisible _ad infinitum_: in proportion as his ideas are divisible man
is wise, 329. Every thing is divisible _in infinitum_, 185.

DIVORCE, by, is meant the abolition of the conjugial covenant, and
thence a plenary separation, and after this an entire liberty to marry
another wife, 468. The only cause of divorce is adultery, according to
the Lord's precept. Matt. xix. 9, 255, 468.

DOCTRINALS of the New Church in five precepts, 82.

DOGS in the spiritual world represent the lusts in which the inhabitants
are principled, 79. Who those are who appear like dogs of indulgences,
505.

DOVES, turtle.--In heaven, the appearances under which the chaste
delights of conjugial love are presented to the view, are turtle-doves,
&c., 430. A pair of turtle-doves represents conjugial love of the
highest region, 270.

DRAGONS in the spiritual world represent the falsities and depraved
inclinations of the inhabitants to those things which appertain to
idolatrous worship, 79.

DRESS of a bridegroom and bride during their marriage in heaven, 20, 21.

DRINK, to, water from the fountain signifies to be instructed concerning
truths, and by truths concerning goods, and thereby to grow wise, 182.

DRINKS.--In the heaven as well as in the world there are drinks, 6. See
_Food_.

DRUNKENNESS, 252, 472.

DURA-MATER, 315.

DUTIES.--There are duties proper to the man, and duties proper to the
wife, 174. In the duties proper to the men, the primary agent is
understanding, thought, and wisdom; whereas in the duties proper to the
wives, the primary agent is will, affection, and love, 175.

EAR, the, does not hear and discern the harmonies of tunes in singing,
and the concordances of the articulation of sounds in discourse, but the
spirit, 440. In heaven the right ear is the good of hearing, and the
left the truth thereof, 316.

EARTH, the, or ground is the common mother of all vegetables, 206, 397;
and of all minerals, 397.

EARTH, the lower, in the spiritual world, is next above hell, 231.

EARTH, or country, 13, 27, 37, 49, 69, 71, 144, 320, &c.

EASE, by, and sloth the mind grows stupid and the body torpid, and the
whole man becomes insensible to every vital love, especially to
conjugial love, 249.

EAST, the.--The Lord is the East, because he is in the sun there, 261.

EAT, to, of the tree of life, in a spiritual sense, is to be intelligent
and wise from the Lord; and to eat of the tree of knowledge of good and
evil, signifies to be intelligent and wise from self, 353. To eat of the
tree of life, is to receive eternal life; to eat of the tree of
knowledge of good and evil, is to receive damnation, 135, 444.

ECCLESIASTICAL ORDER, the, on the earth minister those things which
appertain to the Lord's priestly character, 308. What is the nature of
ecclesiastical self-love, 264. They aspire to be gods, so far as that
love is unrestrained. 264.

EDEN.--See _Garden_.

EDUCATION of children in the spiritual world, 411-413.

EFFECT.--See _End_.

EFFIGY.--Two married partners, between or in whom conjugial love
subsists, are an effigy and form of it, 65. In the spiritual world the
faces of spirits become the effigies of their internal affections, 273.

ELECTION belongs to the man and not to the woman, 296. The women have
the right of election of one of their suitors, 296.

ELEVATION.--With men there is an elevation of the mind into superior
light, and with women elevation of the mind into superior heat, 188.
Elevation into superior light with men is elevation into superior
intelligence, and thence into wisdom, in which also there are ascending
degrees of elevation, 188. The elevation into superior heat with women
is an elevation into chaster and purer conjugial love, and continually
towards the conjugial principle, which from creation lies concealed in
their inmost principles, 188. These elevations considered in themselves
are openings of the mind, 188.

ELYSIAN FIELDS, 182.

EMPLOYMENTS in the spiritual world, 207.

END of this Work, 295.

END, the, and the cause, in what is to be effected and in effects, act
in unity because they act together, 387. The end, cause, and effect
successively progress as three things, but in the effect itself they
make one, 401. Every end considered in itself is a love, 212. Every end
appertains to the will, every cause to the understanding, and every
effect to action, 400. The end, unless the intended effect is seen
together with it, is not any thing, neither does each become any thing,
unless the cause supports, contrives, and conjoins, 400. All operations
in the universe have a progression from ends, through causes into
effects, 400. Ends advance in a series, one after the other, and in
their progress the last end becomes first, 387. Ends make progression in
nature through times without time, but they cannot come forth and
manifest themselves, until the effect or use exists and becomes a
subject, 401. The end of marriage is the procreation of children, 254.
All in heaven are influenced by an end of good; and all in hell by an
end of evil, 453, 527.

ENGLAND, 380

ENGLISH, 103, 107, 326.

ENUNCIATIONS, the.--The name of the prophetic books of the Word that was
given to the inhabitants of Asia, before the Israelitish Word, 77.

EPICURUS, 182.

EQUILIBRIUM, there is an, between the sphere of conjugial love, and
between the sphere of its opposite, and man is kept in this equilibrium,
437. This equilibrium is a spiritual equilibrium, 437. Spiritual
equilibrium is that which exists between good and evil, or between
heaven and hell, 444. This equilibrium produces a free principle, 444.
See _Freedom_.

ERUDITE, the pretended, in the spiritual world, 232.

ERUDITION appertains to rational wisdom, 163.

ERUDITION is one of the principles constituent of rational wisdom, 163.

ESSE and EXISTERE.--The esse of the substance of God is Divine good, and
the existere of the substance of God is Divine truth, 115.

ESSENTIALS.--Love, wisdom, and use, are three essentials, together
constituting one divine essence, 183. These three essentials flow into
the souls of men, 183.

ETERNITY is the infinity of time, 185.

ETHICS is one of those sciences by which an entrance is made into things
rational, which are the ground of rational wisdom, 163.

EUNUCHS.--Of those who are born eunuchs, or of eunuchs so made, 151. Who
are understood by the eunuchs who make themselves eunuchs for the
kingdom of heaven's sake, Matt. xix. 12, 156.

EVIL is not from creation; nothing but good exists from creation, 444.
Man himself is the origin of evil, not that that origin was implanted in
him by creation, but that he, by turning from God to himself, implanted
it in himself, 444. Love without wisdom is love from man, and this love
is the origin of evil, 444. No one can be withdrawn from evil unless he
has been first led into it, 510. So far as any one removes evil, so far
a capacity is given for good to succeed in its place, 147. So far as
evil is hated, so far good is loved, 147. Evils and falses, after they
arose, were distinguished into genera, species, and differences, 479.
All evils are together of the external and internal man; the internal
intends them, and the external does them, 486. So far as the
understanding favors evils, so far a man appropriates them to himself,
and makes them his own, 489. See _Hereditary_.

EXTENSION cannot be predicated of things spiritual, 158. The reason why,
389.

EXTERNALS derive from their internals their good or evil, 478. Of the
external derived from the internal, and of the external separate from
the internal, 148. How man after death puts off externals, and puts on
internals, 48*.

EYE, the, does not see and discern various particulars in objects, but
they are seen and discerned by the spirit, 440. In heaven the right eye
is the good of vision, and the left the truth thereof, 316.

EYES, when the, of the spirit are opened, angels appear in their proper
form, which is the human, 30.

FABLES.--Things which are called fables at this day, were
correspondences agreeable to the primeval method of speaking, 182.

FACE, the, depends on the mind (_animus_), and is its type, 524. The
countenance is a type of the love, 35. The variety of countenances is
infinite, 35. There are not two human faces which arc exactly alike,
186. The faces of no two persons are absolutely alike, nor can there be
two faces alike to eternity, 524.

FACULTY.--Man is born faculty and inclination; faculty to know, and
inclination to love, 134. The faculty of understanding and growing wise
as of himself, was implanted in man by creation, 444. The faculty of
knowing, of understanding, and of growing wise, receives truths, whereby
it has science, intelligence, and wisdom, 122. Man has the faculty of
elevating his understanding into the light of wisdom, and his will into
the heat of celestial love; these two faculties are never taken away
from any man, 230. The faculty of becoming wise increases with those who
are in love truly conjugial, 211.

FAITH is truth, 10, 24. Saving faith is to believe on the Lord Jesus
Christ, 82.

FALLACIES of the senses are the darkness of truths, 152*.

FALSES, all, have been collated into hell, 479. See _Evils_.

FALSIFICATIONS of truth are spiritual whoredoms, 77, 80.

FATHER.--The Lord in the Word is called Father, 118. Most fathers, when
they come into another life, recollect their children who have died
before them, and they are also presented to, and mutually acknowledge,
each other, 406. In what manner spiritual and natural fathers act, 406.
By father and mother, whom man is to leave, Matt. xix. 4, 5, in a
spiritual sense, is meant his _proprium_ (self-hood) of will, and
_proprium_ of understanding, 194. See _Proprium_.

FAVOR, causes of, between married partners, 278, 287, 290.

FEAR.--In love truly conjugial there is a fear of loss, 318. This fear
resides in the very inmost principles of the mind, 318.

FEASTS.--There are in heaven, as in the world, both feasts and repasts,
6.

FEMALE.--See _Male and Female_. The female principle is derived from
the male, or, the woman was taken out of the man, 32. The female
principle cannot be changed into the male principle, nor the male into
the female, 32. The difference between the essential feminine and
masculine principle, 32, 168. The good of truth, or truth from good, in
the female principle, 61, 88, 90. The female principle consists in
perceiving from love, 168, 220.

FEVERS, malignant and pestilential, 253, 470.

FIRE in heaven represents good, 326.

FIRE in the spiritual sense signifies love, 380. The fire of the angelic
sun is divine love, 34. The fire of the altar and of the candlestick in
the tabernacle among the Israelites, represented divine love, 380. The
fire of the natural sun has existed from no other source than from the
fire of the spiritual sun, which is divine love, 380. The fires of the
west signify the delusive loves of evil, 77.

FISH.--In the spiritual world fishes are representative forms, 76. Every
fish corresponds to some quality, 76.

FLAME.--Celestial love with the angels of heaven appears at a distance
as flame; and thus also infernal love appears with the spirits of hell,
359. Flame in the spiritual world does not burn like flame in the
natural world, 359. Celestial flame in no case bursts out against
another, but only defends itself, and defends itself against an evil
person, as when he rushes into the fire and is burnt, 365.

FLESH, the, is contrary to the spirit, that is, contrary to the
spiritual things of the church, 497. Combat between the flesh and the
spirit, 488. The flesh is ignorant of the delights of the spirit, 481.
The flesh is not sensible of those things which happen in the flesh, but
the spirit perceives them, 440. What is signified by the words of our
Lord, "They are no more twain but one flesh," 50, 156*, 178, 321. By
"all flesh," in the Word, is signified every man, 156*.

FLOW FROM, to.--All that which flows from a subject, and encompasses and
environs it, is named a sphere, 386.

FLOW IN, to.--Every thing which flows in from the Lord into man, flows
into his inmost principle, which is the soul, and descends thence into
his middle principle, which is the mind, and through this into his
ultimate principle, which is the body, 101. The marriage of good and
truth flows thus from the Lord with man, immediately into his soul, and
thence proceeds to the principles next succeeding, and through these to
the extreme or outermost, 101.

FLOWERS.--The delights of conjugial love are represented in heaven by
the flowers with which the cloaks and tunics of married partners are
embroidered, 137.

FLOWERY FIELDS.--In heaven there are flowery fields which are the
appearances under which the chaste pleasures of conjugial love are
presented to the sight, 430.

FOOD, heavenly, in its essence is nothing but love, wisdom, and use,
united together; that is, use effected by wisdom, and derived from love,
6. Food for the body is given to every one in heaven, according to the
use which he performs, 6.

FORM.--There is nothing that exists but in a form, 186. There is no
substance without a form, 66. Every form consists of various things, and
is such as is the harmonic co-ordination thereof and arrangement to one,
524. All a man's affections and thoughts are in forms, and thence from
forms, 186. The form of heaven is derived solely from varieties of souls
and minds arranged into such an order as to make a one, 524. Truth is
the form of good, 198. The human form in its inmost principles is from
creation a form of love and wisdom, 361. Men from creation are forms of
science, intelligence, and wisdom; and women are forms of the love of
those principles as existing with men, 187. Form of the marriage of good
and truth, 100. Two married partners are that form in their inmost
principles, and thence in what is derived from those principles, in
proportion as the interiors of their mind are opened, 101, 102. Two
married partners are the very forms of love and wisdom, or of good and
truth, 66. The internal form of man is that of his spirit, 186. The
woman is a form of wisdom inspired with love-affection, 56. The male
form is the intellectual form, and the female is the voluntary, 228. The
most perfect and most noble human form results from the conjunction of
two forms by marriage, so as to become one form, 201. How man, created a
form of God, could be changed into a form of the devil, 153*. The desire
to continue in its form is implanted from creation in all living things,
361. See _Substance_.

FORMATION.--As to formation, the masculine soul, as being intellectual,
is thus truth, 220. Formation of the woman into a wife according to the
description in the Book of Creation, 193-198.

FOUNTAIN, a, signifies the truth of wisdom, 293. Fountain of Parnassus,
182. See _Water_.

FOWLS.--Wonderful things conspicuous respecting fowls, 417.

FRANCE, 380, 381.

FREEDOM originates in the spiritual equilibrium which exists between
heaven and hell, or between good and evil, and in which man is educated,
444. The freedom of love truly conjugial is most free, 257. The Lord
wills that the male man (_homo_) should act from principle according to
reason, 208, 438. Without freedom and reason man would not be a man, but
a beast, 438.

FRENCH, the, 103, 110, 326.

FRENSY, or furious wildness, a legitimate cause of separation, 252, 470.

FRIENDS meet after death, and recollect their friendships in the former
world; but when their consociation is only from external affections, a
separation ensues, and they no longer see or know each other, 273.

FRIENDSHIP is one of the moral virtues which have respect to life, and
enter into it, 164. Friendship increases with those who are principled
in love truly conjugial, 214. Inmost friendship is in love truly
conjugial, and is derived from it, 180. Inmost friendship is seated in
the breast, 180. Friendship from conjugial love differs greatly from the
friendship of every other love, 214. Apparent friendship between married
partners is a consequence of the conjugial covenant being ratified for
the term of life, 278. There are various species of apparent friendship
between married partners, one of whom is brought under the yoke, and
therefore subject to the other, 291. Difference between conjugial
friendship and servile friendship in marriages, 248. Under what
circumstances there may exist between married partners, when old, a
friendship resembling that of conjugial love, 290.

FROZEN SUBSTANCES, 510.

FRUCTIFICATION, all, is originally derived from the influx of love,
wisdom, and use from the Lord; from an immediate influx into the souls
of men; from a mediate influx into the souls of animals; and from an
influx still more mediate into the inmost principles of vegetables, 183.
Fructifications are continuations of creation, 183. Fructification in
the heavens, 44, 355.

FUTURE, the.--The Lord does not permit any man to know the future,
because in proportion as he does so, in the same degree his reason and
understanding, with his prudence and wisdom, become inactive, are
swallowed up and destroyed, 535.

GALLERY, open, 208.

GANGRENES, 253.

GARDENS.--In heaven the appearances under which the chaste delights of
conjugial love are presented, are gardens and flowery fields, 430. The
garden of Eden signifies the wisdom of love, 135. Nuptial gardens, 316.
Paradisiacal gardens, 8. Description of the garden of the prince of a
heavenly society, 13.

GARLAND OF ROSES, a, in heaven signifies the delights of intelligence,
293.

GARLANDS in heaven represent the delights of conjugial love, 137, 293.

GENERA.--Distinction of all things into genera, species, and
discriminations; the reason why, 479. There are three genera of
adulteries, simple, duplicate, and triplicate, 479, 484.

GENERAL of an army, 481.

GENERALS cannot enter into particulars, 328.

GENEROSITY is one of those moral virtues which have respect to life, and
enter into it, 164.

GENII.--Who those are who, in the spiritual world, are called infernal
genii, 514.

GENITAL region, 183.

GENTILES.--Why there is no communication between the Christian heaven,
and the heaven of the Gentiles, 352.

GEOMETRY is one of the sciences by which an entrance is made into things
rational, which are the ground of rational wisdom, 163.

GERMANS, 103, 109.

GERMANY, 380.

GESTURES.--In the spiritual world the internal affections appear even in
the gestures, 273.

GIANTS, abode of, 77.

GLAND, pineal, 315.

GLORIFICATION of the Lord by the angels of the heavens on account of his
coming, 81.

GLORIFYING, by, God is meant the discharging of all the duties of our
callings with faithfulness, sincerity, and diligence; hereby God is
glorified, as well as by acts of worship at stated times, succeeding
these duties, 9.

GLORY, the, of the love of self, elevates the understanding even into
the light of heaven, 269. The glory of honor with men induces, exalts,
and sharpens jealousy, 378.

GOD, the, of heaven is the Lord, 78. There is only one God, in whom
there is a divine trinity, and He is the Lord Jesus Christ, 82, 532. God
is love itself, and wisdom itself, 132. The _esse_ of the substance of
God is divine good, and the _existere_ of His substance is divine truth,
115. See _Lord, obs_.

GOOD and TRUTH.--What the will loves and does is called good, and what
the understanding perceives and thinks is called true, 490. All those
things which pertain to the love are called good, and all those things
which pertain to wisdom are called truths, 60. All things in the
universe have relation to good and truth, 60. Good and truth are the
universals of creation, and thence are in all created things, 84. Good
has relation to love, and truth to wisdom, 84. By truths, man has
understanding, perception, and all thought; and by goods, love, charity,
and all affection, 121. Man receives truth as his own, and appropriates
it as his own, for he thinks what is true as from himself, 122; but he
cannot take good as of himself, it being no object of his sight, 123.
The truth of faith constitutes the Lord's presence, and the good of life
according to the truths of faith constitutes conjunction with Him, 72.
The truth of faith constitutes the Lord's presence, because it relates
to light; and the good of life constitutes conjunction, because it
relates to heat, 72. In all things in the universe, good is conjoined
with truth, and truth with good, 60. There is not any truth without
good, nor good without truth, 87. Good is not good, only so far as it is
united with truth; and truth is not truth, only so far as it is united
with good, 87. Relations of good and truth to their objects, and their
conjunction with them, 87. The good which joins itself with the truth
belonging to the man is from the Lord immediately, but the good of the
wife, which joins itself with the truth belonging to the man, is from
the Lord mediately through the wife, 100. See _Marriage of Good and
Truth_.

GOVERNMENT.--In heaven there are governments and forms of government, 7.

GOVERNMENTS.--There are in heaven, as on the earths, distinctions of
dignity and governments, 7.

GRAPES, good, and bad grapes, what they represent in the spiritual
world, 294, 76.

GROUND.--Man at his first birth is as a ground in which no seeds are
implanted, but which nevertheless is capable of receiving all seeds, and
of bringing them forth and fructifying them, 134.

GROVES, 76, 132, 183, 316.

GUILT, _Reatus_, is principally predicated of the will, 493.

GYMNASIA in the spiritual world, 151*, 207, 315, 380.

GYMNASIA, Olympic, in the spiritual world, where the ancient _sophi_ and
many of their disciples met together, 151*.

HABITATIONS.--How men have ceased to be habitations of God, 153*.

HAND.--In heaven the right hand is the good of man's ability, and the
left the truth thereof, 316. If, in the Word, mention is made of a
thing's being inscribed on the hands, it is because the hands are the
ultimates of man, wherein the deliberations and conclusions of his mind
terminate, and there constitute what is simultaneous, 314. The angels
can see in a man's hand all the thoughts and intentions of his mind,
314. Whatever a man examines intellectually, appears to the angels as if
inscribed on his hands, 261.

HAPPINESS, concerning eternal, 2 and following. Happiness ought to be
within external joys, and to flow from them, 6. This happiness abiding
in external joys, makes them joys, and to flow from them, 6. This
happiness abiding in external joys, makes them joys, it enriches them,
and prevents their becoming loathsome and disgusting; and this happiness
is derived to every angel from the use he performs in his function, 6.
From the reception of the love of uses, springs heavenly happiness,
which is the life of joys, 6. Heavenly happiness results from the
eternal enjoyment of different states derived from conjugial love, 180.
The delights of the soul, with the thoughts of the mind and the
sensations of the body, constitute heavenly happiness, 16. The happiness
which results from the sensations of the body alone, is not eternal, but
soon passes away, and in some cases becomes unhappiness, 16. Eternal
happiness does not arise from the place, but from the state of the life
of man (_homo_) 16.

HAPPINESS, the, of cohabitation increases with those who are principled
in love truly conjugial, 213.

HEALING of the sick by the touch, 396.

HEARING, natural, is grounded in spiritual hearing, which is attention
of the understanding, and at the same time accommodation of the will,
220. The love of hearing grounded in the love of hearkening to and
obeying has the sense of hearing, and the gratifications proper to it
are the various kinds of harmony, 210. The perception of a thing imbibed
by hearing only flows in indeed, but does not remain unless the hearer
also thinks of it from himself, and asks questions concerning it, 183.

HEART, the, signifies love, 75. The heart has relation to good, 87. The
heart rules by the blood in every part of the body, 179.

HEAT, spiritual, is love, 235. This heat is from no other source than
the sun of the spiritual world, 235. Heat is felt, and not seen, 123.
When the heat of conjugial love removes and rejects the heat of
adulterous love, conjugial love begins to acquire a pleasant warmth,
147. The quality of the heat of conjugial love with polygamists, 344.

HEAT and LIGHT.--In heaven heat is love, and the light with which heat
is united, is wisdom, 137. Natural heat corresponds to spiritual heat,
which is love, and natural light corresponds to spiritual light, which
is wisdom, 145. Heavenly light acts in unity with wisdom, and heavenly
heat with love, 145. Those things which have relation to light are seen,
and those which have relation to heat are felt, 168. The delight of
spiritual heat with spiritual light is perceivable in human forms, in
which this heat is conjugial love, and this light is wisdom, 189.

HEAVEN.--The angelic heaven is formed from the human race, 156. There
are three heavens, the first or ultimate heaven, the second or middle
heaven, and the third or highest heaven, 42. The universal heaven is
arranged in order according to the varieties of the affections of the
love of good, 36. In heaven human forms are altogether similar to those
in the natural world. Nothing is wanting in the male, and nothing in the
female, 44. The heaven of infants, its situation, 410. Heaven of
innocence, 444. Heaven of Mahometans, 342-344.

HELICON, 151*, 182.

HELICONIDES, sports of the, in the spiritual world, 207. These sports
were spiritual exercises and trials of skill, 207.

HELL.--The universal hell is arranged in order according to the
affections of the love of evil, 36. Those who are in evil from the
understanding dwell there in front and are called satans, but those who
are in evil from the will dwell to the back and are called devils, 492.
Hell of the deceitful, 514.

HERACLITUS, 182.

HEREDITARY evil is not from Adam, but from a man's parents, 525. Whence
it springs, 245.

HETEROGENEITES in the spiritual world are not only felt, but also appear
in the face, the discourse, and the gesture, 273.

HETEROGENEOUS or DISCORDANT, what is, causes disjunction and absence in
the spiritual world, 171.

HIEROGLYPHICS, the, of the Egyptians derive their origin from the
science of correspondences and representations, 76, 342.

HISTORY is one of the sciences by which an entrance is made into things
rational, which are the ground of rational wisdom, 163.

HOGS.--In hell, the forms of beasts under which the lascivious delights
of adulterous love are presented to the view are hogs, &c., 430.
Companions of Ulysses changed into hogs, 521.

HOLLAND, 380.

HOLLANDERS or Dutchmen, 103, 105.

HOMOGENEITES, in the spiritual world, are not only felt, but also appear
in the face, language, and gesture, 273.

HOMOGENEOUS or CONCORDANT, what is, causes conjunction and presence,
171.

HONORS.--In heaven the angels feel that the honors of the dignities are
out of themselves, and are as the garments with which they are clothed,
266.

HOOF, by the, of the horse Pegasus is understood experiences whereby
comes natural intelligence, 182.

HOUSE, the, signifies the understanding of truths, 76. See _Pegasus_.

HOUSE.--In heaven no one can dwell but in his own house, which is
provided for him, and assigned to him, according to the quality of his
love, 50.

HUMAN PRINCIPLE, the, consists in desiring to grow wise, and in loving
whatever appertains to wisdom, 52.

HUNCH-BACKED.--When the love of the world constitutes the head, a man is
not a man otherwise than as hunch-backed, 269.

HUSBAND.--How with young men the youthful principle is changed into that
of a husband, 199.

HUSBAND, the, does not represent the Lord, and the wife the church,
because both together, the husband and the wife, constitute the church,
125. The husband represents wisdom, and the wife represents the love of
the wisdom of the husband, 21. The husband is truth, and the wife the
good thereof, 76. A state receptible of love, and perceptible of wisdom,
makes a youth into a husband, 321. See _Wife_.

HYPOCRITE.--Every man who is not interiorly led by the Lord is a
hypocrite, and thereby an apparent man, and yet not a man, 267.

IDEA, every, of man's, however sublimated, is substantial--that is,
affixed to substances, 66. To every idea of natural thought there
adheres something derived from space and time, which is not the case
with any spiritual idea, 328. Spiritual ideas, compared with natural,
are ideas of ideas, 326. There is not any idea of natural thought
adequate to any idea of spiritual thought, 326. Spiritual ideas are
supernatural, inexpressible, ineffable, and incomprehensible to the
natural man, 326. One natural idea contains innumerable spiritual ideas,
and one spiritual idea contains innumerable celestial ideas, 329.

IDENTITY.--No absolute identity of two things exist, still less of
several, 186.

IDOLATERS, ancient, in the spiritual world, 78.

IDOLATRY.--Its origin, 78, 342.

IJIM, the, in hell represent the images of the phantasies of the
infernals, 264. See _Phantasy_.

ILLUSTRATE, to, 42, 48*, 130, 134, &c.

_Obs._--In the writings of the Author, to illustrate is generally used
in the sense of to enlighten.

ILLUSTRATION.--In the Word there is illustration concerning eternal
life, 28.

_Obs._--Illustration is an actual opening of the interiors which pertain
to the mind, and also an elevation into the light of heaven, _H.D._,
256.

IMAGE.--What are the image and likeness of God into which man was
created, 182, 134. Image of the husband in the wife, 173.

IMAGINATION, 4, 7. See _Phantasy_.

IMMODESTY, 252, 472. All in hell are in the immodesty of adulterous
love, 429.

IMMORTALITY.--Man may no longer be in doubt through ignorance respecting
his immortality, after the discoveries which it has pleased the Lord to
make, 532.

IMPLANT, to.--That which is implanted in souls by creation, and respects
propagation, is indelible, and not to be extirpated, 409. Good cannot be
implanted, only so far as evil is removed, 525.

IMPLETION.--The soul is a spiritual substance, which is not a subject of
extension, but of impletion, 220.

IMPOSITION OF HANDS.--Whence it has originated, 396.

IMPURE.--To the impure every thing is impure, 140.

IMPURITY, the, of hell is from adulterous love, 480, 495. In like manner
the impurity in the church, 431, 495. There are innumerable varieties of
impurities; all hell overflows with impurities, 430.

IMPUTATION, the, of evil in the other life is not accusation,
incusation, inculpation, and judication, as in the world, 524; evil is
there made sensible as in its odor; it is this which accuses, incuses,
fixes blame, and judges, not before any judge, but before every one who
is principled in good, and this is what is meant by imputation, 524.
Imputation of adulterous love, and imputation of conjugial love,
523-531. Imputation of adulteries after death, how effected, 485, 489,
493; these imputations take place after death, not according to
circumstances, which are external of the deed, but according to internal
circumstances of the mind, 530. Imputation of good, how it is effected,
524. If by imputation is meant the transcription of good into any one
who is in evil, it is a frivolous term, 526.

IMPUTE, to.--The evil in which every one is, is imputed to him after
death; in like manner the good, 524, 530, 531. Evil or good is imputed
to every one after death, according to the quality of his will and or
his understanding, 527. Who it is to whom sin is not imputed, and who to
whom it is imputed, 529, 527.

INACTIVITY or SLOTH occasions a universal languor, dulness, stupor, and
drowsiness of the mind, and thence of the body, 207. In consequence of
sloth the mind grows stupid and the body torpid, and the whole man
becomes insensible to every vital love, especially to conjugial love,
249.

INCLINATION.--In the truth of good, and in the good of truth, there is
implanted from creation an inclination to join themselves together into
one, 88, 100; the reason why, 89. The conjunctive inclination, which is
conjugial love, is in the same degree with the conjunction of good and
truth, which is the church, 63. Every one derives from his parents his
peculiar temper, which is his inclination, 525. Children are born with
inclinations to such things as their parents were inclined to, 202; but
it is of the Divine Providence that perverse inclinations may be
rectified, 202. Inclinations of married partners towards each other,
171. Husbands know nothing at all of the inclinations and affections of
their own love, but wives are well acquainted with those principles in
their husbands, 208. Inclination of the wife towards the husband, 160.
Dissimilitude of internal inclinations is the origin and cause of cold,
275. External inclinations, whence they arise, 246.

INDIFFERENCE with married partners comes from a disunion of souls and
disjunction of minds, 236, 256.

INDUSTRY is one of the moral virtues which have respect to life, and
enter into it, 164.

INEQUALITY of external rank and condition is one of the external causes
of cold, 250. There are many inequalities of rank and condition which
put an end to the conjugial love commenced before marriage, 250.

INFANCY is the appearance of innocence, 75.

INFLUX.--What is meant by influx, 313. There is an immediate influx from
the Lord into the souls of men, a mediate influx into the souls of
animals, and an influx still more mediate into the inmost principles of
vegetables, 183. Every subject receives influx according to its form,
86. The subject does not perceive the influx, 392. The influx is alike
into all; but the reception, which is according to the form, causes
every species to continue a particular species, 86. The influx of love
and wisdom from the Lord is the essential activity from which comes all
delight, 461. Influx of conjugial love, 183, 208, 355.

INHERENT, 23, 217, 410, 422.

_Obs._--That is called inherent which proceeds from a common influx,
_A.E._, 955. Common influx is a continual effort proceeding from the
Lord through all heaven, into each of the things which pertain to the
life of man. See _A.E._, 6214. What is inherent is as a graft.

INHERENT, to be, 32, 51, 98, 221, 422, 426.

INMOST principles of the mind, and inmost principles of the body, 68.
The highest things of successive order become the inmost of simultaneous
order, 314. The inmost principle of man is his soul, 183.

INNOCENCE is the _esse_ of every good; good is only so far good as
innocence is in it, 394, 414. The Lord is innocence itself, 394.
Innocence is to be led by the Lord, 414. The innocence of infants flows
in from the Lord, 395. The sphere of innocence flows into infants, and
through them into parents, and affects them, 395, 396. What is the
innocence of infants which flows into parents, 395. The innocence of
infancy is the cause of the love called _storge_, 395. Innocence
corresponds to infancy, and also to nakedness, 413. The innocence of
childhood is external innocence, and the innocence of wisdom internal
innocence, 413. The innocence of wisdom is the end of all instruction
and progression with infants in the spiritual world, 413. When they come
to the innocence of wisdom, the innocence of infancy is adjoined to
them, which in the mean time had served them as a plane, 413. Innocence
is in conjugial love, and pertains to the soul, 180. Innocence is one of
the spiritual virtues which flow from love to God and love towards the
neighbor, 164.

INSANITY, 212.--Insanity, a vitiated state of the mind, is a legitimate
cause of separation, 252, 470.

INSCRIBED ON THE HANDS.--Why this form of expression is used in the
Word, 314. See _Hand_.

INSTRUCTION of children in heaven, 411-413. Places of instruction in the
spiritual world, 261.

INTEGRITY, state of, 135, 155.

INTELLECTUAL, the, principle is nothing but truth, 220. Man's
intellectual principle is the inmost principle of the woman, 195.

INTELLIGENCE is a principle of reason, 130. There is no end to
intelligence, 185. Every one is in intelligence, not by birth, but
exteriorly by education, 267. The intelligence of women is in itself
modest, elegant, pacific, yielding, soft, tender; and the intelligence
of men in itself is grave, harsh, hard, daring, fond of licentiousness,
218. Circles around the head represent intelligence, 269.

INTEMPERANCE, 252, 472.

INTENTION.--That which flows forth from the form of a man's life, thus
from the understanding and its thought, is called intention; but that
which flows forth from the essence of a man's life, thus that which
flows forth from his will or his love, is principally called purpose,
493. The intention which pertains to the will is principally regarded by
the Lord, 71, 146. Intention is as an act before determination; hence it
is that, by a wise man and also by the Lord, intention is accepted as an
act, 400, 452. Intention is the soul of all actions, and causes
blamableness and unblamableness in the world, and after death
imputation, 452.

INTERCOURSE.--In heaven there are frequent occasions of cheerful
intercourse and conversation, whereby the internal minds (_mentes_) of
the angels are exhilarated, their external minds (_animi_) entertained,
their bosoms delighted, and their bodies refreshed, but such occasions
do not occur till they have fulfilled their appointed uses in the
discharge of their respective business and functions, 5.

INTERIORS, the, form the exteriors to their own likeness, 33. The
opening of the interiors cannot be fully effected except with those who
have been prepared by the Lord to receive the things which are of
spiritual wisdom, 39. These interiors, which in themselves are
spiritual, are opened by the Lord alone, 340, 341.

INTERNAL PRINCIPLES, man's, by which are meant the things appertaining
to his mind or spirit, are elevated in a superior degree above his
external principles, 185.

INTREPIDITY is one of the moral virtues which have respect to life, and
enter into it, 164.

IRON.--Age of iron, 78.

ISRAELITISH NATION.--Why it was permitted to the Israelitish nation to
marry a plurality of wives, 340.

ITALIANS, 103, 106. Italian eunuchs, 156.

JAMES, the Apostle, represented charity, 119.

JEALOUSY, concerning, 357-379. The zeal of conjugial love is called
jealousy, 367. Jealousy is like a burning fire against those who infest
love exercised towards a married partner, and it is a horrid fear for
the loss of that love, 368. There is a spiritual jealousy with
monogamists, and natural with polygamists, 369, 370. Jealousy with those
married partners who tenderly love each other is a just grief grounded
in sound reason lest conjugial love should be divided, and should
thereby perish, 371, 372. Jealousy with married partners who do not love
each other is grounded in several causes, proceeding in some instances
from various mental sickness, 373, 375. Jealousy with men resides in the
understanding, 372. In some instances there is not any jealousy, and
this also from various causes, 376. There is a jealousy also in regard
to concubines, but not such as in regard to wives, 377. Jealousy
likewise exists among beasts and birds, 378. The jealousy prevalent with
men and husbands is different from what is prevalent with women and
wives, 379.

JEHOVAH.--The Lord is Jehovah from eternity, 29. Why Jehovah is said to
be jealous, 366.

JERUSALEM, the New, signifies the new church of the Lord, 43, 534.

JESUIT, 499.

JESUS CHRIST.--The divine trinity is in Jesus Christ, in whom Dwells all
the fulness of the Godhead bodily, 24. See _God, Lord_.

JEW, a, may be recognized by his look, 202.

JOB.--The doctrine of correspondences, of which the spiritual sense of
the Word is composed, has been concealed now for some thousands of
years, namely, since the time of Job, 532.

JOHN, the Apostle, represented the works of charity, 119. He represented
the church as to the goods of charity, John xix. 26, 27, 119.

JOY, heavenly, 2, and following. Heavenly joy consists in the delight of
doing something that is useful to ourselves and others, which delight
derives its essence from love, and its existence from wisdom, 5. The
delight of being useful, originating in love and operating by wisdom, is
the very soul and life of all heavenly joys, 5.

JUDGE, a, gives sentence according to actions done, but every one after
death is judged according to the intentions; thus a judge may absolve a
person, who after death is condemned, and _vice versa_, 485, 527. Unjust
judges, their fate in the other life, 231.

JUDGE, to.--It is permitted to every one to judge of the moral and civil
life of another in the world, but to judge what is the quality of his
interior mind or soul, thus what is the quality of any one's spiritual
state, and thence what is his lot after death, is not allowed, 523. No
one is to be judged of from the wisdom of his conversation, but of his
life in union therewith, 499. After death every one is judged according
to the intentions of the will, and thence of the understanding; and
according to the confirmations of the understanding, and thence of the
will, 485.

JUDGMENT.--Difference between corporeal judgment, and judgment of the
mind, 57. By corporeal judgment is meant the judgment of the mind
according to the external senses, which judgment is gross and dull, 57.
See _Justice and Judgment_.

JUDICIAL PROCEEDINGS.--In heaven there are judicial proceedings, 207,
231.

JURISPRUDENCE is one of the sciences by which, as by doors, an entrance
is made into things rational, which are the ground of rational wisdom,
164.

Madame Degardy instantly pushed back her head.

"Don't get his breath--that's death, idiot!" she said, and began to
pour the liquid into Valmond's mouth very slowly.

It was a tedious process at first, but at length he began to swallow
naturally, and finished the cup.

There was no change for an hour, and then he became less restless. After
another cupful, his eyes half opened.

Within an hour a perspiration came, and he was very quiet, and
sleeping easily.

Parpon crouched near the door, watching it all with deep, piercing
eyes.

Madame Degardy never moved from her place, but stood shaking her head and
muttering.

At last Lagroin came, and whisperingly asked after his chief; then,
seeing him in a healthy and peaceful sleep, he stooped and kissed the
hand lying upon the blanket.

"Beloved sire!

Thank the good God!"

he said. Soon after he had gone, there was a noise of tramping about the
tent, and then a suppressed cheer, which was fiercely stopped by Parpon,
and the soldiers of the Household Troops scattered to their tents.

"What's that?" asked Valmond, opening his eyes bewilderedly.

"Your soldiers, sire," answered the dwarf.

Valmond smiled languidly. Then he saw Madame Degardy and Elise.

"I am very sleepy, dear friends," he said, with a courteous,
apologetic gesture, and closed his eyes. Presently they opened again. "My
snuff-box--in my pocket," he said to the old woman, waving a hand to
where his uniform hung from the tent-pole; "it is for you, madame."

She understood, smiled grimly, felt in a waistcoat pocket, found the
snuff-box, and, squatting on the ground like a tailor, she took
two pinches, and sat holding the antique silver box in her hand.

"Crazy Joan's no fool, dear lad," she said at last, and took another pinch,
and knowingly nodded her head again and again, while he slept
soundly.

CHAPTER XIV
"Lights Out!"
The bugle-call rang softly down the valley, echoed away tenderly
in the hills, and was lost in the distance.

Roused by the clear call, Elise rose from watching beside Valmond's
couch, and turned towards the door of the tent.

The spring of a perfect joy at his safety had been followed by an aching
in all her body and a trouble at her heart. Her feet were like lead,
her spirit quivered and shrank by turn.

The light of the campfires sent a glow through the open doorway
upon the face of the sleeper.

She leaned over him. The look she gave him seemed to her anxious spirit
like a farewell. This man had given her a new life, and out of
it had come a new sight. Valmond had escaped death, but in her poor
confused way she felt another storm gathering about him. A hundred feelings
possessed her; but one thought was master of them all: when trouble
drew round him, she must be near him, must be strong to help him,
protect him, if need be.

Yet a terrible physical weakness was on her.

Her limbs trembled, her head ached, her heart throbbed in a sickening
way.

He stirred in his sleep; a smile passed over his face.

She wondered what gave it birth. She knew well it was not for her,
that smile. It belonged to his dream of success--when a thousand banners
should flaunt in the gardens of the Tuileries.

Overcome by a sudden rush of emotion, she fell on her knees at his side,
bursting into noiseless sobs, which shook her from head to foot.

Every nerve in her body responded to the shock of feeling; she was having
her dark hour alone.

At last she staggered to her feet and turned to the open door. The
tents lay silent in the moonshine, but wayward lights flickered
in the sumptuous dusk, and the quiet of the hills hung like a canopy
over the bivouac of the little army.

No token of misfortune came out of this peaceful encampment, no
omen of disaster crossed the long lane of drowsy fires and huge amorous
shadows.

The sense of doom was in the girl's own heart, not in this deep cradle of
the hills.

Now and again a sentinel crossed the misty line of vision, silent, and
majestically tall, in the soft haze, which came down from Dalgrothe
Mountain and fell like a delicate silver veil before the face of the
valley.

As she looked, lost in a kind of dream, there floated up from the
distant tent the refrain she knew so well:

"Oh, say, where goes your love?
O gai, vine le roi!"
Her hand caught her bosom as if to stifle a sudden pain. That song
had been the keynote to her new life, and it seemed now as if it were
also to be the final benediction. All her spirit gathered itself up
for a great resolution: she would not yield to this invading
weakness, this misery of body and mind.

Some one drew out of the shadows and came towards her.

It was Madame Degardy.

She had seen the sobbing figure inside the tent, but, with the
occasional wisdom of the foolish of this world, she had not been
less considerate than the children of light.

With brusque, kindly taps of her stick, she drove the girl to her own
tent, and bade her sleep: but sleep was not for Elise that night; and
in the grey dawn, while yet no one was stirring in the camp, she
passed slowly down the valley to her home.

Madame Chalice was greatly troubled also. Valmond's life was saved. In
three days he was on his feet, eager and ardent again, and preparing
to go to the village; but what would the end of it all be? She knew
of De la Riviere's intentions, and she foresaw a crisis. If Valmond were
in very truth a Napoleon, all might be well, though this crusade must
close here.
If he were an impostor, things would go cruelly hard with him.

Impostor?
Strange how, in spite of all evidence against him, she still felt a vital
sureness in him somewhere; a radical reality, a convincing quality
of presence.

At times he seemed like an actor playing his own character. She could
never quite get rid of that feeling.

In her anxiety--for she was in the affair for good or ill--she went
again to Monsieur Garon.

"You believe in Monsieur Valmond, dear avocat?" she asked.

The little man looked at her admiringly, though his admiration was
a quaint, Arcadian thing; and, perching his head on one side
abstractedly, he answered:

"Ah, yes, ah, yes!

Such candour! He is the son of Napoleon and a certain princess, born
after Napoleon's fall, not long before his death."
"Then, of course, Monsieur Valmond is really nameless?" she asked.

"Ah, there is the point--the only point; but His Excellency can clear up
all that, and will do so in good time, he says. He maintains that
France will accept him."
"But the Government here, will they put him down? proceed against him?
Can they?"
"Ah, yes, I fear they can proceed against him. He may recruit
men, but he may not drill and conspire, you see. Yet"--the old man
smiled, as though at some distant and pleasing prospect "the cause is a
great one; it is great. Ah, madame, dear madame"--he got to his
feet and stepped into the middle of the floor--"he has the true Napoleonic
spirit. He loves it all.
At the very first, it seemed as if he were going to be a little ridiculous;
now it is as if there was but one thing for him--love of France and
loyalty to the cause. Ah, think of the glories of the Empire!
of France as the light of Europe, of Napoleon making her rich and proud
and dominant! And think of her now, sinking into the wallow of
bourgeois vulgarity!

If--if, as His Excellency said, the light were to come from here, even
from this far corner of the world, from this old France, to be the torch
of freedom once again--from our little parish here!"
His face was glowing, his thin hands made a quick gesture of charmed
anticipation.

Madame Chalice looked at him in a sort of wonder and delight. Dreamers
all! And this visionary Napoleon had come into the little man's quiet,
cultured, passive life, and had transformed him, filled him with adventure
and patriotism. There must be something behind Valmond, some real, even
some great thing, or this were not possible. It was not surprising
that she, with the spirit of dreams and romance deep in her, should be
sympathetic, even carried away for the moment.

"How is the feeling in the country since his illness?" she asked.

"Never so strong as now. Many new recruits come to him. Organisation
goes on, and His Excellency has issued a proclamation. I have
advised him against that--it is not necessary, it is illegal. He
should not tempt our Government too far. But he is a gentleman of
as great simplicity as courage, of directness and virtue--a
wholesome soldier--"
She thought again of that moonlit night, and Elise's window, and a kind
of hatred of the man came up in her. No, no, she was wrong; he
was not the true thing.

"Dear avocat," she said suddenly, "you are a good friend. May I have
always as good! But have you ever thought that this thing may end in sore
disaster? Are we doing right? Is the man worthy our friendship and our
adherence?"
"Ah, dear madame, convictions, principles, truth, they lead to good
ends--somewhere. I have a letter here from Monsieur Valmond. It
breathes noble things; it has humour, too--ah, yes, so quaint! I am to
see him this afternoon--he returns to the Louis Quinze to-day. The
Cure and I--"
She laid her hand on his arm, interrupting him. "Will you take me this
evening to Monsieur Valmond, dear friend?" she asked.

She saw now how useless it was to attempt anything through these
admirers of Valmond; she must do it herself. He must be firmly and finally
warned and dissuaded. The conviction had suddenly come to her with great
force, that the end was near--come to her as it came to Elise. Her
wise mind had seen the sure end; Elise's heart had felt it.

The avocat readily promised. She was to call for him at a little before
eight o'clock. But she decided that she would first seek Elise; before
she accused the man, she would question the woman. Above and beyond
all anger she felt at this miserable episode, there was pity in her heart
for the lonely girl. She was capable of fierce tempers, of great caprices,
of even wild injustice, when her emotions had their way with her; but her
heart was large, her nature deep and broad, and her instincts kind. The
little touch of barbarism in her gave her, too, a sense of primitive
justice. She was self-analytical, critical of life and conduct, yet her
mind and her heart, when put to the great test, were above mere
anatomising. Her rich nature, alive with these momentous events, feeling
the prescience of coming crisis, sent a fine glow into her face, into
her eyes. Excitement gave a fresh elasticity to her step.

In spite of her serious thoughts, she looked very young, almost irresponsible.
No ordinary observer could guess the mind that lay behind the eloquent,
glowing eyes. Even the tongue at first deceived, till it began to probe,
to challenge, to drop sharp, incisive truths in little gold-leaped
pellets, which brought conviction when the gold-leaf wore off.

The sunlight made her part of the brilliant landscape, and she
floated into it, neither too dainty nor too luxurious. The greatest
heat of the day was past, and she was walking slowly under the maples,
on the way to Elise's home, when she was arrested by a voice near her.
Then a tall figure leaped the fence, and came to her with outstretched
hand and an unmistakable smile of pleasure.

"I've called at the Manor twice, and found you out; so I took to
the highway," said the voice gaily.

"My dear Seigneur," she answered, with mock gravity, "ancestors' habits
show in time."
"Come, that's severe, isn't it?"
"You have waylaid me in a lonely place, master highwayman!" she said,
with a torturing sweetness.

He had never seen her so radiantly debonnaire; yet her heart was full of
annoying anxiety.

"There's so much I want to say to you," he answered more seriously.

"So very much?"
"Very much indeed."
She looked up the road. "I can give you ten minutes," she said.
"Suppose we walk up and down under these trees.

It is shady and quiet here. Now proceed, monsieur. Is it my money or
my life?"
"You are in a charming mood to-day."

"Which is more than I could say for you the last time we met. You threatened,
stormed, were childish, impossible to a degree."
His face became grave. "We were such good friends once!"
"Once--once?" she asked maliciously. "Once Cain and Abel were a happy
family. When was that once?"
"Two years ago. What talks we had then! I had so looked forward to your
coming again. It was the alluring thing in my life, your arrival,"
he went on; "but something came between."
His tone nettled her. He talked as if he had some distant claim on
her.

"Something came between?" she repeated slowly, mockingly. "That sounds
melodramatic indeed. What was it came between--a coach-and-four, or a
grand army?"
"Nothing so stately," he answered, piqued by her tone: "a filibuster
and his ragamuffins."
"Ragamufins would be appreciated by Monsieur Valmond's followers, spoken
at the four corners," she answered.

"Then I'll change it," he said: "a ragamuffin and his filibusters."

"The 'ragamuffin' always speaks of his enemies with courtesy, and the
filibusters love their leader," was her pointed rejoinder.

"At half a dollar a day," he answered sharply.

"They get that much from His Excellency, do they?"

she asked in real surprise. "That doesn't look like filibustering, does
it?"

"'His Excellency!'" he retorted. "Why won't you look this matter straight
in the face? Napoleon or no Napoleon, the end of this thing is ruin."

"Take care that you don't get lost in the debris," she said bitingly.

"I can take care of myself. I am sorry to have you mixed up in it."
"You are sorry? How good of you! How paternal!"
"If your husband were here--"
"If my husband were here, you would probably be his best friend,"
she rejoined, with acid sweetness; "and I should still have to take care
of myself."
Had he no sense of what was possible to leave unsaid to a woman? She was
very angry, though she was also a little sorry for him; for perhaps in
the long run he would be in the right.

But he must pay for his present stupidity.

"You wrong me," he answered, with a quick burst of feeling. "You
are most unfair. You punish me because I do my public duty; and because
I would do anything in the world for you, you punish me the more. Have
you forgotten two years ago? Is it so easy to your hand, a true and
constant admiration, a sincere homage, that you throw it aside
like--"
"Monsieur De la Riviere," she said, with exasperating deliberation, her
eyes having a dangerous light, "your ten minutes is more than up.
And it has been quite ten minutes too long."

"If I were a filibuster"--he answered bitterly and suggestively.

She interrupted him, saying, with a purring softness: "If you had only
courage enough--" 
He waved his hand angrily.

"If I had, I should hope you would prove a better friend to me
than you are to this man."

"Ah, in what way do I fail towards 'this man'?"

"By encouraging his downfall. See--I know I am taking my life in my
hands, as it were, but I tell you this thing will do you harm when
it goes abroad."

She felt the honesty of his words, though they angered her. He
seemed to impute some personal interest in Valmond. She would not have
it from any man in the world.

"If you will pick up my handkerchief--ah, thank you!

We must travel different roads in this matter.

You have warned; let me prophesy.

His Highness Valmond Napoleon will come out of this with more honour
than yourself."

"Thanks to you, then," he said gallantly, for he admired her very
stubbornness.

"Thanks to himself. I honestly believe that you will be ashamed of your
part in this, one day."
"In any case, I will force the matter to a conclusion," he answered
firmly.

"The fantastic thing must end."
"When?"
"Within a few days."

"When all is over, perhaps you will have the honesty to come and tell me
which was right--you or I. Goodbye."
Elise was busy at her kitchen fire. She looked up, startled, as her
visitor entered. Her heavy brow grew heavier, her eyes gleamed sulkily,
as she dragged herself forward with weariness, and stood silent and
resentful. Why had this lady of the Manor come to her? Madame Chalice
scarcely knew how to begin, for, in truth, she wanted to be the girl's
friend, and she feared making her do or say some wild thing.

She looked round the quiet room. Some fruit was boiling on a stove,
giving out a fragrant savour, and Elise's eye was on it mechanically.
A bit of sewing lay across a chair, and on the wall hung a military
suit of the old sergeant, beside it a short sabre. An old Tricolor was
draped from a beam, and one or two maps of France were pinned on
the wall.

She fastened her look on the maps. They seemed to be her cue.

"Have you any influence with your uncle?" she asked.

Elise remained gloomily silent.

"Because," Madame Chalice went on smoothly, ignoring her silence, "I
think it would be better for him to go back to Ville Bambord--I am
sure of it."
The girl's lip curled angrily. What right had this great lady to interfere
with her or hers? What did she mean?

"My uncle is a general and a brave man; he can take care of himself,"
she answered defiantly. Madame Chalice did not smile at the title. She
admired the girl's courage. She persisted however. "He is one man, and--"

"He has plenty of men, madame, and His Excellency--"
"His Excellency and hundreds of men cannot stand, if the Government
send soldiers against them."
"Why should the Gover'ment do that? They're only going to France;
they mean no trouble here."
"They have no right to drill and conspire here, my girl."
"Well, my uncle and his men will fight; we'll all fight," Elise
retorted, her hands grasping the arms of the rocking-chair she sat
in.
"But why shouldn't we avoid fighting? What is there to fight for?
You are all very happy here. You were very happy here before Monsieur
Valmond came. Are you happy now?"
Madame Chalice's eyes searched the flushed face anxiously. She was
growing more eager every moment to serve, if she could, this splendid
creature.

"We would die for him!" answered the girl quickly.
"You would die for him," came the reply, slowly, meaningly.
"And what's it to you, if I would?" came the sharp retort. "Why do
you fine folk meddle yourselves with poor folk's affairs?"
Then, remembering she was a hostess, with the instinctive courtesy
of her race, she said: "Ah, pardon, madame; you meant nothing, I'm
sure."
"Why should fine folk make poor folk unhappy?" said Madame Chalice,
quietly and sorrowfully, for she saw that Elise was suffering, and
all the woman in her came to her heart and lips. She laid her hand
on the girl's arm. "Indeed yes, why should fine folk make poor folk
unhappy? It is not I alone who makes you unhappy, Elise."
The girl angrily shook off the hand, for she read the true significance
of the words.
"What are you trying to find out?" she asked fiercely. "What do you
want to do? Did I ever come in your way? Why do you come into mine?
What's my life to you? Nothing, nothing at all. You're here to-day
and away to-morrow. You're English; you're not of us. Can't you see
that I want to be left alone?
"If I were unhappy, I could look after myself. But I'm not, I'm
not--I tell you I'm not! I'm happy. I never knew what happiness was
till now.
I'm so happy that I can stand here and not insult you, though you've
insulted me."
"I meant no insult, Elise. I want to help you; that is all. I know
how hard it is to confide in one's kinsfolk, and I wish with all
my heart I might be your friend, if you ever need me."
Elise met her sympathetic look clearly and steadily. "Speak plain
to me, madame," she said.
"Elise, I saw some one climb out of your bedroom window," was the
slow reply.
"Oh, my God!" said the girl; "oh, my God!" and she stared blankly
for a moment at Madame Chalice. Then, trembling greatly, she reached
to the table for a cup of water.
Madame Chalice was at once by her side. "You are ill, poor girl,"
she said anxiously, and put her arm around her.

Elise drew away.
"I will tell you all, madame, all; and you must believe it, for,
as God is my judge, it is the truth." Then she told the whole story,
exactly as it happened, save mention of the kisses that Valmond had
given her. Her eyes now and again filled with tears, and she tried,
in her poor untutored way, to set him right. She spoke for him
altogether, not for herself; and her listener saw that the bond
which held the girl to the man might be proclaimed in the streets,
with no dishonour.
"That's the story, and that's the truth," said Elise at last. "He's
a gentleman, a great man, and I'm a poor girl, and there can be
nothing between us; but I'd die for him."
She no longer resented Madame Chalice's solicitude: she was passive,
and showed that she wished to be alone.There are three things of which every man consists, the soul, the
mind, and the body; his inmost principle is the soul, his middle is the
mind, and his ultimate is the body, 101. As the soul is man's inmost
principle, it is from its origin celestial; as the mind is his middle
principle, it is from its origin spiritual; and as the body is his
ultimate principle, it is from its origin natural, 158. The supreme
principles in man are turned upwards to God, the middle principles
outwards to the world, and the lowest principles downwards to self, 269.
In man are all the affections of love, and thence all the perceptions of
wisdom, compounded in the most perfect order, so as to make together
what is unanimous, and thereby a one, 361. Man, as to the affections and
thoughts of his mind, is in the midst of angels and spirits, and is so
consociated with them, that were he to be plucked asunder from them, he
would instantly die, 28. Man was created for uses, 249. Man is male and
female, 32. The male man and the female man were so created, that from
two they may become as it were one man, or one flesh; and when they
become one, then, taken together, they are a man (_homo_) in his
fulness; but without such conjunctions they are two, and each is a
divided or half man, 37. Man was born to be wisdom, and the woman to be
the love of the man's wisdom, 75. Man is such as his love is, and not
such as his understanding is, 269. The natural man, separate from the
spiritual, is only man as to the understanding, and not as to the will;
such a one is only half man, 432. A spiritual man is sensible of, and
perceives spiritual delight, which is a thousand times superior to
natural delight, 29. Man lives a man after death, 28. Man after death is
not a natural man, but a spiritual or substantial man, 31. A spiritual
or substantial man sees a spiritual or substantial man, as a natural or
material man sees a natural or material man, 31. Man after death puts
off every thing which does not agree with his love, yea, he successively
puts on the countenance, the tone of voice, the speech, the gestures,
and the manners of the love proper to his life, 36; instead of a
material body he enjoys a substantial one, wherein natural delight
grounded in spiritual is made sensible in its eminence, 475. Men left in
the forests when they were about two or three years old, 151*, 152*.
Difference between men and beasts, 133, 134, 498.

MARRIAGE-APARTMENT of the will and understanding, 270.

MARRIAGE is the fulness of man (_homo_), for by it a man becomes a full
man, 156; thus a state of marriage is preferable to a state of celibacy,
156. Consent is the essential of marriage, and all succeeding ceremonies
are its formalities, 21. The covenant of marriage is for life, 276.
Marriages in themselves are spiritual, and thence holy, 53. Marriages
are the seminaries of the human race, and thence also the seminaries of
the heavenly kingdom, 481. Marriages made in the world are for the most
part external, and not at the same time internal, when yet it is the
internal conjunction, or conjunction of souls, which constitutes a real
marriage, 49, 274. Marriages interiorly conjunctive can hardly be
entered into in the world, the reason why, 320, 49. Of reiterated
marriages, 317-325. There are in the world infernal marriages between
married partners, who interiorly are the most inveterate enemies, and
exteriorly are as the closest friends, 292. Of marriages in heaven,
27-41. How in heaven marriages from love truly conjugial are provided by
the Lord, 229, 316. Spiritual prolification of love and wisdom from
marriages in heaven, 52. Beneath heaven there are no marriages
(_conjugia_), 192. Concerning the marriage of the Lord and the church,
and the correspondence thereof, 116-131.

MARRIAGE, the, of God and truth, 83, 115. The reason why it has been
heretofore unknown, 83. How it takes place with man, 122, 123. It is the
church with man, and is the same thing as the marriage of charity and
faith, 62. The marriage of good and truth is in every thing of the Word,
516; from this marriage proceed all the loves which constitute heaven
and the church with man, 65. The marriage of good and truth flows into
every thing of the universe, 220, 84. To be given in marriage signifies
to enter heaven, where the marriage of good and truth takes place, 44.

MARRIED PARTNERS, two, who are principled in love truly conjugial, are
actually forms of the marriage of good and truth, or of love and wisdom,
66, 101, 102. The will of the wife conjoins itself with the
understanding of the man, and thence the understanding of the man with
the will of the wife, 159, 160. Love is inspired into the man by his
wife, 161. The conjunction of the wife with the man's rational principle
is from within, 165. The wife is conjoined to her husband by the sphere
of her life flowing forth from the love of him, 171-173. There are
duties proper to the man, and duties proper to the wife; the wife cannot
enter into the duties proper to the man, nor can the man enter into the
duties proper to the wife, so as to perform them aright, 174, 175.
Marriage induces other forms in the souls and minds of married partners,
192. The woman is actually formed into a wife according to the
description in the book of creation, Gen. ii. 21, 22, 23, 193. Two
married partners in heaven are called, not two angels, but one angel,
50. Two married partners most commonly meet after death, know each
other, again associate, &c. 49. If they can live together, they remain
married partners, but if they cannot, they separate themselves, 49, 51,
52.

MARROW, spinal, 315.--The marrows represent the interiors of the mind
and of the body, 312.

MARRY, to.--When a man marries he becomes a fuller man, because he is
joined with a consort, with whom he acts as one man, 59. See _Marriage_.

MARY signifies the church, 119.

MATERIALS.--Substantials are the beginnings of materials, 328. Natural
things, which are material, cannot enter into spiritual things, which
are substantial. 328, Material things originate in substantial, 207.

MATERIAL things derive their origin from things substantial, 207.

MECHANICS is one of the sciences by which an entrance is made into
things rational, which are the ground of rational wisdom. 163.

MEATS,--There are in heaven, as in the world, both meats and drinks, 6.
See _Food._

MEDIUMS are conducive to what is first in itself, 98.

MEDIUM, the, of conjunction of the Lord with man, is the Word, 128.

MEDULLARY substance of the brain, 315.

METEOR in the spiritual world, 315.

MIND, the, is intermediate between the soul and the body, 178; although
it appears to be in the head, it is actually in the whole body, 178,
260. The human mind is distinguished into regions, as the world is
distinguished into regions as to the atmospheres, 188, 270; the supreme
region of the mind is called celestial, the middle region spiritual, and
the lowest region natural, 270, 305. The mind is successively opened
from infancy even to extreme old age, 102. As a man advances from
science into intelligence, and from intelligence into wisdom, so also
his mind changes its form, 94. With some, the mind is closed from
beneath, and is sometimes twisted as a spire into the adverse principle;
with others that principle is not closed, but remains half open above,
and with some open, 203. With men there is an elevation of the mind into
superior light, and with women there is an elevation of the mind into
superior heat, 188. The mind of every man, according to his will and
consequent understanding, actually dwells in one society of the
spiritual world, and intends and thinks in like manner with those who
compose the society, 530. The lower principles of the mind are unchaste,
but its higher principles chaste, 302. Every man has an internal and an
external mind, with the wicked the internal mind is insane, and the
external is wise; but with the good the internal mind is wise, and from
this also the external, 477. With the ancients, the science of
correspondences conjoined the sensual things of the body with the
perceptions of the mind, and procured intelligence, 76.

_Obs._--The mind is composed of two faculties which make man to be man,
namely, the will and the understanding. The mind composed of the
spiritual will and of the spiritual understanding, is the internal man;
it incloses the inmost man or soul (_anima_), and it is inclosed by the
natural mind or external man, composed of the natural will and
understanding. This natural mind, together with a sort of mind still
more exterior, called the _animus_, which is formed by the external
affections and inclinations resulting from education, society, and
custom, is the external mind. The whole organized in a perfect human
form, is called spirit (_spiritus_). The spirit in our world is covered
with a terrestrial body, which renders it invisible; but, freed from
this body by natural death, it enters the spiritual world, where its
spiritual body is perfectly visible and tactile.

MIRACLES.--Why there are none in the present day, 535.

MIRE.--In hell lascivious delights are represented under the appearance
of mire, &c., 480.

MISTRESS, 459.

MODESTY is one of those virtues which have respect to life, and enter
into it, 164.

MONASTERIES.--What becomes in the other life of those who have been shut
up in monasteries, 54, 155. Virgins devoted to the monastic life, 513.

MONOGAMISTS.--All in heaven live married to one wife, 77.

MONOGAMICAL marriages, 70, 77, 141. They correspond to the marriage of
the Lord and the church, and originate in the marriages of good and
truth, 70.

MONOGAMY.--Why monogamy exists with Christian nations, 337-339.

MOTE.--Wonderful things respecting it, 329.

MOTHER.--The church in the world is called mother, 118, 119.

MORALITY, genuine, is the wisdom of life, 383. Spiritual morality is the
result of a life from the Lord according to the truths of the Word, 293.

MULTIPLICABLE.--Every thing is multiplicable _in infinitum_, 185.

MUNIFICENCE is one of those virtues which have respect to life, and
enter into it, 164.

MUSES, nine, or virgins represent knowledges and sciences of every kind,
182.

NAKEDNESS signifies innocence, 413.

NATURAL, the, derives its origin from the spiritual, 320. Difference
between the natural and spiritual, 326-329. The natural principle is
distinguished into three degrees; the so-called natural, the natural
sensual, and the natural-corporeal, 442. The natural man is nothing but
an abode and receptacle of concupiscences and lusts, 448. There are
three degrees of the natural man, 496. Those who love only the world,
placing their heart in wealth, are properly meant by the natural, 496;
they pour forth into the world all things of the will and understanding,
covetously and fraudulently acquiring wealth, and regarding no other use
therein, and thence but that of possession, 496.

NATURE is the recipient whereby love and wisdom produce their effects or
uses, 380; thus nature is derived from life, and not life from nature,
380. All the parts of nature derive their subsistence and existence from
the sun, 380. Nature is in all time, in time, and in all space, in
space, 328. Nature, with her time and space, must of necessity have a
beginning and a birth, 328. Wherefore nature is from God, not from
eternity, but in time, that is, together with her time and space, 328.

NECESSITY for apparent love and friendship in marriages, for the sake of
order being preserved in houses, 271, and following, 283.

NEMESIS, 504.

NOVITIATES, 182.--Novitiate spirit, 461. See _Spirits_.

NUPTIALS celebrated in heaven, 19-25. There are nuptials in the heavens
as in the earths, but only with those in the heavens who are in the
marriage of good and truth; nor are any others angels, 44. By the words
of the Lord, "Those who shall be accounted worthy to attain another age,
neither marry nor are given in marriage," no other nuptials are meant
than spiritual nuptials, and by spiritual nuptials is meant conjunction
with the Lord, 41. These spiritual nuptials take place in the earths,
but not after departure thence, thus not in the heavens, 44. To
celebrate nuptials signifies to be joined with the Lord, 41. To enter
into nuptials is to be received into heaven by the Lord, 41. Why
nuptials in the world are essential solemnities, 306.

OBSTRUCTIONS of inmost life, whence they proceed, 313.

OCCIPUT, 267, 444.

OCHIM, the, in hell, represent the images of the phantasies of the
internals, 264, 430.

ODE sung by virgins in the spiritual world, 207.

ODORS, the, whereby the chaste pleasures of conjugial love are presented
to the senses in the spiritual world, are the perfumes arising from
fruits, and the fragrances from flowers, 430.

OFFENSIVE appearances, odors, and forms, under which unchaste delights
are presented to the view in hell, 430.

OFFICES and employments in the spiritual world, 207.

OFFSPRINGS, the, derived from the Lord as a husband and father, and from
the church as a wife and mother, are all spiritual, 120. The spiritual
offsprings which are born from the Lord's marriage with the church are
truths and goods, 121. From the marriages of the angels in the heavens
are generated spiritual offsprings, which are those of love and wisdom,
or of good and truth, 65. Spiritual offsprings, which are produced from
the marriages of the angels, are such things as are of wisdom from the
father, and of love from the mother, 211. See _Storge_.

OIL signifies good, 44.

OLD men, decrepit, and infirm old women are restored by the Lord to the
power of their age, when from a religious principle they have shunned
adulteries as enormous sins, 137.

OLIVE-TREES in the spiritual world represent conjugial love in the
highest region, 270,

ONE, the, from whom all things have life and from whom form coheres, is
the Lord, 524. In heaven two married partners are called two when they
are named husband and wife, but one when they are named angels, 177.
When the will of two married partners become one, they become one man
(_homo_), 196.

OPERATIONS, all, in the universe have a progression from ends through
causes into effects, 400.

OPINIONS on celestial joys and eternal happiness, 3.

OPPOSITE.--There is not any thing in the universe which has not its
opposite, 425. Opposites, in regard to each other, are not relatives,
but contraries, 425. When an opposite acts upon an opposite, one
destroys the other even to the last spark of its life, 255. Marriages
and adulteries are diametrically opposite to each other, 255.

OPPOSITION of adulterous love and conjugial love, 423-443.

OPULENCE in heaven is the faculty of growing wise, according to which
faculty wealth is given in abundance, 250.

ORCHESTRA, 315.

ORDER, all, proceeds from first principles to last, and the last becomes
the first of some following order, 311. All things of a middle order are
the last of a prior order, 311. There is successive order and
simultaneous order; the latter is from the former and according to it,
314. In successive order, one thing follows after another from what is
highest to what is lowest, 314. In simultaneous order, one thing is next
to another from what is inmost to what is outermost, 314. Successive
order is like a column with steps from the highest to the lowest, 314.
Simultaneous order is like a work cohering from the centre to the
superficies, 314. Successive order becomes simultaneous in the ultimate,
the highest things of successive order become the inmost of simultaneous
order, and the lowest things of successive order become the outermost of
simultaneous order, 314. Successive order of conjugial love, 305, 311.

ORGANIZATION, the, of the life of man according to his love, cannot be
changed after death, 524. A change of organization cannot possibly be
effected, except in the material body, and is utterly impossible in the
spiritual body after the former has been rejected, 524.

ORGANS.--Such as conjugial love is in the minds or spirits of two
persons, such is it interiorly in its organs, 310. In these organs are
terminated the forms of the mind with those who are principled in
conjugial love, 310.

ORIGIN of evil, 444. Origin of conjugial love, 60, 61, 83, 103-114, 183,
238. Origin of the Mahometan religion, 342. Origin of the beauty of the
female sex, 381-384.

OUTERMOST, the, lowest things of successive order become the outermost
of simultaneous order, 314.

_Obs._--The outermost is predicated of what is most exterior, in
opposition to the inmost, or that which is most interior.

OWLS in the spiritual world are correspondences and consequent
appearances of the thoughts of confirmators, 233.

PAGANS, the, who acknowledge a God and live according to the civil laws
of justice, are saved, 351.

PALACE representative of conjugial love, 270. Small palace inhabited by
two novitiate conjugial partners, 316. Description of the palace of a
celestial society, 12.

PALLADIUM, 151*.

PALM-TREES, in the spiritual world, represent conjugial love of the
middle region, 270.

PALMS OF THE HANDS, in the, resides with wives a sixth sense, which is a
sense of all the delights of the conjugial love of the husband, 151*.

PAPER on which was written arcana at this day revealed by the Lord, 533.
Paper bearing this inscription, "The marriage of Good and Truth," 115.

PARADISE, spiritually understood, is intelligence, 353. Paradise on the
confines of heaven, 8.

PARALYSIS, 253, 470.

PARCHMENT IN HEAVEN.--Roll of parchment containing arcana of wisdom
concerning conjugial love, 43. Sheet of parchment, on which were the
rules of the people of the first age, 77.

PARNASSIDES, sports of the, in the spiritual world, 207. These sports
were spiritual exercises and trials of skill, 207.

PARNASSUS, 151*, 182, 207.

PARTICULARS are in universals as parts in a whole, 261. Whoever knows
universals, may afterwards comprehend particulars, 261.

_Obs._--Particulars taken together are called universals.

PARTNER.--Those who have lived in love truly conjugial, after the death
of their married partners, are unwilling to enter into iterated
marriages, the reason why, 321. See _Married Partners_.

PATHOLOGY, 253.

PEACE is the blessed principle of every delight which is of good, 394.
Peace, because it proceeds immediately from the Lord, is one of the two
inmost principles of heaven, 394. Peace in their homes gives serenity to
the minds of husbands, and disposes them to receive agreeably the
kindnesses offered by their wives, 285. Peace is in conjugial love, and
relates to the soul, 180.

PEGASUS.--By the winged horse Pegasus the ancients meant the
understanding of truth, by which comes wisdom; by the hoofs of his feet
they understood experiences, whereby comes natural intelligence, 182.

PELLICACY, 459, 460, 462.

PERCEPTION, common, is the same thing us influx from heaven into the
interiors of the mind, 28. By virtue of this perception, man inwardly in
himself perceives truths, and as it were sees them, 28. All have not
common perception, 147. There is an internal perception of love, and an
external perception, which sometimes hides the internal, 49. The
external perception of love originates in those things which regard the
love of the world, and of the body, 49.

_Obs._--Perception is a sensation derived from the Lord alone, and has
relation to the good and true, _A.C._ 104. Perception consists in seeing
that a truth is true, and that a good is good; also that an evil is
evil, and a false is false, _A.C._ 7680. Its opposite is phantasy. See
_Phantasy, obs_.

PEREGRINATIONS of man in the societies of the spiritual world, during
his life in the natural world, 530.

PERIODS whereby creation is preserved in the state foreseen and provided
for, 400, 401.

PERIOSTEUMS, 511.

PETER, the Apostle, represented truth and faith, 119.

PHANTASY, 267.--Those are in the phantasy of their respective
concupiscences who think interiorly in themselves, and too much indulge
their imagination by discoursing with themselves; for these separate
their spirit almost from connection with the body, and by vision
overflow the understanding, 267. What is the fate of those after death
who have given themselves up to their phantasy, 268, 514. Errors which
phantasy has introduced through ignorance of the spiritual world and of
its sun, 422.

_Obs._--Phantasy is an appearance of perception: it consists in seeing
what is true as false, and what is good as evil and what is evil as
good, and what is false as true, _A.C._. 7680.

PHANTOMS.--Who those are who in the other life appear as phantoms, 514.

PHILOSOPHERS, difference between, and _Sophi_, 130. The ancient people,
who acknowledged the wisdom of reason as wisdom, were called
philosophers, 180. See _Sophi_.

PHILOSOPHICAL considerations concerning the abstract substance, form,
subject. &c., 66, 186.

PHILOSOPHY is one of those sciences by which an entrance is made into
things rational, which are the grounds of rational wisdom, 163.

PHYSICS is one of the sciences by which an entrance is made into things
rational, which are the ground of rational wisdom, 163.

PLACE.--In the spiritual world there are places as in the natural world,
otherwise there could be no habitations and distinct abodes, 10.
Nevertheless place is not place, but an appearance of place, according
to the state of love and wisdom. 10. Places of instruction in the
spiritual world, 261.

PLACES, public, in the spiritual world, 17, 79.

PLANES successive, formed in man, on which superior principles may rest
and find support, 447. The ultimate plane in which the sphere of
conjugial love and its opposite terminate is the same, 439. The rational
plane, with man, is the medium between heaven and hell; the marriage of
good and truth flows into this plane from above, and the marriage of
evil and false flows into it from beneath, 436.

PLANETS.--Revelations made at the present day concerning the inhabitants
of the planets, 532. See Treatise by the Author on _The Earths in the
Universe_.

PLASTIC force in animals and vegetables, whence it proceeds, 238.

PLATO, 151*.

PLATONIST.--Arcana unfolded by a Platonist, 153*.

PLEASURES.--Sensations, with the pleasures thence derived, appertain to
the body, 273. The delights of adulterous love are the pleasures of
insanity, 442, 497.

PLEDGES.--After a declaration of consent, pledges are to be given, 300.
These pledges are continual visible witnesses of mutual love, hence also
they are memorials thereof, 300.

POLAND, 521.

POLES, 103, 108.

POLITICAL SELF-LOVE, its nature and quality, 264. It would make its
votaries desirous of being emperors if left without restraint, 264.

POLITICS is one of those sciences by which an entrance is made into
things rational, which are the ground of rational wisdom, 163.

POLYGAMICAL love is the love of the external, or natural man, 345. In
this love there is neither chastity, purity, nor sanctify, 346.

POLYGAMIST, no, so long as he remain such, is capable of being made
spiritual, 347. Conjugial chastity, purity, and sanctity cannot exist
with polygamists, 346.

POLYGAMY, of, 332-352. Whence it originates, 349. Polygamy is
lasciviousness, 345. Polygamy is not a sin with those who live in it
from a religious principle, as did the Israelites, 348. Why polygamy was
permitted to the Israelitish nation, 340.

POPES.--Dreadful fate of two popes who had compelled emperors to resign
their dominions, and had behaved ill to them, both in word and deed, at
Rome, whither they came to supplicate and adore them, 265.

PORTICO of palm-trees and laurels, 56.

POSTERIOR, the, is derived from the prior, as the effect from its cause,
326. That which is posterior exists from what is prior, as it exists
from what is prior, 330. Between prior and posterior there is no
determinate proportion, 326.

POWER, active or living, and passive or dead, 480. Whence proceeds the
propagative, or plastic force, in seeds of the vegetable kingdom, 238.

PRECEPT.--He who from purpose or confirmation acts against one precept,
acts against the rest, 528. The precepts of regeneration are five, see
n. 82: among which are these, that evils ought to be shunned, because
they are of the devil, and from the devil; that goods are to be done,
because they are of God, and from God; and that men ought to go to the
Lord, in order that He may lead them to do the latter, 525.

PREDICATES.--A subject without predicates is also an entity which has no
existence in reason (_ens nullius rationis_), 66.

PREDICATIONS are made by a man according to his rational light, 485.
Predications of four degrees of adulteries, 485 and following.
Difference between predications, charges of blame, and imputations, 485.

PRELATES, why the, of the church have given the pre-eminence to faith,
which is of truth, above charity, which is of good, 126.

PREPARATION for heaven or for hell, in the world of spirits, has for its
end that the internal and external may agree together and make one, and
not disagree and make two, 48*.

PRESENCE.--The origin or cause of presence in the spiritual world, 171.
Man is receptible of the Lord's presence, and of conjunction with Him.
To come to Him, causes presence, and to live according to His
commandments, causes conjunction, 341. His presence alone is without
reception, but presence and conjunction together are with reception,
341. The truth of faith constitutes the Lord's presence, 72.

PRESERVATION is perpetual creation, 86. Whence arises perpetual
preservation, 85.

PRETENDER.--Every man who is not interiorly led by the Lord is a
pretender, a sycophant, a hypocrite, and thereby an apparent man, and
yet not a man, 267.

PRIEST, chief, of a society in heaven, 266.

PRIMARY.--What is first in respect to end, is first in the mind and its
intention, because it is regarded as primary, 98. Things primary exist,
subsist, and persist, from things ultimate, 44.

PRIMEVAL.--In the world, at the present day, nothing is known of the
primeval state of man, which is called a state of integrity, 355. What
the primeval state of creation was, and how man is led back to it by the
Lord, 355.

PRINCE of a society in heaven, 14 and following, 266.

PRINCIPLE, the primary, of the church is the good of charity, and not
the truth of faith, 126.

PRINCIPLES and PRINCIPIATES, 328.

_Obs._--Principiates derive their essence from principles, _T.C.R_.,
177. All things of the body are principiates, that is, are compositions
of fibres, from principles which are receptacles of love and wisdom,
_D.L. and W_., 369.

PROBITY is one of those virtues which have respect to life, and enter
into it, 164.

PROBLEM concerning the soul, 315.

PROCEED, to.--All things which proceed from the Lord, are in an instant
from first principles in last, 389.

PROCREATION, sphere of the love of, 400.

PROGRESSION.--There is no progression of good to evil, but a progression
of good to a greater and less good, and evil to a greater and less evil,
444. A progression from ends through causes into effects is inscribed on
every man in general, and in every particular, 400, 401. Decreasing
progression of conjugial love, 78.

PROLIFICATION corresponds to the propagation of truth, 127. Spiritual
prolification is that of love and wisdom, 51, 52. Origin of natural
prolifications, 115. The sphere of prolification is the same as the
universal sphere of the marriage of good and truth, which proceeds from
the Lord, 92. All prolification is originally derived from the influx of
love, wisdom, and use from the Lord, from an immediate influx into the
souls of men, from a mediate influx into the souls of animals, and from
an influx still more mediate into the inmost principles of vegetables,
183. Prolifications are continuations of creation, 183. The principle of
prolification is derived from the intellect alone, 90. In the principle
of prolification of the husband is the soul, and also his mind as to its
interiors, which are conjoined to the soul, 172. Its state with
husbands, if married pairs were in the marriage of good and truth, 115.

PROMULGATION, cause of the, of the decalogue by Jehovah God upon Mount
Sinai, 351.

PROPAGATE, to.--Love and wisdom, with use, not only constitute man
(_homo_), but also are man, and propagate man, 183. A feminine principle
is propagated from intellectual good, 220.

PROPAGATION, all, is originally derived from the influx of love, wisdom,
and use from the Lord, from an immediate influx into the souls of men,
from a mediate in flux into the souls of animals, and from an influx
still more mediate into the inmost principles of vegetables, 183.
Propagations are continuations of creation, 183. Propagation of the
soul, 220, 236, 238, 245, 321. The propagation of the human race, and
thence of the angelic heaven, was the chief end of creation. 68.

PROPAGATE, or plastic force of vegetables and animals, whence it
originated, 138.

PROPRIUM, man's, from his birth is essentially evil, 262. The _proprium_
of man's (_homo_) will, is to love himself, and the _proprium_ of his
understanding is to love his own wisdom, 194. These two propriums are
deadly evils to man, if they remain with him, 194. The love of these two
propriums is changed into conjugial love, so far as man cleaves to his
wife, that is, receives her love, 194.

PROVIDENCE, the Divine, of the Lord extends to every thing, even to the
minutest particulars concerning marriages, and in marriages, 229, 316.
The operations of uses, by the Lord, by the spheres which proceed from
Him, are the Divine Providence, 386, 391.

_Obs._--The Divine Providence is the same as the mediate and immediate
influx from the Lord, _A.C._ 6480. See the _Treatise on the Divine
Providence_, by the Author.

PRUDENCE is one of the moral virtues which have respect to life, and
enter into it, 164. Nothing of prudence can possibly exist but from God,
354. Prudence of wives in concealing their love, 294. This prudence is
innate, 187. It was implanted in women from creation, and consequently
by birth, 194. Of self-derived prudence, 354.

PULPIT in a temple in the spiritual world, 23.

PU, or PAU, 28, 29, 182.

_Obs._--This is the Greek word [Greek: pou], written in ordinary
characters; the Author gives the Latin translation at n. 28. (In quodam
pu seu ubi.) This word expresses the uncertainty in which philosophers
and theologians are on the subject of the soul.

PURE.--It is not possible that any love should become absolutely pure,
with men or with angels, 71, 146. To the pure all things are pure, but
to them that are defiled, nothing is pure, 140.

PURIFICATION the spiritual, of conjugial love may be compared to the
purification of natural spirits, as effected by the chemists, 145.
Wisdom purified may be compared with alcohol, which is a spirit highly
rectified, 145.

PURITY, the, of heaven is from conjugial love, 430. In like manner the
purity of the church, 431.

PURPLE, the, color from its correspondence signifies the conjugial love
of the wife, 76.

PURPOSE.--That which flows forth from the very essence of a man's life,
thus which flows forth from his will or his love, is principally called
purpose, 493. As soon as any one from purpose or confirmation abstains
from any evil because it is sin, he is kept by the Lord in the purpose
of abstaining from the rest, 529.

PUSTULES, 253, 470.

PUT AWAY, to.--Putting away on account of adultery is a plenary
separation of minds, which is called divorce, 255. Other kinds of
putting away, grounded in their particular causes, are separations, 255.

PUT OFF, to.--Man after death puts off every thing which does not agree
with his love, 36. How a man after death puts off externals and puts on
informals, 48*

PYTHAGORAS, 151*.

PYTHAGOREANS, 153*.

QUALITY of the love of the sex in heaven, 44. The quality of every deed,
and in general the quality of every thing depends upon the circumstances
which mitigate or aggravate it, 487.

RAINBOW painted on a wall in the spiritual world, 76.

RATIONAL principle, the, is the medium between heaven and the world,
145. Above the rational principle is heavenly light, and below the
rational principle is natural light, 233. The rational principle is
formed more and more to the reception of heaven or of hell, according as
man turns himself towards good or evil, 436.

_Obs._--The rational principle of man partakes of the spiritual and
natural, or is a medium between them, _A.C._, 268.

RATIONALITY, spiritual, comes by means of the Word, and of preachings
derived therefrom, 293. Natural, sensual, and corporeal men enjoy, like
other men, the powers of rationality, but they use it while they are in
externals, and abuse it while in their internals, 498, 499. Rationality,
with devils, proceeds from the glory of the love of self, 269, and also
with atheists, who enjoy a more sublime rationality than many others,
269.

RATIONALITY and LIBERTY.--When man turns himself to the Lord, his
rationality and liberty are led by the Lord; but if backwards, from the
Lord, his rationality and liberty are led by hell, 437.

REACTION.--In all conjunction by love there must be action, reception,
and reaction, 293.

READ, to.--While man reads the Word, and collects truths out of it, the
Lord adjoins good, 128; but this takes place interiorly with those only
who read the Word to the end that they may become wise, 128.

REAL.--Love and wisdom are collected together in use, and therein become
one principle, which is called real, 183.

REASON, human, is such that it understands truths from the light
thereof, as though was not heretofore distinguished them, 490.

REASONERS.--They are named such who never conclude any thing, and make
whatever they hear a matter of argument and dispute whether it be so,
with perpetual contradiction, 232. What their fate is in the other life,
232.

REASONINGS, the, of the generality commence merely from effects, and
from effects proceed to some consequences thence resulting, and do not
commence from causes, and from causes proceed analytically to effects,
385. Truth does not admit of reasonings, 481. They favor the delights of
the flesh against those of the spirit, 481.

RECEPTION is according to religion, 352. Without conjunction there is no
reception, 341. See _Reaction_.

RECIPIENT.--Man is a recipient of God, and consequently a recipient of
love and wisdom from Him, 132. A recipient becomes an image of God
according to reception, 132.

RECIPROCAL principle, the, of conjunction with God, is, that a man
should love God, and relish the things which are of God, as from
himself, and yet believe that they are of God, 132, 122. Without such a
reciprocal principle conjunction is impossible, 132.

RECTIFICATION.--The purification of conjugial love may be compared to
the purification of natural spirits, effected by chemists, and called
rectification, 145.

REFORMED, to be.--Man is reformed by the understanding, and this is
effected by the knowledges of good and truth, and by a rational
intuition grounded therein, 495.

REGENERATION is a successive separation from the evils to which man is
naturally inclined, 146. Regeneration is purification from evils, and
thereby renovation of life, 525. The precepts of regeneration are five,
525. See _Precepts_. By regeneration a man is made altogether new as to
his spirit, and this is effected by a life according to the Lord's
precepts, 525.

REGIONS of the mind.--In human minds there are three regions, of which
the highest is called the celestial, the middle the spiritual, and the
lowest the natural, 305. In the lowest man is born; he ascends into the
next above it by a life according to the truths of religion, and into
the highest by the marriage of love and wisdom, 305. In the lowest
region dwells natural love, in the superior spiritual love, and in the
supreme celestial love, 270. In each region there is a marriage of love
and wisdom, 270. The pleasantnesses of conjugial love in the highest
region are perceived as blessednesses, in the middle region as
satisfactions, and in the lowest region as delights, 335. In the lowest
region reside all the concupiscences of evil and of lasciviousness; in
the superior region there are not any concupiscences of evil and of
lasciviousness, for man is introduced into this region by the Lord when
he is reborn; in the supreme region is conjugial chastity in its love,
into this region man is elevated by the love of uses, 305.

REIGN, to, with Christ is to be wise, and perform uses, 7.

RELATION, there is no, of good to evil, but a relation of good to a
greater and less good, and of evil to a greater and less evil, 444. What
is signified by the expression, for the sake of relatives, 17.

RELATIVES subsist between the greatest and the least of the same thing,
425, 17.

RELIGION constitutes the state of the church with man, 238. Religion is
implanted in souls, and by souls is transmitted from parents to their
offspring, as the supreme inclination, 246. With Christians it is formed
by the good of life, agreeable to the truth of doctrine, 115. Conjugial
love is grounded in religion, 238. Where there is not religion, neither
is there conjugial love, 239. There is no religion without the truths of
religion; what is religion without truths, 239. Religion, as it is the
marriage of the Lord and the church, is the initiament and inoculation
of conjugial love, 531. That love in its progress accompanies religion,
531. The first internal cause of cold in marriages is the rejection of
religion by each of the parties, 240. The second cause is, that one has
religion and not the other, 241. The third is, that one of the parties
is of one religion, and the other of another, 242. The fourth is the
falsity of religion, 243.

_Obs._--There is a difference which it is important to bear in mind,
between religion and the church; the church of the Lord, it is true, is
universal, and is with all those who acknowledge a Divine Being, and
live in charity whatever else may be their creed; but the church is
especially where the Word is, and where by means of the Word the Lord is
known. In the countries where the Word does not exist, or is withdrawn
from the people and replaced by human decisions, as among the Roman
Catholics, there is religion alone, but there is, to speak correctly, no
church. Among Protestants, there is both religion and a church, but this
church has come to an end, because it has perverted the Word.

RENEW, to.--Every part of man, both interior and exterior, renews
itself, and this is effected by solutions and reparations, 171.

RENUNCIATION of whoredoms, whence exists the chastity of marriage, how
it is effected, 148.

REPASTS.--In heaven, as in the world, there are repasts, 6.

REPRESENTATIONS.--Among the ancients the study of their bodily senses
consisted in representations of truths in forms, 76.

REPRESENTATIVE.--To those who are in the third heaven, every
representative of love and wisdom becomes real, 270.

RESPIRATION OF THE LUNGS, the, has relation to truth, 87.

REST.--What is the meaning of eternal rest, 207.

RETAIN, to--In whatever state man is he retains the faculty of elevating
the understanding, 495.

REVELATIONS made at the present day by the Lord, 532.

RIB, by a, of the breast is signified, in the spiritual sense, natural
truth, 193.

RIGHT, the, signifies good, 316. It also signifies power, 21.

RITES, customary.--There are customary rites which are merely formal,
and there are others which, at the same time, are also essential, 306.

RIVALSHIP or emulation between married parties respecting right and
power, 291. Emulation of prominence between married partners is one of
the external causes of cold, 248.

RULES of life concerning marriages, 77. Universal rule, 147, 313.

SABBATH, the.--The life of heaven from the worship of God, is called a
perpetual Sabbath, 9. Celebration of the Sabbath in a heavenly society,
23, 24.

SACRILEGE.--See _Sacrimony_.

SACRIMONY.--In heaven, marriage with one wife is called sacrimony, but
if it took place with more than one it would be called sacrilege, 76.

SAGACITY is one of the principles constituent of natural wisdom, 163.

SANCTITIES.--The marriage of the Lord and the church, and the marriage
of good and truth, are essential sanctities, 64. Sanctity of the Holy
Scriptures, 24.

SANCTUARY of the tabernacle of worship amongst the most ancient in
heaven, 75.

SATANS.--They are called satans who have confirmed themselves in favor
of nature to the denial of God, 380. Those who are evil from the
understanding dwell in the front in hell, and are called satans, but
those who are in evil from the will, dwell to the back and are called
devils, 492. See _Devils_. Satan wishing to demonstrate that nature is
God, 415.

_Obs._--In the Word, by the devil is understood that hell which is to
the back, and in which are the most wicked, called evil genii; and by
satan, that hell in which dwell those who are not so wicked, who are
called evil spirits, _H. and H._, 544.

SATISFACTION.--In love truly conjugial exists a state of satisfaction,
180.

SATURNINE or golden age, 153*.

SATYRS.--In the spiritual world the satyr-like form is the form of
dissolute adultery, 521.

SAVED, to be.--All in the universe who acknowledge a God, and, from a
religious principle, shun evil as sins against Him, are saved, 343.

SCIENCE is a principle of knowledges, 130. There is no end to science,
185. Man is not born into the science of any love, but beasts and birds
are born into the science of all their loves, 133. Man is born without
sciences, to the end that he may receive them all; whereas, supposing
him to be born into sciences, he could not receive any but those into
which he was born, 134. Science and love are undivided companions, 134.

SCIENCE OF CORRESPONDENCES, the, was among the ancients the science of
sciences, 532. It was the knowledge concerning the spiritual things of
heaven and the church, and thence they derived wisdom, 532. It conjoined
the sensual things of their bodies with the perceptions of their minds,
and procured to them intelligence, 76. This science having been turned
into idolatrous science, was so obliterated and destroyed by the divine
providence of the Lord, that no visible traces of it were left
remaining, 532. Nevertheless, it has been again discovered by the Lord,
in order that the men of the church may again have conjunction with Him,
and consociation with the angels; which purposes are effected by the
Word, in which all things are correspondences, 532. See
_Correspondences_.

SCORBUTIC PHTHISIC, 253, 470.

SCRIPTURE, the sacred, which proceeded immediately from the Lord, is, in
general and in particular, a marriage of good and truth, 115.

SEAT, the, of jealousy is in the understanding of the husband, 372.

SEDUCERS.--Their sad lot after death, 514.

SEE, to, that what is true is true, and that what is false is false, is
to see from heavenly light in natural light, 233.

SEEDS spiritually understood are truths, 220. By the seed of man,
whereby iron shall be mixed with clay, and still they shall not cohere,
is meant the truth of the Word falsified, 79. Formation of seed, 220,
245, 183.

SELF-CONCEIT, or SELF-DERIVED INTELLIGENCE.--The love of wisdom, if it
remains with man, and is not transcribed into the woman, is an evil
love, and is called self-conceit, or the love of his own intelligence,
88, 353. The wife continually attracts to herself her husband's conceit
of his own intelligence, and extinguishes it in him, and verifies it in
herself, 353. He who, from a principle of self-love, is vain of his own
intelligence, cannot possibly love his wife with true conjugial love,
193.

SEMBLANCES, conjugial, 279-289.

SEMINATION corresponds to the potency of truth, 127. It has a spiritual
origin, and proceeds from the truths of which the understanding
consists, 220.

SENSATIONS with the pleasures thence derived appertain to the body, and
affections with the thoughts thence derived appertain to the mind, 273.

SENSE.--Every love has its own proper sense, 210. Spiritual origin of
the natural senses, 220. See _Taste, Smell, Hearing, Touch, Sight_. Each
of these senses has its delights, with variations according to the
specific uses of each, 68. The sense proper to conjugial love is the
sense of touch, 210. The use of this sense is the complex of all other
uses, 68. Wives have a sixth sense, and which is a sense of all the
delights of the conjugial love of the husband, and this sense they have
in the palms of their hands, 155*.

SENSUAL.--Natural men who love only the delights of the senses, placing
their heart in every kind of luxury and pleasure, are properly meant by
the sensual, 496. The sensual immerse all things of the will, and
consequently of the understanding, in the allurements and fallacies of
the senses, indulging in these alone, 496.

SEPARATIONS of married partners. Legitimate causes thereof, 251-254.

SERENE, principle of peace, 155*.

SERIES.--All those things which precede in minds form series, which
collect themselves together, one near another, and one after another,
and these together, compose a last or ultimate, in which they co-exist,
313. The series of the love of infants, from its greatest to its least,
thus to the boundary in which it subsists or ceases, is retrograde, the
reason why, 401.

SERPENT, the, signifies the love of self-intelligence, 353. By the
serpent, Gen. iii. is meant the devil, as to the conceit of self-love
and self-intelligence, 135. In hell, the forms of beasts, under which
the lascivious delights of adulterous love are presented to the sight,
are serpents, &c., 430.

SEX.--The love of the male sex differs from that of the female sex, 382.
Origin of the beauty of the female sex, 381-384. Cause of the beauty of
the female sex, 56.

SHEEP, in the spiritual world, are the representative forms of the state
of innocence and peace of the inhabitants, 75.

SHEEPFOLD signifies the church, 129.

SHOWER, golden, 155*, 208.

SIGHT.--There is in man an internal and an external sight, 477. Natural
sight is grounded in spiritual sight, which is that of the
understanding, 220. The love of seeing, grounded in the love of
understanding, has the sense of seeing; and the gratifications proper to
it are the various kinds of symmetry and beauty, 210. How gross the
sight of the eye is, 416.

SILVER signifies intelligence in spiritual truths, and thence in natural
truths, 76. The silver age, 76.

SIMPLE.--Every thing divided is more and more multiple, and not more and
more simple, 329.

SIMULTANEOUS.--There is simultaneous order and successive order, 314.
That simultaneous order is grounded in successive, and is according to
it, is not known, 314.

SIN.--All that which is contrary to religion is believed to be sin,
because it is contrary to God; and, on the other hand, all that which
agrees with religion is believed not to be sin, because it agrees with
God, 348.

SINCERITY is one of those virtues which have respect to life, and enter
into it, 164.

SINGING in heaven, 55, 155*.

SIRENS, fantastic beauty of, in the spiritual world, 505.

SISTERS.--The Lord calls those brethren and sisters who are of his
church, 120.

SIX.--The number six signifies all and what is complete, 21.

SLEEP, the, into which Adam fell, when the woman was created, signifies
man's entire ignorance that the wife is formed, and, as it were, created
from him, 194.

SLEEP, to, Gen. ii. 21, signifies to be in ignorance, 194. Sleep in
heaven, 19.

SLOTHFUL, to the, in the spiritual world, food is not given, 6.

SMALL-POX, 253, 470.

SMELLING, natural, is grounded in spiritual smelling, which is
perception, 220. The love of knowing those things which float about in
the air, grounded in the love of perceiving, is the sense of smelling;
and the gratifications proper to it are the various kinds of fragrance,
210.

SOBRIETY is one of those virtues which have respect to life, and enter
into it, 164.

SOCIETY, every, in heaven may be considered as one common body, and the
constituent angels as the similar parts thereof, from which the common
body exists, 10.

SOCRATES, 151*.

SOCRATICS, 153*.

SOLITARY, there is neither good nor solitary truth, but in all cases
they are conjoined, 87.

SOLUTIONS and reparations by which every part of man, both interior and
exterior, renews itself, 171.

SOMNAMBULISTS act from the impulse of a blind science, the understanding
being asleep, 134.

SONS in the Word signify truths conceived in the spiritual man, and born
in the natural, 120, 220. Those who are regenerated by the Lord are
called in the Word sons of God, sons of the kingdom, 120.

SONS-IN-LAW, what, and daughters-in-law signify in the Word, 120.

SONGS in heaven, 17, 19. Heavenly songs are in reality sonorous
affections, or affections expressed and modified by sounds, 55. Singing
in heaven is an affection of the mind, which is let forth through the
mouth as a tune, 155*. Affections are expressed by songs, as thoughts
are by discourse, 55.

SOPHI.--The most ancient people did not acknowledge any other wisdom
than the wisdom of life, and this was the wisdom of those who were
formerly called _sophi_, 130.

SOUL, the, is the inmost principle of man, 101, 158, 206. It is not
life, but the proximate receptacle of life from God, and thereby the
habitation of God, 315. It is a form of all things relating to love, and
of all things relating to wisdom, 315. It is a form from which the
smallest thing cannot be taken away, and to which the smallest thing
cannot be added, and it is the inmost of all the forms of the whole
body, 315. Propagation of the soul, 220, 245. The soul of the offspring
is from the father, and its clothing from the mother, 206, 288. The
principle of truth in the soul is the origin of seed, in which is the
soul of man, 220, 483. It is in a perfect human form, covered with
substances from the purest principles of nature, whereof a body is
formed in the womb of the mother, 183. The soul of man, and of every
animal, from an implanted tendency to self-propagation, forms itself,
clothes itself, and becomes seed, 220; because the soul is a spiritual
substance, which is not a subject of extension but of impletion, and
from which no part can be taken away, but the whole may be produced
without any loss thereof, hence it is that it is as fully present in the
smallest receptacles, which are seeds, as in its greatest receptacle,
the body, 220. The soul of every man, by its origin, is celestial,
wherefore it receives influx immediately from the Lord, 482. The soul
and the mind are the man, since both constitute the spirit which lives
after death, and which is in a perfect human form, 260. The soul
constitutes the inmost principles not only of the head, but also of the
body, 178. The soul and mind adjoin themselves closely to the flesh of
the body, to operate and produce their effects, 178. A masculine soul,
220. How a feminine principle is produced from a male soul, 220. How a
union of the souls of married partners is effected, 172. See _Mind,
obs_.

SPACE.--Those things which, from their origin, are celestial and
spiritual, are not in space, but in the appearances of space, 158. The
soul of man being celestial, and his mind spiritual, are not in space,
158.

SPANIARDS, 103, 104.

SPECIES.--Why the Creator has distinguished all things into genera,
species, and discriminations, 479.

SPEECH, the, of wisdom is to speak from causes, 75. From the thought,
which also is spiritual, speech flows, 220.

SPHERE.--All that which flows from a subject, and encompasses and
surrounds it, is named a sphere, 386. From the Lord, by the spiritual
sun, proceeds a sphere of heat and light, or of love and wisdom, to
operate ends which are uses, 386. The universal sphere of generating and
propagating the celestial things, which are of love; and the spiritual
things, which are of wisdom, and thence the natural things, which are of
offspring, proceeds from the Lord, and fills the universal heaven and
the universal world, 355. The divine sphere which looks to the
preservation of the universe in its created state by successive
generations, is called the sphere of procreating, 386. The divine sphere
which looks to the preservation of generations in their beginnings, and
afterwards in their progressions, is called the sphere of protecting the
things created, 386. There are several other divine spheres, which are
named according to uses, as the sphere of defence of good and truth
against evil and false, the sphere of reformation and regeneration, the
sphere of innocence and peace, the sphere of mercy and grace, &c., 222,
386. But the universal of all is the conjugial sphere, because this is
the supereminent sphere of conservation of the created universe, 222.
This sphere fills the universe, and pervades all things from first to
last, 222; thus from angels even to worms, 92. Why it is more universal
than the sphere of heat and light which proceed from the sun, 222. In
its origin, the conjugial sphere, flowing into the universe, is divine;
in its progress in heaven with the angels, it is celestial and
spiritual; with men it is natural; with beasts and birds, animal; with
worms merely corporeal; with vegetables, it is void of life; and,
moreover, in all its subjects it is varied according to their forms,
225. This sphere is received immediately by the female sex, and
mediately by the male, 225. The sphere of conjugial love is the very
essential sphere of heaven, because it descends from the heavenly
marriage of the Lord and the church, 54. Whereas there is a sphere of
conjugial love, there is also a sphere opposite to it, which is called a
sphere of adulterous love, 434. This sphere ascends from hell, and the
sphere of conjugial love descends from heaven, 435, 455. These spheres
meet each other in each world, but do not conjoin, 436, 455. Between
these two spheres there is equilibrium, and man is in it, 437, 455. Man
can turn himself to whichever sphere he pleases; but so far as he turns
himself to the one, so far he turns himself from the other, 438, 455. A
sphere of love from the wife, and of understanding from the man, is
continually flowing forth, and unites them, 321. A natural sphere is
continually flowing forth, not only from man, but also from beasts--yea,
from trees, fruits, flowers, and also from metals, 171. There flows
forth--yea, overflows from every man (_homo_)--a spiritual sphere,
derived from the affections of his love, which encompasses him, and
infuses itself into the natural sphere derived from the body, so that
these two spheres are conjoined, 171. Every one, both man and woman, is
encompassed by his own sphere of life, densely on the breast, and less
densely on the back, 224.

SPIRE.--With whom the mind is closed from beneath, and sometimes twisted
as a spire into the adverse principle, 203.

SPIRIT, the.--There are two principles which, in the beginning, with
every man who from natural is made spiritual, are at strife together,
which are commonly called the spirit and the flesh, 488. The love of
marriage is of the spirit, and the love of adultery is of the flesh,
488. See _Flesh_.

SPIRITS.--See _Mind, obs_. By novitiate spirits are meant men newly
deceased, who are called spirits because they are then spiritual men,
461. Who those are, who, after death, become corporeal spirits, 495.

SPIRITUAL--The difference between what is spiritual and natural is like
that between prior and posterior, which bear no determinate proportion
to each other, 326. Spiritual principles without natural, which are
their constituent have no consistence, 52. Spiritual principles
considered in themselves have relation to love and wisdom, 52. The
things relating to the church, which are called spiritual things, reside
in the inmost principles with man, 130. By the spiritual is meant he who
loves spiritual things, and thereby is wise from the Lord, 281. A man
(_homo_) without religion is not spiritual, but remains natural, 149. To
become spiritual is to be elevated out of the natural principle, that
is, out of the light and heat of the world into the light and heat of
heaven, 347. Man becomes spiritual in proportion as his rational
principle begins to derive a soul from influx out of heaven, which is
the case so far as it is affected and delighted with wisdom, 145.

SPIRITUALLY, to think, is to think abstractedly from space and time,
328.

SPORTS of wisdom in the, heavens, 132. Literary sports, 207. Conjugial
love in its origin is the sport of wisdom and love, 75, 183. Games and
shows in the heavens, 17. The sixth sense in the female sex is called in
the heavens the sport of wisdom with its love, and of love with its
wisdom, 155*.

SPRING.--In heaven the heat and light proceeding from the sun cause
perpetual spring, 137. In heaven, with conjugial partners, there is
spring in its perpetual conatus, 355. All who come into heaven return
into their vernal youth, and into the powers appertaining to that age,
44.

STABLES signify instructions, 76.

STAGE entertainments. See _Actors_.

STATES.--The state of a man's life is his quality as to the
understanding and the will, 184. The state of a man's life from infancy,
even to the end of life, is continually changing, 185. The common states
of a man's life are called infancy, childhood, youth, manhood, and old
age, 185. No subsequent state of life is the same as a preceding one,
186. The last state is such as the successive order is, from which it is
formed and exists, 313. What was the primeval state, which is called a
state of integrity, 355. Of the state of married partners after death,
45-54. There are two states into which a man enters after death--an
external and an internal state; he comes first into his external state,
and afterwards into his internal, 47*.

STATUE, the, which Nebuchadnezzar saw in a dream represented the ages of
gold, silver, copper, and iron, 78.

STONES signify natural truths, and precious stones spiritual truths, 76.

STORE, abundant, 220, 221.

STOREHOUSE.--The conjugial principle of one man with one wife is the
storehouse of human life, 457.

STORGE.--The love called _storge_ is the love of infants, 392. This love
prevails equally with the evil and the good, and, in like manner, with
tame and wild beasts; it is even in some cases stronger and more ardent
with evil men, and also with wild beasts, 392. The innocence of infancy
is the cause of the love called _storge_, 395. Spiritual storge, 211.

STUDY, what was the, of the men who lived in the silver age, 76. Study
of sciences in the spiritual world, 207.

STUPIDITY of the age, 481.

SUBLIMATION.--The purification of conjugial love may be compared to the
purification of natural spirits, as effected by chemists, and called
sublimation, 145.

SUBJECT, every, receives influx according to its form, 86. All a man's
affections and thoughts are in forms, and thence from forms, for forms
are their subjects, 186. A subject without predicates is an entity which
has no existence in reason, 66. See _Substance_.

SUBSISTENCE is perpetual existence, 86.

SUBSTANCE.--There is no substance without a form, an unformed substance
not being any thing, 66. There is not any good or truth which is not in
a substance as in its subject, 66. Every idea of man's, however
sublimated, is substantial, that is, affixed to substance, 66. Material
things derive their origin from things substantial, 207. In man, all the
affections of love, and all the perceptions of wisdom, are rendered
substantial, for substances are their subjects, 361. See _Form_.

SUBSTANTIAL.--The difference between what is substantial and what is
material is like the difference between what is prior and what is
posterior, 31. Spiritual things are substantial, 328. Spirits and angels
are in substantial and not in materials, 328. Man after death is a
substantial man, because this substantial man lay inwardly concealed in
the natural or material man, 31. The substantial man sees the
substantial man, as the material man sees the material man, 31. All
things in the spiritual world are substantial and not material, whence
it is that there are in their perfection in that world, all things which
are in the natural world, and many things besides, 207. Every idea of
man's, however sublimated, is substantial, that is, attached to
substances, 66.

SUCCESSIVE.--There is a successive order and a simultaneous order, and
there is an influx of successive order into simultaneous order, 314. See
_Order_.

SUMMARY of the Lord's commandments, 340, 82.

SUN.--There is a sun of the spiritual world as there is a sun of the
natural world, 380. The sun of the spiritual world proceeds immediately
from the Lord, who is in the midst of it, 235. That sun is pure love
235, 380, 532. It appears fiery before the angels, altogether as the sun
of our world appears before men, 235. It does not set nor rise, but
stands constantly between the zenith and the horizon, that is, at the
elevation of 45 degrees, 137. The spiritual sun is pure love, and the
natural sun is pure fire, 182, 532. Whatever proceeds from the spiritual
sun partakes of life, since it is pure love; whatever proceeds from the
natural sun partakes nothing of life, since it is pure fire, 532. The
spiritual sun is in the centre of the universe, and its operation, being
without space and time, is instant and present from first principles in
last, 391. For what end the sun of the natural world was created, 235.
The fire of the natural sun exists from no other source than from the
fire of the spiritual sun, which is divine love, 380.

SUPPERS.--In heaven, as in the world, there are suppers, 19.

SURVIVOR, 321.--See _Deceased_.

SWAMMERDAM, 416.

SWANS, in the spiritual world, signify conjugial love in the lowest
region of the mind, 270.

SWEDENBORG.--He protests in truth that the memorable relations annexed
to the chapters in this work are not fictions, but were truly done and
seen; not seen in any state of the mind asleep, but in a state of full
wakefulness, 1. That it had pleased the Lord to manifest Himself unto
him, and send him to teach the things relating to the New Church, 1.
That the interiors of his mind and spirit were opened by the Lord, and
that thence it was granted him to be in the spiritual world with angels,
and at the same time in the natural world with men, 1, 39, 326. State of
anxiety into which he fell when once he thought of the essence and
omnipresence of God from eternity, that is, of God before the creation
of the world, 328. The angels, as well as himself, did not know the
differences between spiritual and natural, because there had never
before been an opportunity of comparing them together by any person's
existing at the same time in both worlds; and without such comparison
and reference those differences were not ascertainable, 327. On a
certain time, as he was wandering through the streets of a great city
inquiring for a lodging, he entered a house inhabited by married
partners of a different religion; the angels instantly accosted him, and
told him they could not on that account remain with him there, 242. He
had observed for twenty-five years continually, from an influx
perceptible and sensible, that it is impossible to think analytically
concerning any form of government, civil law, moral virtue, or any
spiritual truth, unless the divine principle flows in from the Lord's
wisdom through the spiritual world, 419. He declares, that having
related a thousand particulars respecting departed spirits, he has never
heard any one object, how can such be their lot when they are not yet
risen from their sepulchres, the last judgment not being yet
accomplished? 28.

SWEDES, 103, 112.

SWEETNESS.--In heaven, the chaste love of the sex is called heavenly
sweetness, 55.

SYMPATHIES.--In the spiritual world sympathies are not only felt, but
also appear in the face, the discourse, and gesture, 273. With some
married partners in the natural world, there is antipathy in internals,
combined with apparent sympathy in their externals, 292. Sympathy
derives its origin from the concordance of spiritual spheres, which
emanate from subjects, 171.

TABERNACLE.--In heaven, the most ancient people dwell in tabernacles,
because, whilst in the world, they lived in tabernacles, 75. Tabernacle
of their worship exactly similar to the tabernacle of which the form was
showed to Moses on Mount Sinai, 75.

TABLES of wood and stone on which were the writings of the most ancient
people, 77. Tablet with this inscription, "The covenant between Jehovah
and the Heavens," 75.

TARTARUS, 75.--Shades of Tartarus, 75.

TARTARY.--The ante-Mosaic Word, at this day lost, is reserved only in
Great Tartary, 77.

TASTE, sense of.--The love of self-nourishment, grounded in the love of
imbibing goods, is the sense of tasting, and the delights proper to it
are the various kinds of delicate foods, 210.

TEMPERANCE is one of those moral virtues which have respect to life and
enter into it, 164.

TEMPLE, description of a, in heaven, 23. Temple of wisdom, where the
causes of the beauty of the female sex were discussed, 56.

TEMPORAL.--Idea of what is temporal in regard to marriages, effect that
it produced on two married partners from heaven present with Swedenborg,
216.

THEATRES in the heavens, 17.--See _Actors_.

THING, every, created by the Lord is representative, 294.

THINK, to, spiritually is to think abstractedly from space and time, and
to think naturally is to think in conjunction with space and time, 328.
To think and conclude from an interior and prior principle is to think
and conclude from ends and causes to effects, but to think and conclude
from an exterior or posterior principle, is to think and conclude from
effects to causes and ends, 408. The spiritual man thinks of things
incomprehensible and ineffable to the natural man, 326.

THOUGHT is the _existere_, or existence of a man's life, from the _esse_
or essence, which is love, 36. Spiritual thoughts, compared with
natural, are thoughts of thoughts, 326. Spiritual thoughts are the
beginnings and origins of natural thoughts, 320. Spiritual thought so
far exceeds natural thought as to be respectively ineffable, 326.

THUNDER.--Clapping of the air like thunder is a correspondence and
consequent appearance of the conflict and collision of arguments amongst
spirits, 415.

TONES, discordant, brought into harmony, 243.

TOUCH, to.--This sense is common to all the other senses, and hence
borrows somewhat from them, 210. It is the sense proper to conjugial
love, 210. The love of knowing objects, grounded on the love of
circumspection and self-preservation, is the sense of touching, and the
gratifications proper to it are the various kinds of titillation, 210.
The innocence of parents and the innocence of children meet each other
by the touch, especially of the hands, 396. See _Sense_.

TRADES.--In the spiritual world there are trades, 207.

TRANQUILLITY is in conjugial love, and relates to the mind, 180.

TRANSCRIBED, to be.--Whereas every man (_homo_) by birth inclined to
love himself, it was provided from creation, to prevent man's perishing
by self-love, and the conceit of his own intelligence, that that love of
the man (_vir_) should be transcribed into the wife, 353, 88, 193, 293.

TRANSCRIPTION, the, of the good of one person into another is
impossible, 525.

TREE, a, signifies man, 135. The tree of life signifies man living from
God, or God living in man, 135. To eat of this tree signifies to receive
eternal life, 135. The tree of the knowledge of good and evil, signifies
the belief that life for man is not God, but self, 135. By eating
thereof signifies damnation, 135.

TRINITY, the Divine, is in Jesus Christ, in whom dwells all the fulness
of the Godhead bodily, 24.

TRUTH.--What the understanding perceives and thinks is called truth,
490. Truth is the form of good, 198, 493. There is the truth of good,
and from this the good of truth, or truth grounded in good, and good
grounded in that truth; and in these two principles is implanted from
creation an inclination to join themselves together into one, 88. The
truth of good, or truth grounded in good, is male (or masculine), and
the good of truth, or good grounded in truth, is female (or feminine),
61, 88. See _Good and Truth_.

TRUTH does not admit of reasonings, 481.

TRUTHS pertain to the understanding, 128.

TWO.--In every part of the body where there are not two, they are
divided into two, 316.

TZIIM.--In hell, the forms of birds, and under which the lascivious
delights of adulterous love are presented to the view, are birds called
tziim, 430.

ULCERS, 253.

ULTIMATE.--It is a universal law that things primary exist, subsist, and
persist from things ultimate, 44. That the ultimate state is such as the
successive order is, from which it is formed and exists, is a canon
which, from its truth, must be acknowledged in the learned world, 313.

ULYSSES, companions of, changed into hogs, 521.

UNCHASTITY, difference between, and what is not chaste, 139. Unchastity
is entirely opposed to chastity, 139. There is a conjugial love which is
not chaste, and yet is not unchastity, 139. The love opposite to
conjugial love is essential unchastity, 139. If the renunciations of
whoredoms be not made from a principle of religion, unchastity lies
inwardly concealed like corrupt matter in a wound only outwardly healed,
149.

UNCLEAN or FILTHY, every, principle of hell is from adulterers, 500.

UNCLEANNESS, 252, 472.

UNDERSTANDING, the.--Man has understanding from heavenly light, 233. The
understanding considered in itself is merely the ministering and serving
principle of the will, 196. It is only the form of the will, 493. Man is
capable of elevating his intellect above his natural loves, 96. See
_Will and Understanding_.

UNION.--Spiritual union of two married partners is the actual adjunction
of the soul and mind of the one to the soul and mind of the other, 321.
Conjugial love is the union of souls, 179, 480, 482. Union between two
married partners in heaven is like that of the two tents in the breast,
which are called the heart and the lungs, 75.

UNITY, the, of souls between two married partners in heaven is seen in
their faces; the life of the husband is in the wife, and the life of the
wife is in the husband--they are two bodies but one soul, 75.

UNIVERSALS.--Whoever knows universals may afterwards comprehend
particulars, because the latter are in the former as parts in a whole,
261. Good and truth are the universals of creation, 84, 92. There are
three universals of heaven and three universals of hell, 261. A
universal principle exists from, and consists of singulars, 388. If we
take away singulars, a universal is a mere name, and is like somewhat
superficial, which has no contents within, 388. A universal truth is
acknowledged by every intelligent man, 60. Every universal truth is
acknowledged as soon as it is heard, in consequence of the Lord's influx
and at the same time of the confirmation of heaven, 62.

UNIVERSE.--The universe, with all its created subjects, is from the
divine love, by the divine wisdom, or what is the same thing, from the
divine good, by the divine truth, 87. All things which proceed from the
Lord, or from the sun, which is from him, and in which he is, pervade
the created universe, even to the last of all its principles, 389. All
thing in the universe have relation to good and truth, 60. In every
thing in the universe good is conjoined with truth, and truth with good,
60.

USE is essential good, 183, 77. Use is doing good from love by wisdom,
183. Creation can only be from divine love by divine wisdom, in divine
use, 183. All things in the universe are procreated and formed from use,
in use, and for use, 183. All use is from the Lord, and is effected by
angels and men, as of themselves, 7. Uses are the bonds of society;
there are as many bonds as there are uses, and the number of uses is
infinite, 18. There are spiritual uses, such as regard love towards God,
and love towards our neighbor, 18. There are moral and civil uses, such
as regard the love of the society and state to which a man belongs, and
of his fellow-citizens among whom he lives, 18. There are natural uses,
which regard the love of the world and its necessities, 18: and there
are corporeal uses, such as regard the love of self-preservation with a
view to superior uses, 18. The delight of the love of uses is a heavenly
delight, which enters into succeeding delights in their order, and
according to the order of succession exalts them and makes them eternal,
18. Delights follow use, and are also communicated to man according to
the love thereof, 68. The delight of being useful derives its essence
from love, and its existence from wisdom, 5. This delight, originating
in love and operating by wisdom, is the very soul and life of all
heavenly joys, 5. Those who are only in natural and corporeal uses are
satans, loving only the world and themselves, for the sake of the world;
and those who are only in corporeal uses are devils, because they live
to themselves alone, and to others only for the sake of themselves, 18.
Happiness is derived to every angel from the use he performs in his
function, 6. The public good requires that every individual, being a
member of the common body, should be an instrument of use in the society
to which he belongs, 7. To such as faithfully perform uses, the Lord
gives the love thereof, 7. So far as uses are done from the love
thereof, so far that love increases, 266. The use of conjugial love is
the most excellent of all uses, 183, 305. Conjugial love is according to
the love of growing wise, for the sake of uses from the Lord, 183. How
can any one know whether he performs uses from self-love, or from the
love of uses? 266. Every one who believes in the Lord, and shuns evils
as sins, performs uses from the Lord; but every one who neither believes
in the Lord, nor shuns evils as sins, does uses from self, and for the
sake of self, 266. All good uses in the heavens are splendid and
refulgent, 266. Blessed lot of those who are desirous to have dominion
from the love of uses, 266.

_Obs._--Use consists in fulfilling faithfully, sincerely, and carefully,
the duties of our functions, _T.C.R._, 744. Those things are called
_uses_ which, proceeding from the Lord, are by creation in order, _D.L.
and W_., 298.

USES of apparent love and friendship between married partners, for the
sake of preserving order in domestic affairs, 271, and following, 283.

UTILITY of apparent love and apparent friendship between married
partners, for the sake of preserving order in domestic affairs, 271, and
following, 283.

VAPOR.--From reason it may be seen that the soul of man after death is
not a mere vapor, 29.

VARIETY.--There is a perpetual variety, and there is not any thing the
same with another thing, 524. Heaven consists of perpetual varieties,
524. Distinction between varieties and diversities, 324. See
_Diversities_.

VEGETABLES.--Wonders in the productions of vegetables, 416.

VEIN.--There is a certain vein latent in the affection of the will of
every angel which attracts his mind to the execution of some purpose, 6.
Vein of conjugial love, 44, 68, 183, 293, 313, 433, 482.

VENTRICLES of the brain, 315.

VERNAL, the, principle exists only where warmth is equally united to
light, 137. With men (_homines_) there is a perpetual influx of vernal
warmth from the Lord, it is otherwise with animals, 137. In heaven,
where there is vernal warmth, there is love truly conjugial, 137.

VIOLATION of spiritual marriage, 515-520. Violation of spiritual
marriage is violation of the Word, 516. Violation of the Word is
adulteration of good, and falsification of truth, 517. This violation of
the Word corresponds to scortations and adulteries, 518. By whom, in the
Christian church, violation of the Word is committed, 519.

VIRGINITY.--Fate of those who have vowed perpetual virginity, 155, 460,
503.

VIRGINS, 21, 22, 293, 321, 502, 511. The affection of truth is called a
virgin, 293. The virgins (Matt. xxv. 1) signify the church, 21. Quality
of the state of virgins before and after marriage in heaven, 502.
Virgins of the fountain, 207, 293. The nine virgins, or muses, signify
knowledge and science of every kind, 182. How a virgin is formed into a
wife, 199.

VIRTUES, moral, and spiritual virtues, 164. Various graces and virtues
of moral life represented in theatres in heaven, 17. Manly virtue, 433,
355.

VISIBLE.--Every one may confirm himself in favor of a divine principle
or being, from what is visible in nature, 416-421.

VISION, posterior, 233.

VITIATED states of mind and body which are legitimate causes of
separation, 252, 253.

WARS, the, of Jehovah. The name of the historical books of the
ante-Mosaic Word, 77.

WATER FROM THE FOUNTAIN, to drink, signifies to be instructed concerning
truths, and by truths concerning goods, and thereby to grow wise, 182.

WEASELS.--Who they are who appear at a distance in the spiritual world
like weasels, 514.

WHIRLPOOLS which are in the borders of the worlds, 339.

WHITE, the color, signifies intelligence, 76.

WHITE, what is, in heaven is truth, 316.

WHOREDOM, spiritual, is the falsification of truth, which acts in
unity with that which is natural, because they cohere, 80. Whoredoms in
the spiritual sense of the word signify the connubial connection of what
is evil and false, 428. They signify the falsification of truth, 518.
Whoredom is the destruction of society, 345. They are imputed to every
one after death, not according to the deeds themselves, but according to
the state of the minds in the deeds, 530.

WHOREDOMS in the spiritual sense signify the connection (_connubium_) of
evil and false, 428. Toleration of such evils in populous cities, 451.

WIDOW.--Why the state of a widow is more grievous than that of a
widower, 325.

WIFE, a, is the love of a wise man's wisdom, 56. She represents the love
of her husband's wisdom, 21. The wife signifies the good of truth, 76.
In heaven, the wife is the love of her husband's wisdom, and the husband
is the wisdom of her love, 75. The wife perceives, sees, and is sensible
of the things which are in her husband, in herself, and thence as it
were herself in him, 173. There is with wives a sixth sense, which is
the sense of all the delights of the conjugial love of the husband, and
this sense is in the palms of the hands, 155*. Conjugial love resides
with chaste wives, but still their love depends on the husband's, 216*.
Wives love the bonds of marriage if the men do, 217. Wives seated on a
bed of roses, 293. In a rosary, 294. Acts which certain wives employ to
subject their husbands to their own authority, 292. See _Woman, Married
Partners_.

WILL, the, is the receptacle of love, for what a man loves that he
wills, 347. Will principle, considered in itself, is nothing but an
affect and effect of some love, 461. Whoever conjoins to himself the
will of a man, conjoins to himself the whole man, 196. The will acts by
the body, wherefore, if the will were to be taken away, action would be
instantly at a stand, 494.

WILL and UNDERSTANDING.--The will is the man himself, and the
understanding is the man as grounded in the will, 490. The life of man
essentially is his will, and formally is his understanding, 493. The
will is the receptacle of good, and the understanding is the receptacle
of truth, 121. Love, charity, and affection, belong to the will, and
perception and thought to the understanding, 121. All things which are
done by a man are done from his will and understanding, and without
these acting principles a man would not have either action or speech,
otherwise than as a machine, 527. Whoever conjoins to himself the will
of another, conjoins also to himself his understanding, 196. The
understanding is not so constant in its thoughts as the will is in its
affections, 221. He that does not discriminate between will and
understanding, cannot discriminate between evils and goods. 490. The
will alone of itself acts nothing, but whatever it acts, it acts by the
understanding, and the understanding alone of itself acts nothing, but
whatever it acts, it acts from the will, 490. With every man the
understanding is capable of being elevated according to knowledges, but
the will only by a life according to the truths of the church, 269. The
natural man can elevate his understanding into the light of heaven, and
think and discourse spiritually, but if the will at the same time does
not follow the understanding, he is still not elevated, for he does not
remain in that elevation, but in a short time he lets himself down to
his will, and there fixes his station, 347, 495. The will flows into the
understanding, but not the understanding into the will, yet the
understanding teaches what is good and evil, and consults with the will,
that out of those two principles it may choose, and do what is agreeable
to it, 490. The will of the wife conjoins itself with the understanding
of the man, and thence the understanding of the man with the will of the
wife, 159. In adultery of the reason, the understanding acts from
within, and the will from without, but in adultery of the will, the will
acts from within, and the understanding from without, 490.

WISDOM is nothing but a form of love, 493. It is a principle of life,
130. Wisdom, considered in its fulness, is a principle, at the same
time, of knowledges, of reason, and of life, 130. What wisdom is as a
principle of life, 130, 293. Wisdom consists of truths, 84. The
understanding is the receptacle of wisdom, 400. The abode of wisdom is
in use, 18. Wisdom cannot exist with a man but by means of the love of
growing wise, 88. Wisdom with men is twofold, rational and moral; their
rational wisdom is of the understanding alone, and their moral wisdom is
of the understanding and life together, 163, 293. Rational wisdom
regards the truths and goods which appear inwardly in man, not as its
own, but as flowing in from the Lord, 102. Moral wisdom shuns evils and
falses as leprosies, especially the evils of lasciviousness, which
contaminate its conjugial love, 102. The things which relate to rational
wisdom constitute man's understanding, and those which relate to moral
wisdom constitute his will, 195. Wisdom of wives, 208. The perception,
which is the wisdom of the wife, is not communicable to the man, neither
is the rational wisdom of the man communicable to the wife, 168, 208.
The moral wisdom of the man is not communicable to women, so far as it
partakes of rational wisdom, 168. Wisdom and conjugial love are
inseparable companions, 98. The Lord provides conjugial love for those
who desire wisdom, and who consequently advance more and more into
wisdom, 98. There is no end to wisdom, 185. Temple of wisdom, 56. Sports
of wisdom, 182, 151*. See _Love and Wisdom_.

WISE.--A wise one is not a wise one without a woman, or without love, a
wife being the love of a wise man's wisdom, 56.

WOMAN, the, was created and born to become the love of the understanding
of a man, 55, 91. Woman was created out of the man, hence she has an
inclination to unite, and, as it were, reunite herself with the man,
173. Conjugial love is implanted in every woman from creation, 409.
Woman is actually formed into a wife, according to the description in
the book of creation, 193. In the universe nothing was created more
perfect than a woman of a beautiful countenance and becoming manners,
56. The woman receives from the man the truth of the church, 125. Woman,
by a peculiar property with which she is gifted from her birth, draws
back the internal affections into the inner recesses of her mind, 274.
Affection, application, manners, and form of woman, 91, 218. Women were
created by the Lord affections of the wisdom of men, 56. They are
created forms of the love of the understanding of men, 187. Women have
an interior perception of love, and men only an exterior, 47*. In
assemblies where the conversation of the men turns on subjects proper to
rational wisdom, women are silent, and listen only, the reason why, 165.
Intelligence of wisdom, 218. Women cannot enter into the duties proper
to men, 175. Difference between females, women, and wives, 199. See
_Wife_.

WONDERS conspicuous in eggs, 416.

WOOD signifies natural good, 77. Woods of palm-trees, and of rose-trees,
77.

WORD, the ancient, at this day is lost, and is only reserved in Great
Tartary, 77. The historical books of this Word are called the Wars of
Jehovah, and the prophetic books The Enunciations, 77.

WORD, the, with the most ancient, and with the ancient people, 77.

WORD, the, is the Lord, 516. In every thing of the Word there is the
marriage of good and truth, 516. The Word is the medium of conjunction
of the Lord with man, and of man with the Lord, 128. In its essence it
is divine truth united to divine good, and divine good united to divine
truth, 128. It is the perfect marriage of good and truth, 128. In every
part of the Word there is a spiritual sense corresponding to the natural
sense, and by means of the former sense the men of the church have
conjunction with the Lord, and consociation with angels, 532. The
sanctity of the Word resides in this sense, 5-32. While man reads the
Word, and collects truths out of it, the Lord adjoins good, 128.

WORKHOUSES, infernal, 264. See also 54, 80, 461.

WORKS are good or bad, according as they proceed from an upright will
and thought, or from a depraved will and thought, whatever may be their
appearance in externals, 527. Good works are uses, 10.

WORLD OF SPIRITS, the, is intermediate between heaven and hell, and
there the good are prepared for heaven, and the wicked for hell, 48*,
436, 461, 477. It is in the world of spirits that all men are first
collected after their departure out of the natural world, 2, 477. The
good are there prepared for heaven, and the wicked for hell; and after
such preparation, they discover ways open for them to societies of their
like, with whom they are to live eternally, 10, 477.

WORLD, the natural, subsists from its sun, which is pure fire, 380.
There is not anything in the natural world which is not also in the
spiritual world, 182, 207. In the natural world, almost all are capable
of being joined together as to external affections, but not as to
internal affections, if these disagree and appear, 272.

WORLD, the spiritual, subsists from its sun, which is pure love, as the
natural world subsists from its sun, 380. In the spiritual world there
are not spaces, but appearances of spaces, and these appearances are
according to the states of life of the inhabitants, 50. All things there
appear according to correspondences, 76. All who, from the beginning of
creation have departed by death out of the natural world, are in the
spiritual world, and as to their loves, resemble what they were when
alive in the natural world, and continue such to eternity, 73. In the
spiritual world there are all such things there as there are on earth,
and those things in the heavens are infinitely more perfect, 182.

_Obs._--The spiritual world in general comprehends heaven, the world of
spirits, and hell.

WORMS.--Wonders concerning them, 418. Silk-worms, 420.

WORSHIP, the, of God in heaven returns at stated periods, and lasts
about two hours, 23.

WRATH.--If love, especially the ruling love, be touched, there ensues an
emotion of the mind (_animus_); if the touch hurts, there ensues wrath,
358.

WRITERS.--The most ancient writers, whose works remain to us, do not go
back beyond the iron age, 73. See _Writings_.

WRITINGS, the, of the most ancient and of the ancient people are not
extant: the writings which exist are those of authors who lived after
the ages of gold, silver, and iron, 73. But so it is with us, Bill;
if we can once get those boys' feet in sound marching order, all the
nice problems of the human soul which we used to canvass may go to the----
But I suppose that I must reserve that word for military use.

By the way, when the battalion was asked to volunteer, the men only raised
one point.

They didn't trouble themselves about the work or the risk of it,
but they wondered whether anybody really _would_ look after their
homes and dependants when the excitement had died down a little.

All who come into heaven return into their vernal
youth, and into the powers appertaining to that age, and thus continue
to eternity, 44. Infants in heaven do not grow up beyond their first
age, and there they stop, and remain therein to eternity, 411, 444; and
that when they attain the stature which is common to youths of eighteen
years old in the world, and to virgins of fifteen, 444.

YOUTH.--In heaven they remain forever in state of youth, 355. See _Age_.

YOUTH, A.--The state of marriage of a youth with a widow, 322. How a
youth formed into a husband, 199.

YOUTHFUL.--With men, the youthful principle is changed into that of a
husband, 199.

ZEAL is of love, 358. Zeal is a spiritual burning or flame, 359. Zeal is
not the highest degree of love, but it is burning love, 358. The quality
of a man's zeal is according to the quality of his love, 362. There are
the zeal of a good love and the zeal of an evil love, 362. These two
zeals are alike in externals, but altogether unlike in internals, 363.
The zeal of a good love in its internals contains a hidden store of love
and friendship; but the zeal of an evil love in its internals contains a
hidden store of hatred and revenge, 365. The zeal of conjugial love is
called jealousy, 367. Wives are, as it were, burning zeals for the
preservation of friendship and conjugial confidence, 155*.

ZEALOUS (_Zelotes_).--Why Jehovah in the Word is called zealous, 366.