Produced by Barbara Tozier, Bill Tozier, Emmy and the
Online Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


UNDER THE OCEAN TO THE SOUTH POLE

Or

The Strange Cruise of the Submarine Wonder

BY
ROY ROCKWOOD

          AUTHOR OF "THROUGH THE AIR TO THE NORTH POLE," "THE
          RIVAL OCEAN DIVERS," "A SCHOOLBOY'S
          PLUCK," ETC.

ILLUSTRATED

NEW YORK CUPPLES & LEON CO.


GOOD BOOKS FOR BOYS

BY ROY ROCKWOOD

       *       *       *       *       *

=THE GREAT MARVEL SERIES=


          THROUGH THE AIR TO THE NORTH POLE
            Or The Wonderful Cruise of the Electric Monarch

          UNDER THE OCEAN TO THE SOUTH POLE
            Or The Strange Cruise of the Submarine Wonder

Cloth. Illustrated


          Copyright, 1907, by
          CUPPLES & LEON CO.

       *       *       *       *       *

UNDER THE OCEAN TO THE SOUTH POLE


CONTENTS

          CHAPTER                                PAGE

               I. WILL THE SHIP WORK?               1

              II. A LAND OF ICE                    10

             III. RUNNING DOWN A WAR SHIP          19

              IV. IN THE MIDST OF FIRE             27

               V. A GRAVE ACCUSATION               35

              VI. ON A RUNAWAY TROLLEY             43

             VII. OFF FOR THE SOUTH POLE           52

            VIII. ASHORE IN THE DARK               60

              IX. A PRICE ON THEIR HEADS           68

               X. ATTACKED BY A MONSTER            75

              XI. CAUGHT IN A SEA OF GRASS         84

             XII. FIRE ON BOARD                    92

            XIII. THE GHOST OF THE SUBMARINE      100

             XIV. DIGGING OUT THE SHIP            108

              XV. THE STRANGE SHIPWRECK           117

             XVI. THE GHOST AGAIN                 126

            XVII. ATTACKED BY SAVAGES             134

           XVIII. ON LAND                         143

             XIX. REGAINING THE SHIP              152

              XX. ON A VOLCANIC ISLAND            160

             XXI. CAUGHT IN A WHIRLPOOL           169

            XXII. UNDER FIRE                      177

           XXIII. CAUGHT IN AN ICE FLOE           185

            XXIV. THE SHIP GRAVEYARD              193

             XXV. CAUGHT BY SEA SUCKERS           201

            XXVI. LAND UNDER ICE                  211

           XXVII. ATTACKED BY AN OCTUPUS          220

          XXVIII. OUT OF THE ICE                  228

            XXIX. THE BOILING WATER               235

             XXX. THE SOUTH POLE--CONCLUSION      240


UNDER THE OCEAN TO THE SOUTH POLE


CHAPTER I

WILL THE SHIP WORK?


"Hand me that wrench, Mark," called Professor Amos Henderson to a boy
who stood near some complicated machinery over which the old man was
working. The lad passed the tool over.

"Do you think the ship will work, Professor?" he asked.

"I hope so, Mark, I hope so," muttered the scientist as he tightened
some bolts on what was perhaps the strangest combination of apparatus
that had ever been put together. "There is no reason why she should not,
and yet--"

The old man paused. Perhaps he feared that, after all, the submarine
boat on which he had labored continuously for more than a year would be
a failure.

"Is there anything more I can do now?" asked Mark.

"Not right away," replied the professor, without looking up from the
work he was doing. "But I wish you and Jack would be around in about an
hour. I am going to start the engine then, and I'll need you. If you see
Washington outside send him to me."

Mark left the big room where the submarine boat had been in process of
construction so long. Outside he met a boy about his own age, who was
cleaning a rifle.

"How's it going, Mark?" asked this second youth, who was rather fat,
and, if one could judge by his face, of a jolly disposition.

"The professor is going to try the engine in about an hour," replied
Mark. "We must be on hand."

"I'll be there all right. But if there isn't anything else to do, let's
shoot at a target. I'll bet I can beat you."

"Bet you can't. Wait 'till I get my gun."

"Now don't yo' boys go to disportin' yo'seves in any disproportionable
anticipation ob transposin' dem molecules of lead in a contigious
direction to yo' humble servant!" exclaimed a colored man, coming from
behind the big shed at that moment, and seeing Mark and Jack with their
rifles.

"I s'pose you mean to say, Washington," remarked Jack, "that you don't
care to be shot at. Is that it?"

"Neber said nuffin truer in all yo' born days!" exclaimed Washington
earnestly. "De infliction ob distress to de exterior portion ob--"

"The professor wants you," interrupted Mark, cutting off the colored
man's flow of language.

"Yo' mind what I tole yo'," Washington muttered as he hurried into the
work room.

Soon the reports of rifles indicated that the boys were trying to
discover who was the best shot, a contest that waged with friendly
interest for some time.

The big shed, where the submarine ship was being built, was located at a
lonely spot on the coast of Maine. The nearest town was Easton, about
ten miles away, and Professor Henderson had fixed on this location as
one best suited to give him a chance to work secretly and unobserved on
his wonderful invention.

The professor was a man about sixty-five years old, and, while of simple
and kindly nature in many ways, yet, on the subjects of airships and
submarines, he possessed a fund of knowledge. He was somewhat queer, as
many persons may be who devote all their thoughts to one object, yet he
was a man of fine character.

Some time before this story opens he had invented an electric airship in
which he, with Mark Sampson, Jack Darrow and the colored man,
Washington White, had made a trip to the frozen north.

Their adventures on that journey are told of in the first volume of this
series, entitled, "Through the Air to the North Pole, or, The Wonderful
Cruise of the _Electric Monarch_."

The two boys, Mark then being fifteen and Jack a year older, had met the
professor under peculiar circumstances. They were orphans, and, after
knocking about the world a bit, had chanced to meet each other. They
agreed to seek together such fortune as might chance to come to them.

While in the town of Freeport, N. Y., they were driven away by a
constable, who said tramps were not allowed in the village. The boys
jumped on a freight train, which broke in two and ran away down the
mountain, and the lads were knocked senseless in the wreck that
followed.

As it chanced Professor Henderson had erected nearby a big shop, where
he was building his airship. He and Washington were on hand when the
wreck occurred and they took the senseless boys to the airship shed.

The boys, after their recovery, accepted the invitation of the professor
to go on a search for the north pole. As the airship was about to start
Andy Sudds, an old hunter, and two men, Tom Smith and Bill Jones, who
had been called in to assist at the flight, held on too long and were
carried aloft.

Somewhat against their will the three latter made the trip, for the
professor did not want to return to earth with them.

The party had many adventures on the voyage, having to fight savage
animals and more savage Esquimaux. They reached the north pole, but in
the midst of such a violent storm that the ship was overturned, and the
discovery of the long-sought goal availed little. After many hardships,
and a fierce fight to recover the possession of the ship, which had been
seized by natives, the adventurers reached home.

Since then a little over a year had passed. The professor, having found
he could successfully navigate the air, turned his attention to the
water, and began to plan a craft that would sail beneath the ocean.

To this end he had moved his machine shop to this lonely spot on the
Maine coast. The two boys, who had grown no less fond of the old man
than he of them, went with him, as did Washington White, the negro, who
was a genius in his way, though somewhat inclined to use big words, of
the meaning of which he knew little and cared less.

Andy Sudds, the old hunter, had also been induced to accompany the
professor.

"I hunted game up north and in the air," said Andy, "and if there's a
chance to shoot something under the water I'm the one to do it."

Needing more assistance than either the boys, Andy or Washington could
give, the professor had engaged two young machinists, who, under a
strict promise never to divulge any of the secrets of the submarine, had
labored in its building.

Now the queer craft was almost finished. As it rested on the ways in the
shed, it looked exactly like a big cigar, excepting that the top part
was level, forming a platform.

The ship, which had been named the _Porpoise_, was eighty feet long, and
twenty feet in diameter at the largest part. From that it tapered
gradually, until the ends were reached. These consisted of flattened
plates about three feet in diameter, with a hole in the center one foot
in size.

Weary months of labor had been spent on the _Porpoise_, until now it was
almost ready for a trial. The professor had discovered a new method of
propulsion. Instead of propellers or paddle-wheels, he intended to send
his craft ahead or to the rear, by means of a water cable.

Through the entire length of the ship ran a round hole or shaft, one
foot in diameter. Within this was an endless screw worked by powerful
engines. With a working model the professor had demonstrated that when
the endless screw was revolved it acted on the water just as another
sort of screw does in wood. The water coming in through the shaft served
as a rope, so to speak, and the screw, acting on it, pulled the craft
ahead or to the rear, according to the direction in which the screw was
revolved.

The submarine was a wonderful craft. It contained a powerful engine,
electric motors and dynamos, and machinery of all kinds. The engine was
a turbine, and steam was generated from heat furnished by the burning of
a powerful gas, manufactured from sea water and chemicals. So there was
no need to carry a supply of coal on the ship.

The interior of the vessel was divided into an engine-room, a kitchen,
combination dining-room and parlor, bunk rooms, and a conning tower, or
place for the steersman.

While the boys had been shooting at the target the professor and
Washington had been putting the finishing touches to the engine,
tightening nuts here and screwed up bolts there.

"I guess that will do," remarked the old inventor. "Call the boys,
Washington."

The colored man went to the door and gave three blasts on a battered
horn that hung from a string.

"Coming!" called Mark, as he and Jack ceased their marksmanship contest
and approached the shed.

"Now boys, we'll see if she works so far," said the professor. "If she
does, we'll give her a trial under water."

At the inventor's directions the boys started the gas to generating from
the chemicals. Soon the hissing of steam told them that there was power
in the boiler.

The professor entered the engine-room of the submarine. He looked over
the various wheels, levers, handles, gages and attachments, satisfying
himself that all were in proper shape and position.

"Three hundred pounds pressure," he muttered, glancing at the steam
indicator. "That ought to be enough. Are you all ready, boys?"

"All ready!" cried Jack.

Of course the test was only one to see if the engine worked, for the
boat could not move until in the water.

The professor opened a valve. The steam filled the turbine with a hiss
and throb. The _Porpoise_ trembled. Then, with a cough and splutter of
the exhaust pipes, the engine started. Slowly it went at first, but, as
the professor admitted more steam, it revolved the long screw until it
fairly hummed in the shaft.

"Hurrah! It works!" cried Mark.

"It does!" chimed in Jack.

"Gollyation! She suttinly am goin'!" yelled Washington.

"I think we may say it is a success," said the professor calmly, yet
there was a note of exultation in his voice.

"Now that you've got her started, when are you goin' to put her in the
water an' scoot along under the waves?" asked Andy Sudds.

"In about a week," replied the professor.

"And where are you goin' to head for?" went on the hunter.

"We're going under the ocean to the south pole!" exclaimed the inventor,
as he shut off the engine.


CHAPTER II

A LAND OF ICE


"The south pole?" exclaimed Mark.

"Way down dat way!" cried Washington.

"Can you do it?" asked Jack.

"That remains to be seen," replied the professor, answering them all at
once. "I'm going to try, at any rate."

"Hurrah!" yelled Mark. "It will be better than going to the north pole,
for we will be in no danger of freezing to death."

"Don't be so sure of that," interrupted the professor. "There is more
ice at the south pole than at the north, according to all accounts. It
is a place of great icebergs, immense floes and cold fogs. But there is
land beyond the ice, I believe, and I am going to try to find it."

"It will be a longer voyage than to the north pole," said Jack.

"Jest de same," argued Washington, "de poles am at each end ob de
world."

"Yes, but we're quite a way north of the equator now, and we'll have to
cross that before we will be half way to the south pole," explained
Jack. "But I guess the _Porpoise_ can make good time."

"If the engine behaves under water as well as it did just now, we'll
skim along," said the professor.

"And so you figure there's land down there to the south, do you?" asked
old Andy.

"I do," replied the inventor. "I can't prove it, but I'm sure there is.
I have read all the accounts of other explorers and from the signs they
mention I am positive we shall find land if we ever get there. Land and
an open sea."

"And other things as well," muttered Andy, yet neither he nor any of
them dreamed of the terrible and strange adventures they were to have.

The next few days were busy ones. Many little details remained to
perfect in connection with the ship, and a lot of supplies and
provisions had to be purchased, for the professor was determined to get
all in readiness for the trip under the water. He believed firmly that
his ship would work, though some of the others were not so positive.

"We'll put her into the water to-morrow," announced the inventor after
supper one night. "Everything is complete as far as I can make it, and
the only thing remaining is to see if she will float, sink when I want
her to, and, what is most important, rise to the surface again. For,"
he added with a twinkle in his eye, "anybody can make a ship that will
sink, but it isn't every one who can make one that will come to the
surface again."

"Golly! I hope dis chile ain't goin' to git in no subicecream ship
what'll stay down under de water so de fishes gits him!" exclaimed
Washington, opening his eyes wide. "Dat's worser dan freezin!"

"Can't you swim?" asked Mark with a wink at Jack.

"Co'se I can swim, boy. I can swim like a starfish, but I can't wif ten
thousand tons of a subicecream ship on my back."

"A sub-ice-cream ship is a new one," commented the professor with a
smile. "It's a submarine, Washington."

"I can't see no difference," persisted the colored man. "Subicecream am
good enough for me."

That night Mark and Jack were thinking so much of the proposed test of
the ship the next day that they each dreamed they were sailing beneath
the waves, and Jack woke Mark up by grabbing him about the neck during a
particularly vivid part of the vision.

"What's the matter?" inquired Mark, sleepily.

"I thought the ship turned over and spilled me out and I was drowning,"
explained Jack. "I grabbed the first thing I got hold of and it happened
to be you."

"Well, as long as you're safe you can go to sleep again," said Mark. "I
dreamed I was chasing a whale with the _Porpoise_."

The boys were up early the next morning, and found the professor and
Washington before them. The inventor was inspecting the track which had
been built from the shed down to the water's edge to enable the
_Porpoise_ to slide into the ocean.

With him were the two machinists, Henry Watson and James Penson. They
had been busy since daylight making the ways secure.

"She goes in after breakfast," announced the professor, "and I'm going
to let you christen her, Washington."

"Me? I neber christened a ship," objected the colored man.

"Nothing like learning," remarked Mr. Henderson.

"Has you got the bottle ob wine?" asked Washington.

"I guess soda water will do," said the inventor. "Now look sharp, boys.
Get your breakfasts and we'll see if the ship will come up to our
expectations."

No one lingered over the meal. When it was finished the professor gave
Washington a few instructions about breaking the bottle over the nose of
the _Porpoise_ as she slid down to the water, for there was no bow to
such a queerly shaped vessel as the submarine.

At last all was in readiness. The two machinists knocked away the last
of the retaining blocks and eased the ship slightly down the
well-greased timbers of the ways.

"There she goes!" cried the professor. "Break the bottle, Washington!"

"In de name ob de Stars an' Stripes, in de name of liberty, de home of
the free an' de land ob de brave, I names yo' _Mrs. Porpoise_!" cried
the colored man, but he was so long getting the words out, and so slow
in swinging the bottle of soda, that the ship was quite beyond his reach
when he had finished his oration. He was not to be outdone, however,
and, with a quick movement he hurled the bottle at the moving ship. It
struck the blunt nose squarely, and shivered to pieces.

"Three cheers for de south pole!" yelled Washington, and the others
joined in.

The next instant the _Porpoise_ was riding the waves of the little bay,
dancing about as lightly as a cork, though, from the nature of her
construction, she was quite low in the water, only about three feet of
freeboard showing where the platform was located.

"Well, she floats, anyhow," remarked the professor. "Row out and fasten
cables fore and aft," he went on, turning to the two machinists. In a
few minutes the _Porpoise_ was fastened to a small dock with strong
ropes the two young men had carried out to her in rowboats.

"We will go aboard in a little while," the professor said. "I am anxious
to see if she rides on an even keel and how the sinking tanks work."

Aided by the boys, he and Washington carried on board a number of tools
and appliances. Then, with the two machinists, they all descended into
the interior of the craft through the small manhole in the middle of the
deck or platform.

Inside the _Porpoise_, the greater part of which was below the surface
of the waves and consequently in darkness, the professor switched on the
electric lights and then he proceeded to get up steam.

The propelling power of the craft has already been described. In order
to make the ship sink beneath the water all that was necessary was to
incline the rudder and open certain valves in the four tanks, when the
water, rushing in, would sink her. There was a tank on either side, and
one each fore and aft. If it was desired to sink straight down all four
tanks were filled at once. If the professor wanted to descend slanting
either to the front or back, only one of the end tanks was filled,
according to the direction desired. The deflecting rudder also aided
greatly in this movement.

To cause the ship to rise the tanks were emptied of the water by means
of powerful pumps. The filling of the tanks, as well as the emptying of
them, the starting or stopping of the engine that moved the boat, as
well as the control of most of the important machinery on the craft
could be accomplished from the conning or steering tower, as well as
from the engine-room.

There were numerous gages to tell the depth to which the ship had sunk,
the steam pressure, density of the water, and other necessary details.

There were dynamos to make light, motors to run the pumps, and a great
storage battery, so that in case of a breakdown to the turbine engine
the craft could be run entirely by electricity for a time.

The cooking was all done by this useful current, and all that was
necessary to make a cup of coffee or fry a beefsteak was to turn a small
switch of the electric stove.

The professor was busy over the machine for generating gas, that
furnished the heat to create steam. Soon a hissing told that it was
working. In a few minutes the hum and throb of the engine told that it
was ready to start.

"We are only going down a little way," the professor said, "and only
going to travel a short distance under water for the first time. I think
there is no danger, but if any of you want to back out, now is your
chance."

No one seemed inclined to withdraw, though Mark said afterward he
thought Washington got as pale as it is possible for a colored man to
get.

"We will all put on life preservers," the inventor went on, "and one of
you will be stationed near the emergency exit. In case anything goes
wrong, and I cannot make the ship rise, by pulling the lever the top of
the craft will be forced off, and, we can at least save our lives. I
think we are all ready now. Mark, you clamp down the manhole cover, and
Jack, after you close the conning tower station yourself at the
emergency lever after we have donned the life preservers."

The cork jackets were adjusted and Mark clamped the manhole cover on.
The professor took one last look at the various levers and handles, and
then turned the wheel that admitted water to all four tanks. There was a
hissing sound as the sea water rushed in, and the _Porpoise_ gave a
sudden lurch.

Then they could all feel the submarine sinking. Down and down she went.
Would she ever stop? Would the professor be able to raise her again?
There were questions that troubled everyone.

Down and down the craft sunk, until by the gage it was indicated that
she was twenty feet below the surface. We were backing and slowing off
Port Ludlow. Big sawmill close at hand.
Four barks lie at the dock in front of it; a few houses stand on
the hill above; pine woods crowd to the water's edge, making the
place look solemn.

Surely it is a solemn land and a solemn sea about here. After breakfast,
about 8.30 o'clock, Port Townsend hove in sight, and here we await
the arrival of the Alaska boat.

What an odd little town it is--the smallest possible city set upon
a hill; the business quarter huddled at the foot of the hill, as if it
had slid down there and lodged on the very edge of the sea! The hotels
stalk out over the water on stilts.

One sleeps well in the sweet salt air, lulled by the murmur of the waves
under the veranda.

I rummage the town in search of adventure; climb one hundred and fifty
steep steps, and find the highlands at the top, green, pastoral
and reposeful.

Pleasant homes are scattered about; a few animals feed leisurely
in the grassy streets.

One diminutive Episcopal chapel comes near to being pretty, yet
stops just short of it.

But there is a kind of unpretending prettiness in the bright and
breezy heights environed by black forest and blue sea.

A revenue cutter--this is a port of customs, please remember--lies
in the offing.

She looks as if she were suspended in air, so pure are the elements
in the northland.

I lean from a parapet, on my way down the seaward face of the cliff, and
hear the order, "Make ready!"

Then comes a flash of flame, a white, leaping cloud, and a crash that
shatters an echo into fragments all along the shore; while beautiful
smoke rings roll up against the sky like victorious wreaths.

I call on the Hon. J. G. Swan, Hawaiian Consul, author of "The Northwest
Coast; or, Three Years' Residence in Washington Territory." Find him
delightful, and delightfully situated in a perfect museum of Indian
relics; himself full of the liveliest recollections of Indian life,
and quite an authority on Indian tongues and traditions; find also
an old schoolmate, after long years of separation, and am most
courteously entertained.

What a drive we had over the hills and along the beach, where the crows
haunt the water's edge like sea-birds! It has been repeatedly affirmed
that these crows have been seen to seize a clam, raise it high in
the air, let it drop upon a rock, and then pounce upon the fragments
and feast furiously.

But I have never seen one who has had ocular proof of this.

There was a very happy hour spent at Colonel Douglas' quarters, over at
the camp; and then such a long, long drive through the deep wildwood,
with its dense undergrowth, said to be the haunt of bear, panther,
wild cat, deer, and other large game.

Bearberries grew in profusion everywhere. The road, kept in splendid
repair by the army men, dipped into a meadow full of savage mosquitoes;
but escaping through two gates, we struck again into the forest,
where the road was almost overgrown with dew-damp brush, that
besprinkled us profusely as we passed.

We paused upon the slope above Port Discovery Bay; saw an old fellow
on the porch of a wee cottage looking steadfastly into the
future--across the Bay; with pipe in mouth, he was the picture of
contentment, abstraction and repose. He never once turned to look at
us, though few pass that way; but kept his eyes fixed upon a vision
of surpassing beauty, where the vivid coloring was startling to the
eye and the morning air like an elixir.

Nothing but the great summer hotel of the future--it will surely come
some day and stand right there--can rob the spot of its blissful
serenity.

CHAPTER VI.

In the Inland Sea.

We were waiting the arrival of the Alaska boat,--wandering aimlessly
about the little town, looking off upon the quiet sea, now veiled
in a dense smoke blown down from the vast forest fires that were
sweeping the interior.

The sun, shorn of his beams, was a disk of copper; the sun-track
in the sea, a trail of blood.

The clang of every ship's bell, the scream of every whistle, gave
us new hope; but we were still waiting, waiting, waiting.

Port Townsend stands knee-deep in the edge of a sea-garden. I sat a long
time on the dock, watching for some sign of the belated boat.

Great ropes of kelp, tubes of dark brown sea-grass, floated past me
on the slow tide. Wonderful anemones, pink, balloon-shaped, mutable,
living and breathing things,--these panted as they drifted by.

At every respiration they expanded like the sudden blossoming of a
flower; then they closed quite as suddenly, and became mere buds. When
the round core of these sea-flowers was exposed to the air--the
palpitating heart was just beneath the surface most of the time,--they
withered in a breath; but revived again the moment the water glazed
them over, and fairly revelled in aqueous efflorescence.

"Bang!" It was the crash of an unmistakable gun, that shook the town to
its foundations and brought the inhabitants to their feet in an instant.

Out of the smoke loomed a shadowy ship, and, lo! it was the Alaska boat.

A goodly number of passengers were already on board; as many more
were now to join her; and then her prow was to be turned to the
north star and held there for some time to come.

In a moment the whole port was in a state of excitement. New arrivals
hurried on shore to see the lions of the place. We, who had been anxiously
awaiting this hour for a couple of long summer days, took the ship
by storm, and drove the most amiable and obliging of pursers nearly
frantic with our pressing solicitations.

Everybody was laying in private stores, this being our last chance to
supply all deficiencies.

Light literature we found scattered about at the druggist's and the
grocer's and the curiosity shops; also ink, pens, note-books,
tobacco, scented soap and playing-cards were discovered in equally
unexpected localities.

We all wanted volumes on the Northwest--as many of them as we could
get; but almost the only one obtainable was Skidmore's "Alaska, the
Sitkan Archipelago," which is as good as any, if not the best.

A few had copies of the "Pacific Coast Pilot. Alaska. Part I. Dixon's
Entrance to Yakutat Bay,"--invaluable as a practical guide, and filled
with positive data. Dall and Whimper we could not find, nor Bancroft at
that time.

Who will give us a handy volume reprint of delightful old Vancouver?

We were busy as bees all that afternoon; yet the night and the
starlight saw us satisfactorily hived, and it was not long before the
buzzing ceased, as ship and shore slept the sleep of the just. By and
by we heard pumping, hosing, deck-washing, the paddling of bare
feet to and fro, and all the familiar sounds of an early morning
at sea.

The ship, however, was motionless: we were lying stock-still. Doubtless
everybody was wondering at this, as I was, when there came a crash,
followed by a small avalanche of broken timber, while the ship
quaked in her watery bed.

I thought of dynamite and the _Dies Irae_; but almost immediately
the cabin-boy, who appeared with the matutinal coffee, said it was
only the _Olympian_, the fashionable Sound steamer, that had run
into us, as was her custom.

She is always running into something, and she succeeded in carrying
away a portion of our stern gear on this occasion.

Nevertheless, we were delayed only a few hours; for the _Olympian_
was polite enough not to strike us below the water-line, and so by
high noon we were fairly under way.

From my log-book I take the following: This is slow and easy
sailing--a kind of jog-trot over the smoothest possible sea, with
the paddles audibly working every foot of the way.

We run down among the San Juan Islands, where the passages are so
narrow and so intricate they make a kind of watery monogram among
the fir-lined shores.

A dense smoke still obscures the sun,--a rich haze that softens the
distance and lends a picturesqueness that is perhaps not wholly
natural to the locality, though the San Juan Islands are unquestionably
beautiful.

The Gulf of Georgia, the Straits of Fuca, and Queen Charlotte Sound
are the words upon the lips of everybody.

Shades of my schoolboy days! How much sweeter they taste here than in
the old geography class!

Before us stretches a wilderness of islands, mostly uninhabited, which
penetrates even into the sunless winter and the shadowless summer of
Behring Sea.

As for ourselves, Old Probabilities has got down to business. He has
opened an impromptu peripatetic school of navigation, and triumphantly
sticks a pin into every point that tallies with his yard-square
chart.
The evangelist has his field-glass to his eye in search of the
unregenerated aborigines.

The swell tourists are much swollen with travel; they loosen the
belts of their Norfolks, and at intervals affect a languid interest in
this mundane sphere.

There are delightful people on board--many of them--and not a few
others.

There are bevies of girls--all young, all pretty; and all, or nearly all,
bubbling over with hearty and wholesome laughter.

What richness!

A good, clean deck running the whole length of the ship; a cosy and
cheerful social hall, with a first-class upright piano of delicious
tone, and at least a half dozen creditable performers to awaken the
soul of it; a good table, good weather, good luck, and positively
nothing to do but have a good time for three solid weeks in the
wilderness.

The pestiferous telephone can not play the earwig on board this
ship; the telegraph, with metallic tick, can not once startle us
by precipitating town tattle; the postal service is cut off; wars
and rumors of wars, the annihilation of a nation, even the swallowing
up of a whole continent, are now of less consequence to us than the
possibility of a rain-shower this afternoon, or the solution of the
vexed question, "Will the aurora dazzle us before dawn?"

We do not propose to wait upon the aurora: for days and days and days we
are going to climb up the globe due North, getting nearer and nearer to
it all the while.

Now, inasmuch as everything is new to us, we can easily content ourselves
for hours by lounging in the easy-chairs, and looking off upon the
placid sea, and at the perennial verdure that springs out of it and
mantles a lovely but lonely land.

Only think of it for a moment!

Here on the northwest coast there are islands sown so thickly that
many of the sea-passages, though deep enough for a three-decker to
swim in, are so narrow that one might easily skim his hat across
them.

There are thousands of these islands--yea, tens of thousands,--I don't
know just how many, and perhaps no man does.

They are of all shapes and sizes, and the majority of them are handsomely
wooded.

The sombre green of the woods, stretching between the sombre blue-green
of the water and the opaline sheen of the sky, forms a picture--a
momentary picture,--the chief features of which change almost as
suddenly and quite as completely as the transformations in a
kaleidoscope.

We are forever turning corners; and no sooner are we around one corner
than three others elbow us just ahead. Now, toward which of the three
are we bound, and will our good ship run to larboard or to starboard?
This is a turn one might bet on all day long--and lose nearly every
time.

A bewildering cruise! Vastly finer than river sailing is this Alaskan
expedition. Here is a whole tangle of rivers full of strange tides,
mysterious currents, and sweet surprises. Moreover, we can get
lost if we want to--no one can get lost in a river.

We can rush in where pilots fear to tread, strike sunken rocks, toss
among dismal eddies, or plunge into whirlpools. We can rake overhanging
boughs with our yard-arms if we want to--but we don't want to. In
1875 the United States steamer _Saranac_ went down in Seymour
Narrows, and her fate was sudden death.

The United States steamer _Suwanee_ met with a like misfortune on
entering Queen Charlotte Sound. It is rather jolly to think of these
things, and to realize that we were in more or less danger; though the
shores are as silent as the grave, the sea sleeps like a mill-pond, and
the sun sinks to rest with great dignity and precision, nightly bathing
the lonely North in sensuous splendor.

It is getting late. Most of us are indulging in a constitutional. We rush
up and down the long flush decks like mad; we take fiendish
delight in upsetting the pious dignity of the evangelist; we flutter
the smokers in the smoking-room--because, forsooth, we are chasing
the girls from one end of the ship to the other; and consequently
the denizens of the masculine cabin can give their undivided attention
to neither cards nor tobacco.

What fun it all is--when one is not obliged to do it for a living,
and when it is the only healthy exercise one is able to take!

By and by the girls fly to their little nests. As we still stroll in the
ever-so-late twilight, at 10 p. m., we hear them piping sleepily, one to
another, their heads under their wings no doubt. They are early birds--but
that is all right.

They are the life of the ship; but for their mirth and music the
twilight would be longer and less delightful.
Far into the night I linger over a final cigarette.

An inexpressible calm steals over me,--a feeling as of deliverance,
for the time being at least, from all the cares of this world.

We are steaming toward a mass of shadows that, like iron gates, seem shut
against us.

A group of fellow-voyagers gathers on the forward deck, resolved
to sit up and ascertain whether we really manage to squeeze through
some crevice, or back out at last and go around the block.

I grow drowsy and think fondly of my little bunk.

What a night! Everything has grown vague and mysterious. Not a voice
is heard--only the throb of the engine down below and the articulated
pulsation of the paddles, every stroke of which brings forth a
hollow sound from the sea, as clear and as well defined as a blow
upon a drumhead; but these are softened by the swish of waters
foaming under the wheel.

Echoes multiply; myriads of them, faint and far, play peek-a-boo with the
solemn pilot, who silently paces the deck when all the ship is wrapped
in a deep sleep.

CHAPTER VII.

Alaskan Village Life.

With the morning coffee came a rumor of an Indian village on the
neighboring shore. We were already past it, a half hour or more,
but canoes were visible.

Now this was an episode. Jack, the cabin-boy, slid back the blind; and
as I sat up in my bunk, bolstered among the pillows, I saw the green
shore, moist with dew and sparkling in the morning light, sweep
slowly by--an endless panorama.

There is no dust here, not a particle.

There is rain at intervals, and a heavy dew-fall, and sometimes a
sea fog that makes it highly advisable to suspend all operations
until it has lifted.

After coffee I found the deck gaily peopled. The steamer was running
at half speed; and shortly she took a big turn in a beautiful lagoon
and went back on her course far enough to come in sight of the
Indian village, but we did not stop there.

It seems that one passage we were about to thread was reached at a
wrong stage of the tide; and, instead of waiting there for better
water, we loafed about for a couple of hours, enjoying it immensely,
every soul of us.

Vancouver Island lay upon our left. It was half veiled in mist, or smoke;
and its brilliant constellation of sky-piercing peaks, green to
the summit, with glints of sunshine gilding the chasms here and
there, and rich shadows draping them superbly, reminded me of
Nukahiva, one of the Marquesas Islands--the one where Herman Melville
found his famed Typee.

It seems extravagant to associate any feature in the Alaskan archipelago
with the most romantic island in the tropical sea; but there are points
of similarity, notwithstanding the geographical discrepancy--daring
outlines, magnificent cloud and atmospheric effects, and a fragrance,
a pungent balsamic odor ever noticeable.

This impalpable, invisible balm permeates everything; it is wafted out
over the sea to us, even as the breath of the Spice Islands is borne over
the waves to the joy of the passing mariner.

Surely there can be no finer tonic for a fagged fellow with feeble
lungs than this glorious Alaskan air.

There is no danger of surfeit here; the over-sweet is not likely to be
met with in this latitude; and, then, if one really feels the need
of change, why, here is a fishing station. The forest is trimmed
along the shore so that there is scant room for a few shanties between
the water and the wilderness. A dock runs but a little way out into the
sea, for the shores are precipitous and one finds a goodly number
of fathoms only a few yards from the shingle.

At the top of the dock, sometimes nearly housing the whole
of it, stands a shed well stored with barrels, sacks of salt, nets,
and all the necessary equipments of a first-class fish-canning
establishment.

A few Indian lodges are scattered along the shore. The Indians, a hearty
and apparently an industrious and willing race, do most of the work about
here. A few boats and canoes are drawn up upon the beach. The atmosphere
is heavy with the odor of ancient fish.

The water-line is strewn with cast-off salmon heads and entrails. Indian
dogs and big, fat flies batten there prodigiously.

Acres of salmon bellies are rosy in the sun.
The blood-red interiors of drying fish--rackfuls of them turned
wrong side out--are the only bit of color in all Alaska.

Everybody and everything is sombre and subdued.

Yet not all fishing stations are cheerless. The salmon fishery and trading
store located at Loring are picturesque. The land-lock nook is as lovely
as a Swiss lake; and, oh, the myriad echoes that waken in chorus
among these misty mountains!

The waters of the Alaskan archipelago are prolific. Vast shoals of
salmon, cod, herring, halibut, mullet, ulicon, etc., silver the surface
of the sea, and one continually hears the splash of leaping fish.

A traveller has written of his visit to the fishing-grounds on the
Naass river, where the tribes had gathered for what is called their
"small fishing"--the salmon catch is at another time.

These small fish are valuable for food and oil. They run up the river for
six weeks only, and with the utmost regularity.

At the point he visited, the Naass was about a mile and a half
wide; yet so great was the quantity of fish that, with three nails
driven into a stick, an Indian would rake up a canoeful in a short
time.

Five thousand Indians were congregated from British Columbia and Alaska;
their faces painted red and black; feathers upon their heads, and
imitations of wild beasts upon their dresses.

Over the fish was an immense cloud of sea-gulls--so many were there, and
so thick were they, that the fluttering of their wings was like a
swift fall of snow.

Over the gulls were eagles soaring and watching their chance.
The halibut, the cod, the porpoise, and the finback whale had
followed the little ones out of the deep; and there was confusion
worse confounded, and chaos came again in the hours of wild excitement
that followed the advent of the small fry, for each and all in sea
and air were bent upon the destruction of these little ones.

Seven thousand salmon have been taken at one haul of the seine in this
latitude. Most of these salmon weigh sixty pounds each, and some
have been caught that weigh a hundred and twenty pounds. Yet there are
no game fish in Alaska. Let sportsmen remember that far happier hunting
grounds lie within twenty miles of San Francisco, and in almost
any district of the Northern or Eastern States. On a certain occasion
three of our fellow-voyagers, armed in fashionable fishing toggery,
went forth from Sitka for a day's sport.

A steam launch bore them to a land where the rank grass and rushes grew
shoulder high. Having made their way with difficulty to the margin
of a lake, they came upon a boat which required incessant bailing
to prevent its speedy foundering.

One kept the craft afloat while the others fished until evening. They
caught nothing, yet upon landing they found five fish floundering under
the seats; these swam in through a hole in the bottom of the boat.

I say again, on good authority, there are no game fish in Alaska. There
are salmon enough in these waters to supply the world--but the world can
be supplied without coming to these waters at all. The truth is, I fear,
that the market has been glutted and the business overdone.

One evening we anchored off a sad and silent shore. A few Indian lodges
were outlined against the woods beyond. A few Indians stolidly awaited
the arrival of a small boat containing one of our fellow-passengers.
Then for some hours this boat was busily plying to and fro, bringing
out to us all that was portable of a once flourishing, or at least
promising, fishery and cannery, now defunct.

Meanwhile the mosquitoes boarded our ship on a far more profitable
speculation.

It was pitiful to see our friend gathering together the _débris_ of a
wrecked fortune--for he had been wealthy and was now on the down grade
of life--hoping almost against hope to be able to turn an honest penny
somehow, somewhere, before he dies.

At times we saw solitary canoes containing a whole family of Indians
fishing in the watery waste. What solemn lives they must lead! But a
more solemn and more solitary scene occurred a little later. All the
afternoon we had been sailing under splendid icy peaks.

We came in out of the hot sun, and were glad of the cool, snow-chilled air
that visited us lightly at intervals.

It was the hour of 9.30 p. m. The sun was dropping behind a lofty mountain
range, and in its fine glow we steamed into a lovely cove under a
towering height. A deserted, or almost deserted, fishing village
stood upon a green bottom land--a mere handful of lodges, with a
young growth of trees beyond, and an older growth between these and
the glacier that was glistening above them all.

A cannery looking nearly new stood at the top of a tall dock on stilts.
On the extreme end of the dock was a figure--a man, and a white man
at that--with both hands in his pockets, and an attitude of
half-awakened curiosity.

The figure stood stock-still. We wondered if it lived, if it breathed, or
if it was an effigy set up there in scorn of American enterprise. We
slowed up and drew near to the dock. It was a curious picture: a half
dozen log-built lodges; a few tall piles driven into the land for
steamer or trading schooner to make fast to; a group of Indians by
a feeble camp fire,--Indians who never once changed their postures
more than to wearily lift their heads and regard us with absolute
indifference.

When we were near enough to hail the motionless figure on the dock, we did
not hail him.

Everybody was wildly curious: Everybody was perfectly dumb. The whole
earth was silent at last; the wheels had stopped; the boat was scarcely
moving through the water. The place, the scene, the hour seemed under
a spell.

Then a bell rang very shrilly in the deep silence; the paddles plunged
into the sea again; we made a graceful sweep under the shadow of the
great mountain and proudly steamed away.
Not a syllable had been exchanged with that mysterious being on the
dock; we merely touched our hats at the last moment; he lifted his,
stalked solemnly to the top of the dock and disappeared.

"I can't take any chances on their giving me the slip."

"This place is going to be crowded with people from the burned hotel,"
objected the sergeant. "There will be no room for you. Besides, how do I
know these boys are anarchists?"

"Look in their valise," cried the stranger. "It is filled with bombs."

"You can't look in this satchel," exclaimed Jack, for he remembered the
valise contained parts of the professor's secret machines.

"What did I tell you?" cried the Englishman with triumph in his tones.
"They are the guilty ones. They are afraid to open their valise."

"We are, but not because it has bombs in it," said Mark. "It has parts
of an unpatented machine and the owner does not want any one to see
them," for Mark remembered Mr. Henderson's strict injunctions to let no
one but the mechanist to whom they had gone catch a glimpse of the
parts that were to be duplicated. The machinist was sworn to secrecy.

"It's none of our affair," said the sergeant, though he seemed a little
impressed by the Englishman's words and the reluctance Mark and Jack
showed to letting the valise be opened. "The boys will be here until
morning, and then you can see the judge. Now you'll have to get out. You
boys get to bed."

Muttering threats, the stranger went from the station house, and Mark
and Jack, in response to a nod from the doorman, followed him upstairs
to a part of the police station used to detain witnesses. They were
shown to a small room with a single bed.

"Are ye really anarchists?" asked the doorman.

"Not a bit," replied Jack, and he told as much of their story as he
dared.

"I was kind-of hopin' ye was," said the officer with a twinkle in his
eye. "It wouldn't do any harm to scare that uppish Englishman a bit.
Sure he an' his kind have done enough to poor old Ireland."

"I'm sorry we can't oblige you," said Mark with a laugh.

"I guess ye're all right," went on the doorman. "I hope ye sleep good
the rest of the night."

Then he left them alone. What with the excitement of the fire and the
startling accusation against them, the boys' brains were too excited to
let them sleep much. They had a few fitful naps throughout the remainder
of the night.

It was just getting daylight when Mark was awakened by some one shaking
him.

"What is it?" he asked. "Another fire?"

"Not this time," replied a voice, and Mark, now that his eyes were fully
opened, saw the doorman bending over him.

"What's the matter?" asked Jack waking up in his turn.

"Easy!" exclaimed the doorman in a whisper. "I happened to think ye
might want to be leavin'."

"Leaving?" asked Mark in bewilderment.

"Yes. Ye know that Englishman is liable to be back any minute, an' he
may make trouble for ye. I know ye're innocent lads, an' I'd hate to see
ye mixed up in a mess with that fellow. So I slips up here early, an' ye
can leave by the back door if ye want to, an' the officer of His
Imperial Majesty, King Edward VII, will never know a thing about it."

"It looks like running away," objected Jack.

"Sure there's no charge agin ye," went on the doorman. "Ye're free to
come an' go as far as we're concerned, an' ye'd better go whilst ye have
the chance."

Jack reflected. It was true that the charge of the Englishman, baseless
as it was, might make trouble for them, and cause them endless delays in
getting back to Professor Henderson. Suddenly Jack made up his mind.

"Come on Mark," he said.


CHAPTER VI

ON A RUNAWAY TROLLEY


"Are you going to leave?" asked Mark.

"Certainly. There is no use staying here and getting mixed up in
something that Englishman thinks we have done. It's easier to go away
quietly and let him find out his mistake."

"All right," agreed Mark. "I wonder who he is, anyhow?"

"He thinks he owns the earth, whoever he is," returned Jack.

"He's some sort of a special detective traveling with Lord Peckham's
party," explained the doorman. "He told us a lot about himself last
night after you boys went to bed. He came back to inquire how early the
judge would be here.

"He went on to tell how some English anarchists have vowed to kill Lord
Peckham because he foreclosed a lot of mortgages on some poor people in
Ireland where he owned property," added the doorman. "There was some
sort of explosions in the hotel, near where Lord Peckham had his rooms.
Maybe it was a bomb and, maybe ag'in it was only the boiler. Anyhow,
this detective jumped to the conclusion that anarchists had done it, and
he thinks you are responsible. But you'd better be goin' now. It's
gettin' daylight."

So Mark and Jack, with what scanty clothes they had, and carrying their
valise, went quietly out of the back door of the police station.

"We'd better go to the machine shop for the rest of the stuff,"
suggested Mark, "and then we can take the first trolley we see and get
back to the professor."

Through quiet side streets the boys made their way toward the machine
shop. They were somewhat amused to think how they had fooled the
detective, but they would not have felt so jolly had they seen the
roughly dressed man who had darted after them as soon as they left the
police station.

"I'll get you yet," the man muttered. "You needn't think to escape with
the aid of these bloomin' American police."

The lads found the machinist just opening his shop though it was quite
early. The pieces of apparatus were finished and, after paying for them
Mark put the parts in the valise.

"Quite a fire in town," observed the machinist.

"Yes," answered Mark, not wishing to get into a long conversation.

"Heard the hotel was blowed up by anarchists and that the police are
after 'em," proceeded the man.

"I believe I did hear something like that," admitted Mark. "I guess
we'll be going."

He signalled to Jack, and the two hurried out of the shop. As they did
so, the trampish-looking man glided from behind a tree where he had been
hiding and took after them.

"Say," exclaimed Jack, "I forgot we haven't had any breakfast yet."

"That's so," said Mark, rubbing his stomach and making a wry face.

Near by was a bakery, and there the lads got some coffee and rolls which
tasted fine. When they finished their simple meal a trolley came past
and they ran to catch it. So did the man who had been following them,
but this person bore no resemblance to the spruce little detective who
had wanted to arrest the boys.

"A couple of hours now and we'll be back at the cabin," spoke Mark. "My,
but I must say we have had strenuous times since we started away!"

There were few passengers on the trolley so early in the morning and not
many stops to make, so the motorman turned on the power full and made
the vehicle speed along.

Mile after mile was covered and finally the car reached the top of a
long hill. At the foot of this the line came to an end, and the boys had
a two mile tramp before them to reach the lonely spot where the
_Porpoise_ was docked.

Down the hill the car started. The motorman shut off the electricity and
let the vehicle run by its weight.

Faster and faster it ran, the dust flying in a cloud about it.

"Better put the brakes on a bit," called the conductor. "It's gettin'
kinder speedy, Hank!"

The motorman twisted the handle. There was a grinding noise as the shoes
took hold on the wheels. Then a chain snapped and the car seemed to leap
ahead.

"The brake's busted! I can't stop the car!" yelled the motorman.

Vainly he twisted at the handle. Then, seeing he could not stop the
trolley car he made a desperate jump off the vehicle and landed in a
heap on the side of the road, rolling over and over.

"Reverse the current!" cried one of the passengers, to the conductor.
"That ought to stop her!"

The conductor made his way to the front platform and turned the
reversing lever. Then he applied the current. But it was no use. With a
blinding flash and a report like that of a gun a fuse blew out, and that
crippled the car completely so far as the electric current was
concerned.

"Everybody jump!" cried the conductor. "There's a curve at the foot of
the hill, and we'll all be killed if we stay on!"

One by one the passengers leaped from the car. Several were badly hurt
by the falls they got. Meanwhile the trolley was tearing down the hill
at a terrific rate of speed.

"Shall we jump?" asked Mark of Jack.

"We'll be killed if we do," was Jack's answer.

"And we'll be killed if we stay aboard," said Mark.

"Not if I can help it," cried Jack as he started for the rear platform.

"What are you going to do?" asked Mark.

"Put on the other brake. They never thought to try this one! Maybe it
will work and stop the car!"

Then Mark saw what Jack was up to and went to help him. The shabbily
dressed man seemed undecided what to do. He stood up, holding to the
straps to prevent himself from being tossed from side to side as the
runaway trolley swayed. He watched the boys curiously.

The lads, reaching the rear platform, twisted at the brake handle with
all their strength. They could feel that the chain was still intact. But
would the shoes grip the wheels with force sufficient to stop the car?

There was a shrill screech as the brakes were applied by the boys. With
all their might they turned the handle, winding the chain up tighter and
tighter. At last they could not budge it another inch. Then they waited
anxiously.

The car never slackened its speed. So great was the momentum that had
both sets of brakes been in working order it is doubtful whether they
would have stopped the vehicle. The speed was so great now that one of
the journals became hot and the oily waste that was packed in it caught
fire, making what railroad men term a "hot box".

"I guess we're done for," groaned Mark.

"We certainly haven't checked the speed any," Jack admitted. "But wait a
minute."

He began stamping on the floor of the platform.

"What you doing?" cried Mark, for he had to shout to make his voice
heard above the roar and rattle of the car.

"Putting on the sand," replied Jack, as he kicked at the plunger which,
being depressed, let a stream of fine gravel out on the rails. "The
wheels are gripped I think, and are slipping on the rails. This may help
some."

"Let me give you a hand," exclaimed a voice, and the boys turned to see
the shabby man standing with them on the platform. He grasped the brake
handle, and gave it an additional turn. His strength seemed remarkable
for so small a man.

The speed of the car was checked a little, but the vehicle was still
speeding along at a rate that would soon bring it to destruction if not
halted before the curve was reached.

"That's a little better," observed Mark. "It's a good thing you were
here."

"Good for me, not so good for you," said the man with a peculiar smile.

"What do you mean?" asked Mark.

"I mean that I shall have to place you under arrest for attempting to
assassinate Lord Peckham!" exclaimed the man. "I am Detective Ducket, of
Scotland Yard!"

He stripped off a false beard he had donned, and threw back his coat,
displaying his shield. He was the same man who had attempted to arrest
the boys in the police station at Easton.

"I've got you just where I want you now," Detective Ducket went on.
"There are none of those blooming American police to interfere."

The next instant the car gave a sudden lurch. Then it seemed to rise up
in the air. Jack felt himself flying through space, and he observed
Mark, who was clinging to the valise, following him.

There was a terrific crash, a ripping, tearing splintering sound, and
the runaway trolley smashed into a big oak tree at the foot of the hill.
The vehicle had completely jumped the track at the sharp curve.

Jack's eyes grew dim, and he seemed to be sinking down in some dark pool
of water. He heard a splashing beside him and began to strike out,
trying to swim. He seemed to be choking. Then the blessed air and
daylight came to him, and he found he was floating on the surface of a
pond.

He dashed the water from his eyes and saw, over on the bank, the wreck
of the trolley. Then he noticed that Mark was swimming beside him.

"What happened?" asked Jack.

"A little of everything," panted Mark. "Lucky we weren't killed. We must
have been flung off the rear platform into this duck pond."

The boys soon made their way to shore, unhurt except for the wetting.
The fall into the water had saved their lives.

"Where's the valise of machinery?" asked Jack.

"There it is," answered Mark pointing to where it had fallen at the back
of the pond.

"And what became of Detective Ducket?"

"He's here, at your service!" exclaimed a voice. "Consider yourselves
under arrest and don't you dare to leave this place without me."

The boys looked in the direction of the sound and saw the English
officer lying on the grass not far away. He seemed in pain, but had
raised himself on his elbow and was pointing his finger sternly at the
boys.


CHAPTER VII

OFF FOR THE SOUTH POLE


"Are you hurt?" asked Jack.

"I think my leg is broken, but otherwise I'm not damaged," replied the
detective. "Even if I am disabled, it makes no difference, you are my
prisoners. I command you to stay here until help comes."

The boys did not know what to do. They did not like to see even an enemy
suffer, but, at the same time, they knew he had no right to arrest them.

"Here comes a wagon," said Mark, catching the sound of wheels.

"Well, fo' de land sakes! Gollyation! What terrible catafterme hab
occurred in dis unapproachable manner?" a voice demanded.

"It's Washington!" cried Mark, as he saw Professor Henderson's colored
assistant driving along the road.

"Dat's who it am!" exclaimed Washington as he noticed the boys. "My! My!
But am you boff dead?"

"No, only one of us," said Mark with a laugh, as he and Jack ran toward
the wagon.

"Ha! Ha! Dat's one ob yo' jokes," said Washington. "But hurry up, boys.
De perfessor he done sent me to meet you. He reckoned you'd becomin'
ober on an early trolley. He's in a hurry to git away."

"Don't you boys dare to leave!" exclaimed Detective Ducket.

"Who's dat?" asked Washington.

"Never mind," said Mark. "He was hurt in the trolley smash, but not
badly. We'll send help, from the first farm house we come to. Come on,
Washington, we'll go with you."

The boys jumped into the wagon, and Washington started off. He explained
that the inventor was anxious to make a start that day, as there would
be an unusually high tide which would be followed a little later by a
low one, and that would make it difficult to cross the harbor bar.

"So I hired dis wagon an' come after you," said the colored man.

At the first house they came to the boys stopped and told about the
accident. The farmer agreed to go and get the detective and the others
who were hurt and take them to a hospital.

"I guess we're rid of that detective now," observed Jack, as they
started off again.

"Yes, but we're getting away under a cloud on our characters," said
Mark. "I'd like to stay and see the thing through, if we had time."

"But we can't, and there's no use worrying over it," spoke Jack.

In a short time they were at the inventor's cabin, and related to Mr.
Henderson all that had occurred.

"Well I guess your detective friend will have a hard time to find you in
a few hours," said the old man. "We start on our trip for the south pole
this evening."

There were busy times for the next few hours. Many supplies had to be
placed on board, and, while the boys, with Tom and Bill, saw to this, the
professor and Washington were occupied with putting the last touches to
the submarine boat's machinery.

Most of the supplies from the cabin were placed in the _Porpoise_,
including food and clothing and a good quantity of minerals that, with
sea water, generated the gas that made steam.

An early supper was made on shore, as the professor said they might be
so busy for the first few hours of the starting trip that they would get
no chance to eat. Then the cabin and buildings where the submarine had
been built, were securely fastened.

"I guess we're all ready," announced the professor, taking a last look
around.

One by one they went aboard the _Porpoise_ crawling down through the man
hole. The inventor was the last one to enter. He clamped the cover on by
means of the cam levers and switched on the electric lights. Then he
took his place in the conning tower with Andy Sudds.

"Forward, to the South Pole!" exclaimed Mr. Henderson.

With a turn of his wrist the inventor started the engines. The big screw
in the shaft revolved, pulling the water in at one end of the craft and
sending it out in a swirling stream at the other. The trip was fairly
begun.

For several miles the _Porpoise_ glided along on the surface of the
ocean. It was a calm evening, and the boys down in the cabin of the
craft could look into the reflecting mirrors on the wall, which were
connected with observation magnifying glasses in the conning tower, and
view what was going on, though their heads were below the surface of the
sea.

As it grew darker the view of shore and water faded away. The engine
kept up its speed with Washington to see to it every now and then,
oiling the bearings, some of which did not run quite smoothly because of
their newness.

"I'll send her down a bit now," observed the professor. "I don't want to
run into any more warships or scare the crews by making them think we
are a foreign torpedo boat."

He opened the sea cocks in the ballast tanks and soon the _Porpoise_
sunk about two hundred feet beneath the waves. The craft, which had been
pitching and tossing under the influence of a ground swell, became more
steady and quiet once it left the surface.

The searchlight in the conning tower was turned on, and in the glare of
it Andy and the professor were able to steer properly, aided by the
compass which gave them the true southern course.

It was now quite dark. Additional electric lights were switched on in
the cabin, engine and dining room. Andy came out of the conning tower
and announced that Captain Henderson wanted Washington to get supper.

All the cooking was done by electricity, and, in addition to a supply of
the usual and ordinary kinds of food, there was a big lot of patent
condensed victuals to draw on. Soup, broiled steak, potatoes, hot
biscuits, rice pudding and coffee made up the repast which was enjoyed
by all.

Toward the close of the meal Professor Henderson began to sniff the air
of the cabin.

"What's the matter? Do you smell a storm brewing?" asked Andy.

"No, but the air is not as fresh as it should be," replied the inventor.
"Washington, release a little more of the supply from the compression
tanks."

The ship, which had been left to steer itself automatically while the
professor was absent from the conning tower, was moving along at about
half speed. The gage showed they were going at twenty miles an hour, and
were three hundred feet below the surface.

He joined us just in season to recognize the occupants of the canoe, as
they shot through a stream of light under an open port, crying "_Anah
nawitka mika halo shem!_" And then we learned that the sea-nymphs
he had put to flight were none other than the belles of Juneau City,
the Alaskan metropolis, who were spending the summer at this
watering-place, and who were known to fame as "Kitty the Gopher,"
and "Feather-Legged Sal."

CHAPTER XI.

In the Sea of Ice.

We appreciated the sun's warmth so long as we were cruising among
the ice-wrack.

Some of the passengers, having been forewarned, were provided with heavy
overcoats, oilskin hats, waterproofs, woolen socks, and stogies
with great nails driven into the soles.

They were iron-bound, copper-fastened tourists, thoroughly
equipped--Alpine-stock and all,--and equal to any emergency.

Certainly it rains whenever it feels like it in Alaska.

It can rain heavily for days together, and does so from time to time. The
excursion-boat may run out of one predicament into another, and the whole
voyage be a series of dismal disappointments; but this is not to
be feared.

The chances are in favor of a round of sunshiny days and cloudless
nights as bright as the winter days in New England; of the fairest
of fair weather; bracing breezes tempered by the fragrant forests
that mantle each of the ten thousand islands; cool nights in
midsummer, when a blanket is welcome in one's bunk; a touch of a
fog now and again, generally lasting but a few hours, and welcome,
also, by way of change.

As for myself, a rubber coat protected me in the few showers to which we
were exposed, and afforded warmth enough in the coldest weather
we encountered.

For a climb over a glacier, the very thickest shoes are absolutely
necessary; beyond these, all else seems superfluous to me, and the
superfluous is the chief burden of travel.

We were gathered about the deck in little groups. The unpremeditated
coteries which naturally spring into existence on shipboard hailed
one another across decks, from the captain's cabin--a favorite
resort--or the smoking-room, as we sighted objects of interest.

With us there was no antagonism, albeit we numbered a full hundred,
and for three weeks were confined to pretty close quarters.

Passing the hours thus, and felicitating ourselves upon the complete
success of the voyage, we were in the happiest humor, and amiably
awaited our next experience.

Presently we ran under a wooded height that shut off the base of a great
snow-capped mountain.

The peak was celestial in its beauty,--a wraith dimly outlined upon the
diaphanous sky, of which it seemed a more palpable part. When we had
rounded this point we came face to face with a glacier. We saw at a glance
the length and the breadth of it as it plowed slowly down between
lofty rock-ridges to within a mile and a half of the shore. This
was our first sight of one of those omnipotent architects of nature,
and we watched it with a thrill of awe.

Picture to yourself a vast river, two or three miles in breadth,
pouring down from the eminence of an icy peak thirty miles away,--a
river fed by numerous lateral tributaries that flow in from every
declivity.

Imagine this river lashed to a fury and covered from end to end,
fathoms deep, with foam, and then the whole suddenly frozen and
fixed for evermore--that is your glacier.

Sometimes the surface is stained with the _débris_ of the mountain;
sometimes the bluish-green tinge of the ancient ice crops out.

Generally the surface is as white as down and very fair to look upon;
for at a distance--we were about eight miles from the lower edge
of it--the eye detects no flaw.

It might be a torrent of milk and honey. It might almost be compared in
its immaculate beauty to one of the rivers of Paradise that flow
hard by the throne of God.

It seems to be moving in majesty, and yet is stationary, or nearly so;
for we might sit by its frozen shore and grow gray with watching,
and ever our dull eyes could detect no change in a ripple of it.

A river of Paradise, indeed, escaped from the gardens of the blessed;
but, overcome by the squalor of this little globe, it has stopped
short and turned to ice in its alabaster bed.

One evening, about 8.30 o'clock, the sun still high above the western
mountain range, we found ourselves opposite the Davidson glacier.

It passes out of a broad ravine and spreads fanlike upon the shore under
the neighboring cliffs. It is three miles in breadth along the
front, and is twelve hundred feet in height when it begins to
crumble and slope toward the shore.

A terminal moraine, a mile and a half in depth, separates it from the
sea.

A forest, or the remnant of a forest, stands between it and the water it
is slowly but surely approaching. The fate of this solemn wood is sealed.
Anon the mightiest among these mighty trees will fall like grain
before the sickle of the reaper.

We are very near this glacier. We see all the wrinkles and fissures
and the deep discolorations. We see how the monstrous mass winds in and
out between the mountains, and crowds them on every side, and rubs
their skin off in spots, and leaves grooved lines, like high-water
marks, along the face of the cliffs; how it gathers as it goes, and
grinds to powder and to paste whatever comes within its reach,
growing worse and worse, and greedier and more rapacious as it
creeps down into the lowlands; so that when it reaches the sea,
where it must end its course and dissolve away, it will have covered
itself with slime and confusion.

It will have left ruin and desolation in its track, but it will
likewise have cleft out a valley with walls polished like brass
and a floor as smooth as marble,--one that will be utilized in after
ages, when it has carpeted itself with green and tapestried its
walls with vines.

Surely no other power on earth could have done the job so neatly.

One sees this work in process and in fresh completion in Alaska. The
bald islet yonder, with a surface as smooth as glass and with delicate
tracery along its polished sides--tracery that looks like etching
upon glass,--was modelled by glaciers not so many years ago: within
the century, some of them, perhaps.

A glacier--probably the very glacier we are seeking--follows this track
and grinds them all into shape.

Every angle of action--of motion, shall I say?

--is indelibly impressed upon each and every rock here about; so all
these northlands, from sea to sea, the world over, have been
laboriously licked into shape by the irresistible tide of ice.

Verily, the mills of the gods grind slowly, but what a grist they grind!

Let me record an episode that occasioned no little excitement among
the passengers and crew of the _Ancon_.

While we were picking our way among the floating ice--and at a pretty
good jog, too,--a dark body was seen to fall from an open port,
forward, into the sea.

There was a splash and a shriek as it passed directly under the wheel
and disappeared in the foam astern. "Man overboard!" was the cry that
rang through the ship, while we all rushed breathlessly to the
after-rail.

Among the seething waters in our wake, we saw a head appearing and
disappearing, and growing smaller and smaller all the while, though
the swimmer was struggling bravely to hold his own.

In a moment the engines were stopped; and then--an after-thought--we
made as sharp a turn as possible, hoping to lessen the distance
between us, while a boat was being manned and lowered for the rescue.

We feared that it was the cook, who was running a fair chance of
being drowned or chilled to death.

His black head bobbed like a burnt cork on the crest of the waves; and,
though we marked a snow-white circle in the sea, we seemed to get
no nearer the strong swimmer in his agony; and all at once we saw
him turn, as in desperation or despair, and make for one of the
little rocky islets that were lying at no great distance.

Evidently he believed himself deserted, and was about to seek this desolate
rock in the hope of prolonging existence.

By this time we had come to a dead halt, and a prolonged silence
followed.

Our sailor boys pulled lustily at the oars; yet the little boat seemed
to crawl through yawning waves, and, as usual, every moment was an
hour of terrible suspense. Then the captain, the most anxious among us
all, made a trumpet of his hands and shouted: "Here, Pete, old boy!
Here, Pete, you black rascal!" At the sound of his voice the swimmer
suddenly turned and struck out for the ship with an enthusiasm that was
actually ludicrous. We roared with laughter--we could not help it; for
when the boat had pulled up to the almost water-logged swimmer,
and he began to climb in with an energy that imperiled the safety
of the crew, we saw that the black rascal in question was none other
than Pete Bruin, Captain Carroll's pet bear.

He shook himself and drenched the oarsmen, who were trying to get
him back to the ship; for he was half frantic with delight, and it
was pretty close quarters--a small boat in a chop sea dotted with
lumpy ice; and a frantic bear puffing and blowing as he shambled
bear-fashion from the stem to stern, and raised his voice at intervals
in a kind of hoarse "hooray," that depressed rather than cheered
his companions.

It was ticklish business getting the boat and its lively crew back to the
davits in safety.

It was still more ticklish receiving the shaggy hero on deck; for he gave
one wild bound and alighted in the midst of a group of terrified ladies
and scattered the rest of us in dismay.

But it was side-splitting when the little fellow, seeing an open door,
made a sudden break for it, and plunged into the berth of a shy
damsel, who, put to ignominious flight in the first gust of the
panic, had sought safety in her state-room only to be singled out
for the recipient of the rascal's special attentions.

She was rescued by the bravest of the brave; but Bruin had to be dragged
from behind the lace curtains with a lasso, and then he brought
some shreds of lace with him as a trophy.

He was more popular than ever after this little adventure, and many
an hour we spent in recounting to one another the varied emotions
awakened by the episode.

Heading for Glacier Bay, we found a flood of bitter cold water so
filled with floating ice that it was quite impossible to avoid
frequent collisions with masses of more or less magnitude.

There was an almost continual thumping along the ship's side as the paddle
struck heavily the ice fragments which we found littering the frozen
sea.

There was also a dull reverberation as of distant thunder that rolled
over the sea to us; and when we learned that this was the crackling
of the ice-pack in the gorges, we thought with increasing solemnity
of the majesty of the spectacle we were about to witness.

Thus we pushed forward bravely toward an ice-wall that stretched across
the top of the bay from one high shore to the other. This wall of ice,
a precipitous bluff or palisade, is computed to be from two hundred
to five hundred feet in height.

It is certainly nowhere less than two hundred, but most of it far
nearer five hundred feet above sea level, rising directly out of it,
overhanging it, and chilling the air perceptibly.

Picking our path to within a safe distance of the glacier, we cast anchor
and were free to go our ways for a whole glorious day.
According to Professor John Muir--for whom the glacier is deservedly
named,--the ice-wall measures three miles across the front; ten
miles farther back it is ten miles in breadth.

Sixteen tributary glaciers unite to form the one.

Professor Muir, accompanied by the Rev. S. Hall Young, of Fort Wrangell,
visited it in 1879. They were the first white men to explore this
region, and they went thither by canoe. Muir, with blankets strapped to
his back and his pockets stuffed with hard-tack, spent days in
rapturous speculation.

Of all glacial theorists he is doubtless the most self-sacrificing and
enthusiastic. I believe, as yet, no one has timed this glacier. It
is dissolving away more rapidly than it travels; so that although it is
always advancing, it seems in reality to be retreating.

Within the memory of the last three generations the Muir glacier filled
the bay for miles below our anchorage; and while it recedes, it
is creeping slowly down, scalping the mountains, grinding all the
sharp edges into powder or leaving a polished surface behind it.

It gathers rock dust and the wreck of every living thing, and mixes
them up with snow and ice. These congeal again, or are compressed into
soft, filthy monumental masses, waiting their turn to topple into the
waves at last.
The wash of the sea undermines the glacier; the sharp sunbeams blast
it.

It is forever sinking, settling, crushing in upon itself and splitting
from end to end, with fearful and prolonged intestinal reverberations,
that remind one of battle thunders and murder and sudden death.

There was hardly a moment during the day free from rumble or a crash or a
splash.

The front elevation might almost be compared to Niagara Falls in
winter; but here is a spectacular effect not often visible at Niagara.
At intervals huge fragments of the ice cliffs fall, carrying with
them torrents of snow and slush.

Heaven only knows know many hundred thousand tons of this _débris_
plunged into the sea under our very eyes. Nor was it all _débris_: there
were masses of solid ice so lustrous they looked like gigantic
emeralds or sapphires, and these were fifty or even a hundred times
the size of our ship.

When they fell they seemed to descend with the utmost deliberation; for
they fell a much greater distance than we could realize, as their bulk
was beyond conception, so that a fall of two hundred or three
hundred feet seemed not a tenth part of that distance.

With this deliberate descent, as if they floated down, they also gave an
impression of vast weight and when they struck the sea, the foam
flew two-thirds of the way up the cliff--a fountain three hundred feet
in height and of monstrous volume.

Then after a long time--a very long time it seemed to us--the ice would
rise slowly from the deep and climb the face of the cliff as if it were
about to take its old place again; but it sank and rose, until it
had found its level, when it joined the long procession drifting
southward to warmer waves and dissolution.

In the meantime the ground swell that followed each submersion resembled
a tidal wave as it rolled down upon us and threatened to engulf us.
But the _Ancon_ rode like a duck--I can not consistently say swan
in this case,--and heaved to starboard and to larboard in picturesque
and thoroughly nautical fashion.

Some of us were on shore, wading in the mud and the slush, or climbing
the steep bluffs that hem in the glacier upon one side. Here it was
convenient to glance over the wide, wide snow-fields that seem to have
been broken with colossal harrows.

It was even possible to venture out upon the ice ridges, leaping the
gaps that divided them in every direction. But at any moment the
crust might have broken and buried us from sight; and we found the
spectacle far more enjoyable when viewed from the deck of the
steamer.

What is that glacier like? Well, just a little like the whitewashed crater
of an active volcano. At any rate, it is the glorious companion piece to
Kilauea in Hawaii. In these wonders of nature you behold the extremes,
fire and ice, having it all their own way, and a world of adamant shall
not prevail against them.

CHAPTER XII.

Alaska's Capital.

Sitka has always seemed to me the jumping-off place.

I have vaguely imagined that somehow--I know not just how--it had a
mysterious affinity with Moscow, and was in some way a dependence
of that Muscovite municipality.

I was half willing to believe that an underground passage connected
the Kremlin with the Castle of Sitka; that the tiny capital of Great
Alaska responded, though feebly, to every throb of the Russian heart.

Perhaps it did in the good old days now gone; but there is little or
nothing of the Russian element left, and the place is as dead as
dead can be without giving offence to the olfactory organ.

We were picking our way through a perfect wilderness of islands,
on the lookout for the capital, of which we had read and heard so
much.

Surely the Alaskan pilot must have the eye and the instinct of a
sea bird or he could never find a port in that labyrinth.

Moreover, the air was misty:
we felt that we were approaching the sea.

Lofty mountains towered above us; sometimes the islands swam apart--they
seemed all in motion, as if they were swinging to and fro on the
tide,--and then down a magnificent vista we saw the richly wooded
slopes of some glorious height that loomed out of the vapor and
bathed its forehead in the sunshine.

Sometimes the mist grew denser, and we could see hardly a ship's-length
ahead of us; and the air was so chilly that our overcoats were drawn
snugly about us, and we wondered what the temperature might be "down
south" in Dakota and New England.

In the grayest of gray days we came to Sitka, and very likely for this
reason found it a disappointment at first sight.

Certainly it looked dreary enough as we approached it--a little
cluster of tumbledown houses scattered along a bleak and rocky shore.

We steamed slowly past it, made a big turn in deep water, got a
tolerable view of the city from one end of it to the other, and
then crept up to the one little dock, made fast, and were all granted
the freedom of the capital for a couple of days.

It is a gray place--gray with a greenish tinge in it--the kind of
green that looks perennial--a dark, dull evergreen.

There was some show of color among the costumes of the people on
shore--bright blankets and brighter calicoes,--but there was no
suspicion of gaiety or of a possible show of enthusiasm among the
few sedate individuals who came down to see us disembark.

I began to wonder if these solemn spectators that were grouped along
the dock were ghosts materialized for the occasion; if the place
were literally dead--dead as the ancient Russian cemetery on the
hill, where the white crosses with their double arms, the upper and
shorter one aslant, shone through the sad light of the waning day.

We had three little Russian maids on our passenger list, daughters
of Father Mitropolski, the Greek priest at Sitka.

They were returning from a convent school at Victoria, and were bubbling
over with delight at the prospective joys of a summer vacation at home.
But no sooner had they received the paternal embraces upon the
deck than the virtue of happiness went out of them; and they became
sedate little Sitkans, whose dignity belied the riotous spirit that
had made them the life of the ship on the way up.

We also brought home a little Russian chap who had been working down at
Fort Wrangell, and, having made a fortune--it was a fortune in his
eyes,--he was returning to stay in the land of his nativity.

He was quiet enough on shipboard--indeed, he had almost escaped
observation until we sighted Sitka; but then his heart could contain
itself no longer, and he made confidants of several of us to whom he
had spoken never a word until this moment. How glad he was to greet its
solemn shores, to him the dearest spot in all the earth! A few hours
later we met him.

He was swinging on the gate at the homestead in the edge of the town:
a sweet, primitive place, that caught our eye before the youngster
caught our ears with his cheerful greeting.

"Oh, I so glad!" said he, with a mist in his eye that harmonized with
everything else. "I make eighty dollar in four month at Wrangell.
My sister not know me when I get home. I so glad to come back to
Sitka. I not go away any more."

Of course we poured out of the ship in short order, and spread
through the town like ants.

At the top of the dock is the Northwest Trading Company's store--how we
learned to know these establishments! Some scoured it for a first choice,
and got the pick of the wares; but here, as elsewhere, we found
the same motley collection of semi-barbarous bric-a-brac--brilliantly
painted Indian paddles spread like a sunburst against the farther
wall; heaps of wooden masks and all the fantastical carvings such
as the aborigines delight in, and in which they almost excel.

Up the main street of the town is another store, where a series of
large rooms, crowded with curios bewilders the purchaser of those
grotesque wares.

At the top of Katalan's rock, on the edge of the sea, stands the
Colonial Castle.

It is a wooden structure, looking more like a barrack than a castle.

At the foot of the rock are the barracks and Custom House. A thin
sprinkling of marines, a few foreign-looking citizens--the full-fledged
Rusk of the unmistakable type is hard to find nowadays,--and troops
of Indians give a semblance of life to this quarter.

At the head of the street stands the Russian Orthodox Church; and this
edifice, with its quaint tower and spire, is really the lion of
the place.

St.

Michael's was dedicated in 1844 by the Venerable Ivan Venianimoff, the
metropolitan of Moscow, for years priest and Bishop at Ounalaska
and Sitka.

In his time the little chapel was richly decorated; but as the
settlement began falling to decay, the splendid vestments and sacred
vessels and altar ornaments, and even the Bishop himself, were
transferred to San Francisco.

It then became the duty of the Bishop to visit annually the churches
at Sitka, Ounalaska and Kodiak, as the Russian Government still
allowed these dependencies an annuity of $50,000.

But the last incumbent of the office, Bishop Nestor, was lost
tragically at sea in May, 1883; and, as the Russian priesthood seems
to be less pious than particular, the office is still a-begging--unless
I have been misinformed.

Jack and Mark, who came in at that juncture, were a little bit ashamed
of the trick they had played.

"What is the trouble?" repeated Mr. Henderson.

"We's all goin' to be devoured alibe!" cried Washington pointing to the
fish, that still clung to the glass.

"Ah, a sucker fish!" remarked the inventor. "A large specimen, too.
Don't be afraid Washington, it can't hurt you."

"He looks like he could," said the colored man. "Look at dem teef!"

Indeed the creature's mouth was a horrible sight, as it opened and shut.

"I'll show you how to get rid of him," said the professor.

He turned on the electric lights in the cabin, flooding the room with a
bright glow. The big fish darted off, and, when the lights were turned
out again, the terrible eyes did not reappear, much to their
satisfaction.

"The lights scared it away," remarked the inventor. "But you mustn't get
frightened so easily, Washington. You'll see stranger sights than that
before you're through with this voyage."

"Oh I wasn't 'fraid," spoke up Washington. "I were jest 'stonished,
dat's all."

"What did you get down on your knees for?" asked Mark with a grin.

"I might hab been lookin' for my collar button, for all you knows,"
replied Washington, with an air of great dignity, and went back to the
engine room.

For several days after this the _Porpoise_ continued on her way south.
Now and then appearing on the surface to renew the supply of fresh air,
and again skimming along under the surface, or deep down, the strange
craft kept on. It grew much warmer, and even when some distance below
the surface the heat could be felt in an uncomfortable manner.

"We're getting near the equator," explained the professor.

One afternoon, when dinner had just been finished, and the ship, under
the direction of Washington, was gliding along well under the sea, there
came a sudden shock.

"We've hit something!" exclaimed Mr. Henderson as he jumped for the
conning tower. The shock was repeated.

"What was it?" asked someone.

"Shut down the engine!" yelled the inventor to the colored man. "What do
you want to go on ramming an object after you've once hit it? Slow down
the engine!"

"Power's shut off!" cried Washington. "We didn't hit nothin'! Something
hit us!"

"What do you mean?" asked Mr. Henderson.

"Somethin's rammin' us," went on Washington.

"It must be a big monster. I was sterrin' along an' there was nothin' in
de road, when all of a suddint, ker-plunk! We's hit. Look ahead, an' you
can't see nothin'!"

The professor, and the boys, who had followed him, gazed out of the
conning tower window. There was nothing forward but a vast expanse of
water.

The next instant the ship careened as something struck her a violent
blow on the port side. Everyone almost toppled over from the force of
the impact.

"Dar he goes agin!" cried Washington.

"We're attacked by a whale!" said the professor. "We must rise to the
surface or it may damage the ship."

"If it's a whale I'd like to get a shot at it," put in Andy Sudds, from
the foot of the companion ladder leading into the tower.

"I don't know that it is a whale," went on the inventor. "But it must be
something very big and strong."

"It's a monster of some sort," put in Andy, "and I want a chance at
him."

"It's too risky," murmured the professor. "We couldn't get down to
bottom here, as the water is several miles deep, and the pressure would
crush the _Porpoise_, strong as she is."

Once more came a terrible blow and the ship rocked in a swirl of foam
beneath the waves. In quick succession two more fierce onslaughts were
made by the unseen monster.

"We'll have to do something," muttered Andy.

"You're right," agreed the professor. "Our only chance is to rise to the
surface, for I do not believe the creature will follow us there. Empty
the tanks, Washington."

The colored man started the pumps, and the professor watched the gages
that told the depth of the craft. The pointer should have begun to swing
around in a few seconds after the tanks began to empty. Instead it
remained stationary.

"Strange," said Mr. Henderson. "I wonder if anything is wrong with the
machinery."

"More like the whale, or whatever it is, is on top of the boat, holding
her down," suggested Andy.

There was no doubt of this a moment later, for there were several
violent blows on the upper part of the _Porpoise_.

The crew of the submarine were held prisoners below the surface by the
unknown monster!

For a few minutes the thought of the awful fate that would be theirs if
the ship should be wrecked under the water made each one speechless. As
they stood looking at each other, not knowing what to do, the attack was
renewed on the port side.

The big fish, whale or whatever it was, kept pounding away.

"I have an idea!" cried Andy suddenly.

"What is it?" asked the professor quickly.

"Let me put a diving dress on," began the old hunter.

"I tell you we can't sink to the bottom in this depth of water,"
interrupted the professor.

"We don't need to," put in Andy. "All I want is a diving suit and a
chance to stand out in the diving chamber. I guess I can fix Mr. Whale,
if I have one of those electric guns."

"Quick! Get a diving suit, Washington!" cried Mr. Henderson. He saw what
the old hunter planned to do.

In a few minutes Andy was dressed in the suit. The attacks of the
monster had redoubled in frequency, and the ship rocked as in a storm.

Andy stepped into the diving chamber, clasping the electric gun. The
inner door was tightly closed and then the sea cocks that admitted water
from the outside were opened. When the pressure inside the chamber was
equal to that of the ocean outside some one pulled the lever that
opened the outer door.

Andy knew better than to step outside. He remained in the chamber, like
a sentinel hid in the embrasure of a wall, for the chamber was a sort of
big dent in the side of the _Porpoise_.

Once more the ship rocked from a terrific blow, and the old hunter was
nearly thrown out and into the fathomless depths below.

He clung to the door lever and peered out. Through the big glass eyes of
his copper helmet he saw headed straight at him a whale that seemed
larger than the submarine.


CHAPTER XI

CAUGHT IN A SEA OF GRASS


"It's all up with me and the ship, too," thought Andy as he stood in the
small chamber and watched the oncoming of the monster.

However, he was not going to die without a fight, so he raised the
electric gun. Yet he knew it was a most forlorn chance.

He aimed straight down the big open mouth and pulled the trigger. The
next instant the water all about him was a mass of foam, through which
he could dimly see that the whale had halted.

And, as the old hunter watched, in awe and fear at what he saw, he noted
that instead of one monster there seemed to be a pair. Together they
were threshing the sea into a bloody foam.

Then, turning on the searchlight in his helmet, Andy beheld a terrible
sight. The whale had been attacked by a gigantic swordfish at the moment
the hunter had fired the shot, and it was that, and not the electric
bullet, that had stopped the infuriated animal's rush at the ship.

Ancient enemies, the whale and swordfish, had met in mortal combat. The
swordfish had engaged the whale just as it was about to strike what
would probably have been a blow that would have disabled the submarine,
for with the door of the diving chamber open, the onslaught might not
have been withstood.

Rushing here and there, the whale seeking to destroy his enemy with a
sweep of the enormous flukes, and the swordfish plunging his bony weapon
again and again into the whale, the two monsters fought until the water
about the ship was a mass of foam and blood.

Much as he wanted to see the end of the fight, Andy knew it was
dangerous to remain longer with the door open.

He closed it, pressed the lever which started the pumps, forcing the
water from the chamber and, in a few minutes, emerged into the interior
of the ship.

Mr. Henderson, realizing that something out of the ordinary was going
on, had opened the slides of the bull's-eye windows, and those in the
submarine saw part of the fight between the whale and swordfish.

As soon as Andy had removed his diving suit he advised that the ship be
sent to the surface, as there might be danger should the monsters get
too close in their struggles.

Accordingly the pumps, which had been stopped when it was found
impossible to raise the ship, because of the weight of the whale, were
started and the _Porpoise_ was soon on the surface.

The manhole cover was opened and Andy, with Jack and Mark, went out on
deck. They had no sooner stepped out on the platform than there was a
commotion in the water.

"They're going to fight up here!" exclaimed Mark.

A big body shot upward and fell back with a splash, rocking the
submarine.

"There's the whale," observed Andy. "But I reckon he won't fight any
more. He's dead."

It was so. The swordfish had conquered, and the lifeless body of the
whale floated on top of the water, only to sink a little later.

"It was a great battle," said Jack. "I'm glad I was inside the ship."

The course was due south, and every minute it seemed to the boys that it
was getting warmer, for they were approaching the equator. Every hour
brought them nearer the south pole, though they were still several
thousand miles from it.

After a while quite a wind sprang up, and as the sea roughened the
professor decided to go down under the surface. The _Porpoise_ sunk as
the tanks filled and, in a little while, the submarine was in calm
water, and was forging ahead at three-quarter speed.

It was three days after the adventure with the whale when, as the ship
was going along at a good rate, that there seemed to be a gradual
slacking in the progress.

"I wonder what Washington is slowing down for," said the professor
rising from the dinner table at which all save the colored man had been
sitting. "I told him to keep right on. He must have seen something
ahead. I'll take a look."

The inventor went to the conning tower, where Washington was steering.

"What are you stopping for?" he asked.

"I'm not slowin' down," replied the colored man. "Guess another ob dem
debil fishes has grabbed holt ob de ship. Dey suttinly am de most
koslostrous conglomerations ob inconsequence dat I eber see."

"You must keep your big words for another time," remarked Mr. Henderson,
who seemed worried. "Hurry to the engine-room and see if the machinery
is all right. We certainly are slowing down, from some cause or other."

The _Porpoise_ was now scarcely moving, though from the vibration it was
evident that the engines were working almost at top speed. Washington
came back and reported that the big screw was revolving properly and
that all the machinery was working well.

"Then we're caught in something," said the professor. "Shut off the
power, Washington, I don't want to strain things."

The ship was now scarcely making a foot a minute, and, a little later,
when the colored man had turned off the engine, the submarine became
stationary, merely undulating with the roll and heave of the ocean.

Hurrying to the cabin, Captain Henderson opened the side window
shutters, turned off the electric lights and peered out.

"I can't see anything," he said. "Yet I should be able to, as we are not
very deep."

The gage showed that the ship was submerged only thirty feet, and at
that depth there should have been no difficulty in seeing, at least
dimly, objects under water. But the windows showed as black as night.

"Bring me one of the portable searchlights," called Mr. Henderson.

Washington brought one, operated by a storage battery. Holding it so the
reflector cast the beams out of the bull's-eye and into the water on the
opposite side, the inventor peered forth.

"I was afraid of this!" he murmured.

"What is it?" asked Jack.

"We are caught in the Sargasso Sea," replied Mr. Henderson.

"The Sargasso Sea?" repeated Mark, in a questioning tone. "What is
that?"

"It is a great sea of grass," replied the captain. "An immense ocean of
sea weed, that sometimes floats on the surface and sometimes a little
below. The stalks or blades of the grass are very long and closely
matted together."

"Is there any danger?" asked Andy in some alarm.

"Very much," answered the professor quietly. "A ship, once fairly
entangled in the grass or sea weed, seldom gets out. If it is a sailing
ship the weed clings to the rudder, making steerage impossible, and even
in a strong wind the ship cannot get free of the mass. The grass winds
about the propellers of steamships, and holds them as tight as in a
vise.

"Sometimes a great storm may tear the mass of weed loose from the bottom
of the ocean, and then the ship is free. But the Sargasso Sea is the
graveyard of many a fine vessel."

The pumps were set going. Anxiously everyone watched the gage. The
pointer never moved, but remained at thirty feet. The _Porpoise_ was
caught.

"Well, since we can't go up, let us see if we can go down," said the
inventor. "Perhaps we can dive under the sea weed."

The cocks of the tanks were opened and the water rushed in. Under the
weight of it the ship should have sunk to the bottom. Instead it
remained just where it was, thirty feet below the surface.

"Try the screw again," suggested Andy, "Maybe we can back out."

The big propeller in the tube was started going in a reverse direction,
but the _Porpoise_ only moved a few feet and then stopped. To go forward
was equally impossible.

The submarine was held fast in the grip of the long, sinuous, snake-like
fingers of the terrible sea grass. Weak as one strand was, the thousands
combined served to fasten the ship as securely as wire cables would have
done. The weeds had entangled themselves all around the craft and
refused to let go.

"Well," remarked Mr. Henderson when all efforts had failed. "We must
think of a new plan."

He spoke cheerfully, for he did not want the boys and other members of
the crew to know how worried he was. This was a danger he had never
counted on when he planned to go to the south pole.

"There is no great hurry," Mr. Henderson went on in a few minutes. "We
can stay here for several days if need be, and by that time a storm may
tear the grass loose."

"If we had our old hay sythes here," spoke Bill, "me an' Tom could put
on divin' suits an' go out an' cut the sea weed."

"I'm afraid that wouldn't work," answered Mr. Henderson. "I'll think up
some plan, soon."

He started toward the engine room to look over the machinery. He was met
by Washington, who seemed much alarmed.

"What's the matter?" asked the inventor.

"De air tank hab busted an' all de air is escapin' out!" cried the
colored man. "We'll all smothercate!"


CHAPTER XII

FIRE ON BOARD


The professor jumped past Washington and hurried into the room where the
tanks were kept, carrying the reserve supply of air for breathing when
the ship was under water. A loud hissing told that the leak was a large
one.

"Quick! Bring me some tools and a steel plug," shouted the captain.

Mark hurried in with the things the professor wanted. But before the
plug could be put in the hole the air stopped hissing.

"The leak is fixed!" cried Jack.

"No," said the professor in a strange voice.

"But the air no longer rushes out."

"For a good reason, there is no longer any air to rush out. It is all
gone!"

"Do you mean to say that all the reserve stock has been lost?" exclaimed
Andy.

"I fear so. The leak must have been a bad one. You see the _Ancon_
combined business with pleasure, and distributed coal in quantities to
suit throughout the Alaskan lagoon.

Now, there is not much fun in coaling, even when a craft as funny
as the _Pinta_ is snuggling up under your quarter, looking more
like the Pinafore than ever, with her skylarking sailors, midshipmite
and all; so Captain Carroll secured a jaunty little steam-launch,
and away we went on a picnic in the forest primeval.

The launch was laden to the brim; three of our biggest boats were in
tow; an abundant collation, in charge of a corps of cabin-boys, gave
assurance of success in one line at least.

We explored.

Old Vancouver did the same thing long ago, and no doubt found these
shores exactly as we find them to-day.

We entered a shallow creek at the top of the cove; landed on a
dreary point redolent of stale fish, and the beach literally alive
and creeping with small worms above half an inch in length.

A solitary squaw was splitting salmon for drying. She remained absorbed
in her work while we gathered about and regarded her with impudent
curiosity.

Overcome by the fetid air of the place, we re-embarked and steamed gaily
miles away over the sparkling sea.

In an undiscovered country--so it seemed to us--we came to a smooth
and sandy strip of shore and landed there. But a few paces from the
lightly-breaking ripples was the forest--and such a forest!

There were huge trees, looking centuries old, swathed in blankets
of moss, and the moss gray with age. Impenetrable depths of shadow
overhead, impenetrable depths of litter under foot. Log had fallen upon
log crosswise and at every conceivable angle.

Out of the fruitful dust of these deposed monarchs of the forest sprang
a numerous progeny--lusty claimants, every one of them,--their foliage
feathery and of the most delicate green, being fed only by the thin
sunshine that sifts through the dense canopy, supported far aloft
by the majestic columns that clustered about us.

Under foot the russet moss was of astonishing depth and softness. One
walks with care upon it, for the foot breaks through the thick
matting that has in many cases spread from log to log, hiding
treacherous traps beneath.

The ferns luxuriate in this sylvan paradise; and many a beautiful shrub,
new to us, bore flowers that blushed unseen until we made our
unexpected and perhaps unwelcome appearance.

Here we camped. The cloth was spread in a temple not made with hands;
how hard it is to avoid ringing in these little old-time tags about
flowers and forests! The viands were deftly served; the merry jest went
round, and sometimes came back the same way, "returned with thanks."

And thus we revelled in the midst of a solitude that may never before
have been broken by the sound of human voice. When we held our
peace--which we did at long intervals, and for a brief moment
only--we realized this solemn fact; but it didn't seem to impress
us much on the spot.

Why, even the birds were silent. Only the sea-gulls flashed their
white wings under the boughs in the edge of the wood, and wheeled
away in dizzy circles, piping sharp, peevish cries.

It was a delightful day we passed together. The memory of it is one
of the most precious souvenirs of the Alaskan tour; and it was
with reluctance that we returned to the ship, after consulting our
watches with astonishment; for the late hours gave no warning, and
we might have passed the night there in the loveliest of twilights.

The _Pinta_ was about to withdraw to her anchorage as we boarded
the _Ancon_; and then, too late, I discovered among the officers
of that terror of the sea an old friend with whom I had revelled
in the halcyon days at Stag Racket Bungalow, Honolulu.

He was then on the U. S.
man-of-war, _Alaska_ of jolly memory; and he, with his companions,
constituted the crack mess of the navy.

But the _Alaska_ is a sheer hulk, and her once jovial crew scattered
hither and yon; he alone, in the solitude of these unfreighted
waters, remains to tell the tale.

I thought it a happy coincidence that, having met him first under
_Old Glory_, then floating in the trade wind that blew over southern seas,
I should find him last in the lone land that gave name to the ship
that brought him over.

Can the theosophists unravel this mystery, or see aught in it that
verges upon the mystic philosophy? As we steamed out of Wood's Cove
that night, with the echoes of a parting salute filling the heavens
to overflowing, we saw a cluster of small, dark islets in the foreground;
shining waters beyond flowed to the foot of far-away mountains; a silvery
sky melted into gold as it neared the horizon: this picture, as
delicate in tint as the most exquisite water-color, was framed in
a setting of gigantic pines; and it was by this fairy portal we
entered the sea of ice.

From solitude to solitude is the order in Alaska. The solitude of the
forest and the sea, of the mountain and ravine,--with these we had
become more or less familiar when our good ship headed for the
solitude of ice and snow.

I began to feel as if we were being dragged out on the roof of the
world--as if we were swimming in the flooded eaves of a continent.

Sometimes there came over me a sense of loneliness--of the distance
that lay between us and everybody else, and of the helplessness
of our case should any serious accident befall us.

It is this very state, perhaps, that ages the hearts of the hardiest
of the explorers who seek vainly to unravel the polar mystery.

From time to time as we sailed, the sea, now a brighter blue than ever,
was strewn with fragments of ice.

Very lovely they looked as they hugged the distant shore; a ghostly and
fantastical procession, borne ever southward by the slow current; and
growing more ghostly and fantastical hour by hour, as they dwindled
in the clear sunshine of the long summer days.

Anon the ice fragments increased in number and dimensions. The whole watery
expanse was covered with brash, and we were obliged to pick our way
with considerable caution. At times we narrowly escaped grazing
small icebergs, that might have disabled us had we come in collision
with them.

As it was, many an ice-cake that looked harmless enough, being very
low in the water, struck us with a thud that was startling; or
passed under our old-fashioned side-wheels, splintering the paddles
and causing our hearts to leap within us.

A disabled wheel meant a tedious delay in a latitude where the
resources are decidedly limited.

Often we thought of the miserable millions away down East simmering in
the sultry summer heat, while the thermometer with us stood at 45 degrees
in the sun, and the bracing salt air was impregnated with balsamic
odors.

In this delectable state we sighted a bouncing baby iceberg, and
at once made for it with the enthusiasm of veritable discoverers.

It was pretty to see with what discretion we approached and circled
round it, searching for the most favorable point of attack. So
much of an iceberg is beneath the surface of the water, ballasting the
whole, that it is rather ticklish business cruising in its vicinity.

We lay off and on, coquetting with the little beauty, while one of our
boats pulled up to it, and threw a lariat over a glittering peak
that flamed in the sun like a torch.

Then we drew in the slack and made fast, while a half dozen of our men
mounted the slippery mass, armed with ropes and axes, and began
to hack off big chunks, which were in due season transferred to our
iceboxes.

Our iceberg was about fifty feet in length and twenty or thirty feet out
of the water. It was a glittering island, with savage peaks, deep valleys,
bluffs, and promontories. The edges were delicately frilled and resembled
silver filigree. Some of these, which were transparent and as daintily
turned as old Venetian glass, dripped continually like rain-beaten
eaves. The portion nearest the water's edge was honeycombed by the
wavelets that dashed upon it without ceasing, rushing in and out
of the small, luminous caverns in swift, sparkling rivulets.

Much of the surface was crusted with a fine frosting; it was full
of wells deep enough to sink a man in.

These wells were filled with water, and with a blue light, celestial in
its loveliness,--a light ethereal and pellucid.
It was as if the whole iceberg were saturated with transfused moonbeams,
that gave forth a mellow radiance, which flashed at times like
brilliants, and burst into flame and played like lightning along
the almost invisible rims and ridges.

The unspeakable, the incomprehensible light throbbed through and through;
and was sometimes bluish green and sometimes greenish blue; but
oftenest with the one was the other, both at once, and with a perfectly
bewildering tint added,--in a word, it was frozen moonlight and
no mistake.

O my friend, I assure you there are many famous sports with not
half the fun in them that there is in lassoing an iceberg!

Once more I turn to my note-books. I find that the morning had been foggy;
that we could see scarcely a ship's length ahead of us; that the water
was like oil beneath and the mists like snow above and about, while
we groped blindly.

Of course we could not press forward under the circumstances; for we
were surrounded by islands great and small, and any one of these might
silently materialize at a moment's notice; but we were not idle.

Now and again our paddles beat the water impetuously, and they hung
dripping, while the sea stretched around us as we leisurely drifted
on like a larger bubble in danger of bursting upon an unexpected
rock.

We sounded frequently. There was an abundance of water--there nearly
always is throughout the Alaskan archipelago; enough and to spare; but
the abrupt shore might be but a stone's-throw from us on the one
hand or the other.

What was to be done?

In the vast stillness we blew a blast on our shrill whistle, and
listened for the echo.

Sometimes it returned to us almost on the instant and we cried, "Halt!"
When we halted or veered off, creeping as it were on the surface
of the oily sea, sometimes a faint or far-off whisper--"the horns
of elf-land"--gave us assurance of plenty of space and the sea-room
we were sorely in need of just then.

Once we saw looming right under our prow a little islet with a tuft
of fir-trees crowning it--the whole worthy to be made the head-piece
or tail-piece to some poem on solitude.

It was very picturesque; but it seemed to be crouching there, lying
in wait for us, ready to arch its back the moment we came within
reach.

The rapidity with which we backed out of that predicament left us no time
for apologies.

Again we got some distance up the wrong channel.

When the fog lifted for a moment, we discovered the error, put about
without more ado, and went around the block in a hurry.

Meanwhile we had schooled our ears to detect the most delicate shades of
sound; to measure or weigh each individual echo with an accuracy that
gave us the utmost self-satisfaction.

Perhaps Captain Carroll or Captain George, who was spying out the land
with his ears, would not have trusted the ship in our keeping for five
minutes--but no matter.

Presently the opaque atmosphere began to dissolve away; and as the sun
brushed the webs from his face, and darted sharp beams upon the
water all at once in a shower, the fog-banks went to pieces and
rolled away in sections out of sight, like the transformation scene
in a Christmas pantomime.

And there we were in the very centre of the smiling island world, with
splendid snow peaks towering all about us; and such a flood of
blue sky and bluer water, golden sunshine and gilded fields of snow,
of jutting shores clad in perennial verdure, and eagles and sea-birds
wheeling round about us, as can be seen nowhere else in the wide
world to the same advantage.

We were entering a region of desolation. The ice was increasing, and the
water took that ghastly hue, even a glimpse of which is enough to
chill the marrow in one's bones. Vegetation was dying out. A
canoe-full of shivering Indians were stemming the icy flood in
search of some chosen fishery,--all of them blanketed, and all--squaw
as well as papooses--taking a turn at the paddle.

These were the children of Nature, whose song-birds are the screaming
eagle, the croaking raven, and the crying sea-doves blown inland
by the wild westerly gales.

We were now nearly within sound of the booming glaciers; and as we drew
nearer and nearer I could but brood over the oft imagined picture of
that vast territory--our Alaska,--where, beyond that mountain
range, the almost interminable winter is scarcely habitable, and
the summers so brief it takes about six of them to make a swallow.

CHAPTER X.

In Search of the Totem-Pole.

Hour after hour and day after day we are coasting along shores that become
monotonous in their beauty. For leagues the sea-washed roots of the
forest present a fairly impassable barrier to the foot of man.

It is only at infrequent intervals that a human habitation is visible,
and still more seldom does the eye discover a solitary canoe making
its way among the inextricable confusion of inlets. Sometimes a small
cluster of Indian lodges enlivens the scene; and this can scarcely
be said to enliven it, for most Indian lodges are as forlorn as a
last year's bird's-nest.

Sometimes a bright little village gives hope of a break in the serenity
of the season--a few hours on shore and an extra page or two in our
log-books. Yet again, sometimes it is a green jungle, above the sea,
out of which rise diminutive box-houses, like exaggerated dove-cotes,
with a goodly number of towering cedar columns, curiously carved,
perhaps stained black or red in patches, scattered through them.

These are Indian cemeteries. They are hedged about with staves, from the
top of which flutter ragged streamers. They are rich in rude carvings of
men and birds and beasts. Now and again a shield as big as a target, and
looking not unlike an archery-target, marks the tomb of some
warrior.

The unerring shafts of death search out the obscurest handfuls of people
scattered through these wide domains; and every village has its
solemn suburb, where the houses of the dead are decorated with
barbaric bric-a-brac.

Many of the tombs are above ground--airy sarcophagi on high poles
rocking in the wind and the rain.

Some are nearer the earth, like old-fashioned four-poster bed-steads; and
there the dead sleep well.
Others are of stone, with windows and peaked roofs,--very comfortable
receptacles.

But most of the bodies are below ground, and the last vestiges of their
graves are lost in the depths of the jungle.
Incineration is not uncommon in Alaska, and in such cases the ashes
are distributed among the winds and waves.

Birds feast upon the bodies of certain tribes--meat-offerings, very
gracious in the sight of the Death Angel; but by far the larger portion
find decent burial, and they are all long and loudly and sincerely
mourned.

We awoke one morning at Casa-an, and found ourselves made fast to
a dock.

On the dock was a salmon-house, or shed, a very laboratory of ancient and
fish-like smells.

It was not long before the tide slipped away from us and left the
steamer resting easily on her beam-ends in shallow water. We were
prisoners for a few hours; but we were glad of this, for every
hour was of interest to us.

This was our first chance to thoroughly explore an Indian village;
and, oh! the dogs, cousins-german to the coyotes, that shook off their
fleas and bayed us dismally! Lodges of the rudest sort were scattered
about in the most convenient localities. As for streets or lanes, there
were none visible.

The majority of the lodges were constructed of hemlock bark or of rough
slabs, gaudily festooned with split salmon drying in the sun. The lodges
are square, with roofs slightly inclined; they are windowless and have
but one narrow door about shoulder high.

The Casa-an Indians are a tribe of the Haidas, the cleverest of the northern
races. They are expert craftsmen. From a half dollar they will hammer
out or mold a bangle and cover it with chasing very deftly cut.

Their wood-carvings, medicine-man rattles, spoons, broth bowls, and the
like, are curious; but the demand for bangles keeps the more ingenious
busy in this branch of industry.

Unfortunately, some simple voyager gave the rude silversmiths a bangle
of the conventional type, and this is now so cunningly imitated
that it is almost impossible to secure a specimen of Haida work of
the true Indian pattern.

Very shortly the Indian villages of Alaska will be stocked with curios
of genuine California manufacture. The supply of antiquities and originals
has been already nearly, if not quite, exhausted.

It is said that no sooner is the boom of the paddle-wheel heard in
the noiseless Alaskan sea than the Indian proceeds to empty of its
treasures his cedar chest or his red Chinese box studded with brass
nails, and long before the steamer heaves in sight the primitive
bazar is ready for the expected customer.

There is much haggling over the price of a curio, and but little chance
of a bargain. If one has his eye upon some coveted object, he had
best purchase it at once at the first figure; for the Indian is not
likely to drop a farthing, and there are others who will gladly
outbid the hesitating shopper.

Time is no object in the eyes of these people. If an Indian thought
he could make a quarter more on the sale of a curio by holding it a month
longer, until the arrival of the next excursion boat, or even by
getting into his canoe and paddling a day or two over to the next
settlement, he would as lief do it as not.

By the merest chance I drew from a heap of rubbish in the corner
of a lodge a Shaman rattle, unquestionably genuine.

This Shaman rattle is a quaintly carved rattle-box, such as is used
by sorcerers or medicine-men in propitiation of the evil spirit at
the bedside of the dying.

The one I have was not offered for sale, nor did the possessor seem
to place much value on it; yet he would not budge one jot or tittle
in the price he first set upon it, and seemingly set at a guess.

Its discovery was a piece of pure luck, but I would not exchange
it for any other curio which I chanced to see during the whole
voyage.

In one of the lodges at Casa-an a chief lay dying. He was said to be the
last of his race; and, judging from appearances, his hours were
fast drawing to a close.

He was breathing painfully; his face was turned to the wall.

Two or three other Indians sat silently about, stirring at intervals a
bright wood-fire that burned in the centre of the lodge. The curling
smoke floated gracefully through a hole in the roof--most of it, but
not quite all. As we entered (we were in search of the dying chief;
for, as he seemed to be the one lion in the settlement, his fame
was soon noised abroad) we found that the evangelist had forestalled
us.

He was asking the price of salmon in San Francisco; but upon our
appearance he added, solemnly enough: "Well, we all must die--Indians
and all." An interpreter had reluctantly been pressed into service; but
as the missionary work was not progressing, the evangelist dropped the
interpreter, rolled up his spiritual sleeves and pitched in as
follows:

"Say, you Injun!

you love God? You love Great Spirit?" No answer came from the thin,
drawn lips, tightly compressed and visible just over the blankets
edge in the corner of the lodge.

"Say, John! you ready to die!

You make your peace with God!

You go to heaven--to the happy hunting-ground?" The chief, who had
silenced the interpreter with a single look, was apparently beyond
the hearing of human speech; so the evangelist, with a sigh, again
inquired into the state of the salmon market on the Pacific coast.

Then the stricken brave turned a glazed eye upon the man of God,
and the latter once more sought to touch that heart of stone: "I
say, you Injun!

you prepared to meet Great Spirit? You ready to go to happy
hunting-ground?" The chief's eyes flamed for a moment, as with infinite
scorn he muttered between his teeth to the evangelist: "You ----
fool!

You go to ----!" And he went.

While the steamer was slowly righting we had ample time to inspect the
beached hull of a schooner with a history.

She was the Pioneer of Casa-an once commanded by a famous old
smuggler named Baronovich. Long he sailed these waters; and, like
Captain Kidd, he bore a charmed life as he sailed.

It is a mystery to me how any sea-faring man can trust his craft to
the mercy of the winds and tides of this myriad-islanded inland sea.

This ancient mariner, Baronovich, not only braved the elements,
but defied Russian officials, who kept an eye upon him night and
day.
Mr. Henderson raised his gun, and
took careful aim at the middle of the fish, half turned over. Unerringly
the electric bullet sped on its way. It entered the soft under part of
the shark, and immediately the thing struggled in its death agony.

The water was dyed with blood. At the same instant the other sharks
rushed forward in a swirl of foam. The boys and Andy fired as best they
could, and must have hit one of the creatures for there was a greater
commotion.

But the fight was not over. Instantly the ocean seemed alive with the
giant fish. Attracted by the blood of the killed ones, scores of the
tigers of the seas rushed toward the scene of combat making matters
livelier than ever.

The professor, the boys and Andy fired their guns at random. Redder and
more red became the water until their helmet lamps barely glowed in the
crimson sea. It seemed that a whole army of the voracious sharks had
attacked them.

The professor realized that to stay and attempt to fight all the sharks
in that part of the ocean was impossible. He motioned for the boys and
Andy to follow him. Then he slowly led the way back to the ship.

But the sharks were not to be gotten rid of so easily. Several of the
largest followed the diggers, their horrible eyes, and big mouths with
rows of cruel teeth, striking terror to the hearts of all.

One of the creatures made a rush for Bill and Tom who were close
together. Either or both of the men would have been bitten in twain, in
spite of the protection of their diving suits, had not Mark, with a snap
shot, killed the fierce fish.

It was now a running fight, and yet not so much that, because to run was
impossible. However, they hurried all they could, and, by dint of quick
firing kept the ugly creatures at bay until the side of the ship, where
the diving tank was placed, was reached.

The professor stepped to one side, and motioned for the others to
proceed him in entering. Little time was lost. As Bill, the last one in,
stepped past the steel door the inventor attempted to enter. To do so he
had to let go of his gun.

Instantly one of the sharks made a rush for the old man. But Andy was
on the watch. He leaned forward, and, from his weapon sent a bullet
straight down the throat of the monster. The electric missile did its
work well, and the lifeless body of the shark was devoured by the others
of its tribe.

The professor pulled the door shut behind him. Then he set the pump to
work to empty the tank. As he did so there was a tremor to the ship.
What could it mean?

In a few minutes the tank was empty and the divers stepped out into the
ship, freed from the oppressive weight of water. The ship continued to
vibrate and seemed to be in motion.

"What is it?" asked Mark as soon as he had his helmet off.

"De ship am free! We've got off de mud bank!" exclaimed Washington,
running in from the engine room.

It was true. Enough had been dug so that, with the power of the screw
working backward, there was sufficient force to pull the _Porpoise_ from
her perilous position.

"Empty the tanks and rise to the surface," said the professor.

In a few minutes the ship was on top of the waves, the adventurers freed
from the double danger of the mud and sharks. They congratulated each
other on the good outcome of the fight with the monster fishes.

Wearied with their labors and the battle under the waves, the travelers
sat up on the deck breathing in the fresh breeze. Then, after a while,
supper was made ready and eaten with good appetites.

It was decided hereafter to sail along near the surface at night, and
not to submerge the ship deeply save during daylight, when it was easier
to distinguish objects under the water.

Following this plan the _Porpoise_ steamed along just awash that night,
and the next day was sent down about fifty feet below the surface.

One afternoon, when the travelers were resting, having partaken of a
fine meal, the professor went on deck to make some observations, the
ship having been raised for that purpose. He came down, somewhat
excited.

"Well, we're half way to the pole," he announced.

"How can you tell?" asked Mark.

"Because we have just crossed the equator. We went over the imaginary
line three minutes ago."

"I was wondering what made it so warm," said Jack.

"I guess you dreamed it was hotter," spoke the professor. "It has been
just as hot as this for the last few days. Crossing the line makes no
difference."

"Then we are really in the southern hemisphere now," said Mark.

"That's where we are," replied Mr. Henderson.

He put his instruments away.

"Well, we may as well go below the surface again," he remarked.

"Come quick! Hurry up!" yelled Washington from the deck. "Dar's a
shipwreck up heah! Somebody's on it!"


CHAPTER XV

THE STRANGE SHIPWRECK


The professor, followed by the boys and Tom, Bill and Andy hastened on
deck. They saw Washington pointing excitedly off to the west. There,
rising and falling on the easy swell, was the wreck of a large vessel.

She had been a three masted schooner, but now only the stumps of the
masts remained and the craft was rolling to and fro. It had settled low
in the water, and was quite deep by the head, so that, at times, the
waves broke over the bow in a shower of spray.

But what attracted the attention of the adventurers more than anything
else was the sight of two figures near what had been the after cabin of
the ship.

There they stood, frantically waving their hands toward those on the
submarine. Across the water that separated the two craft, there came a
faint hail.

"I suppose they are nearly dead," exclaimed the inventor. "We must save
them."

He ordered the _Porpoise_ sent ahead slowly toward the wreck. The
distance was about half a mile, and was soon covered. As the submarine
approached closer those on the schooner could be observed more plainly.

"One of 'em is a woman!" exclaimed Jack, who was using the glasses.

"Let me see," spoke the professor.

"You're right," he added. "The other is a little girl."

A few minutes later the _Porpoise_ was alongside. The woman and child
came to the rail of the schooner, which was barely five feet above the
waves.

"Can you jump down, or shall I come aboard and get you?" asked Mr.
Henderson seeing the woman hesitate.

"I can jump down, if you will catch the child," said the woman. "Oh I am
so glad you came," she added. "We are almost dead from hunger and
thirst, and the wreck is ready to sink and cannot last many hours
longer."

"Pass the little girl down to me," spoke Andy. "Then you jump. We'll
save you all right."

The little girl reached the deck in safety, and the woman, who proved to
be her mother, followed.

"Now take us to your ship," said the woman.

"You must be a long way from her, as she is not in sight."

"Our ship is right here," spoke Mr. Henderson with a smile.

"Where, I don't see her," and the woman looked in all directions.

"Allow me to introduce you to Profess Amos Henderson's famous submarine,
the _Porpoise_," spoke the inventor with a bow. "But come, let us go
below. You must be suffering, and here I am making speeches."

"Indeed I am hungry, and thirsty too," said the woman. "So is Nellie.
But I thought this was merely a small boat, sent from some large ship to
get us."

The woman and girl descended to the cabin of the submarine, where
Washington set before them a fine meal. Under the advice of the
professor they partook sparingly of food and drink at first, as, having
eaten nothing in many hours, the inventor said they must begin by taking
a little at a time.

As soon as they had finished and become somewhat rested, the woman told
her story. She was Mrs. Johnson, a widow, her husband having once owned
and been captain of the schooner that was wrecked. After his death she
and her daughter, having become part owners of the craft, disposing of
a third interest to the former mate of the ship, had set out on one of
the voyages to South American ports.

They had had good weather going, and took on a valuable cargo of lumber
and rare woods. But the return trip was more perilous. Heavy storms had
buffeted the craft almost from the time of leaving port, and in one
heavy blow, ten days before, the ship had been wrecked.

"What became of the crew?" asked Mr. Henderson.

"They took to the boats," replied Mrs. Johnson. "My little girl and
myself were to go with the mate and his men. The waves were fearfully
high, and, as they held the boat close to the schooner so we could get
in, a big roller smashed the little craft. The men must have all been
drowned for I never afterwards caught sight of one of them."

"But the other boats?" asked the inventor.

"They had gotten too far away to hail, supposing that I would be taken
care of by the mate. There was nothing for Nellie and I to do but stay
on board, expecting the ship to sink every minute."

"And you have been there ever since?" inquired Andy.

"Ever since. That was ten days ago. Every day I thought it would be our
last. The storm passed away and the sea became calm but the ship kept
settling lower and lower. Only the fact that part of the cargo was wood
kept her afloat so long. I managed to get some provisions and water up
on deck, but the sea had spoiled most of the stuff. We had to eat only a
little at a time, as I knew it would be some days before we could be
rescued, if we ever were. Two days ago we ate the last of the food and
drank almost the last of the water."

"Then you had nothing since then," spoke Jack.

"Only a few drops of rain that I caught on a piece of sail," answered
Mrs. Johnson.

"Never mind, you can have all you want now, mother," said Nellie, coming
over to pat her parent's cheek. "Oh," the child went on, "I was so
thirsty I could just cry when I thought of such things as ice cream
sodas."

"I guess you could," agreed Mark. "Well, we can't give you any soda
water, but we have plenty of the other kind."

Mrs. Johnson was much interested in the _Porpoise_ and Professor
Henderson showed her all about the craft. Though the quarters were
rather cramped, a small cabin was fitted up for the lady and her
daughter.

"We will travel a bit under the water so you can get used to it," said
the captain after a tour of the ship had been made. The tanks were
filled, and the _Porpoise_ sank beneath the waves. At first Mrs. Johnson
was much frightened, and Nellie cried. But when they saw how skillfully
the ship was managed, and how easy it was to rise again, they lost their
fears.

For several days the voyage was continued. Mrs. Johnson and Nellie
remained aboard as there was no place to land them, and they said they
wished to stay until they met some ship sailing north.

One day, just at dusk, when the _Porpoise_, after a long run under the
water had come to the surface, the professor, came up on deck to take a
look around. Washington and Andy accompanied him.

"Looks like land, off there to the left," remarked the old hunter.

"Get the glasses, Washington," said Mr. Henderson. "It may be a ship."

He took a long and careful look through the binoculars.

"It's some sort of land," he announced. "We'll go over in the morning
and see what it is. Probably it's an island, for there's no main land in
these parts. We are in the middle of the southern Atlantic now."

The next morning, after breakfast, the _Porpoise_ was headed toward the
dark spot on the surface of the water that the professor had gazed at
the evening before. As they came nearer it was seen that the place was a
large island.

"But it's a mighty queer one," spoke Mr. Henderson. "It looks more like
a big volcano than anything else."

As the ship came nearer it was seen that this was true. The island rose
abruptly from the surface of the sea in a big ridge, slightly rounded.
There appeared to be no signs of life on the land, but in the air
overhead hovered several big birds. These circled about and then
fluttered down, seemingly about the middle of the island.

"We'll sail around and see if there's a place to land," spoke the
inventor. "There doesn't seem to be a good harbor on this side."

Slowly the _Porpoise_ made the circuit. The island appeared to be almost
round. When they had gone about half way around Andy, who was staring
ahead, cried out:

"Look out Professor! Don't go any nearer or we'll be sucked into the
whirlpool!"

The inventor looked where the hunter pointed. Then he beheld the
strangest sight he had ever seen. The island was low toward where Andy
pointed and they beheld the waters of the ocean pouring over the edge
of it, and falling down into an immense hole with a roar like that of
Niagara Falls.

"Reverse the ship!" cried Professor Henderson. "Send her back quickly,
Washington, or we'll be sucked down!"

The colored man lost no time, and the big screw was sent whirling in the
opposite direction. And it was high time, for already the onward rush of
the falling waters was slowly drawing the ship toward the big cavern.

"That was a lucky escape," commented Amos Henderson. "Well, as we can't
land there we'll try the other way around."

The ship was headed in the opposite direction, and, after an hour's
sailing, a good harbor was discovered. The _Porpoise_ was anchored in
shallow water close to the shore and in a small boat the professor, Andy
and the two boys went to the strange island.

They found it merely an immense circle of land with the middle part
taken up by the big hole. And such a hole as it was! Biscuit, hand-made,
full weight, a la yellow.

VEGETABLES.

Beans, mountain style, warranted boiled forty-eight hours, a la
soda.

DESSERT.
Dried Apples, Russell gulch style.
Coffee, served in tin cups, to be washed clean for the occasion,
overland style, a la no cream.

In those days Horace Greeley, returning from his California tour, halted
to cast his eye over the now West.

The miners primed an old blunderbus with rich dust, and judiciously salted
Gregory gulch. Of course Horace was invited to inspect it. Being somewhat
horny-handed, he seized pick and shovel and went to work in earnest.

The pan-out was astonishing. He flew back to New York laden with the
glittering proofs of wealth; gave a whole page of the _Tribune_
to his tale of the golden fleece; and a rush to the new diggings
followed as a matter of course.

Denver and Auraria were rival settlements on the opposite shores of
Cherry Creek; in 1860 they consolidated, and then boasted a
population of 4000, in a vast territory containing but 60,000 souls.

The boom was on, and it was not long before a parson made his appearance.
This was the Rev.

George Washington Fisher of the Methodist Church, who accepted the
offer of a saloon as a house of worship, using the bar for a pulpit.

His text was: "Ho, everyone that thirsteth!

come ye to the waters.

And he that hath no money, come ye, buy and eat. Yea, come buy wine and
milk without money and without price." On the walls were displayed these
legends: "No trust," "Pay as you go," "Twenty-five cents a drink,"
etc.

Colorado Territory was organized in 1861, and was loyal to the Union.
Denver was still booming, though she suffered nearly all the ills
that precocious settlements are heir to.

The business portion of the town was half destroyed in 1863; Cherry
Creek flooded her in 1864, floating houses out of reach and drowning
fifteen or twenty of the inhabitants.

Then the Indians went on the war-path; stages and wagon trains were
attacked; passengers and scattered settlers massacred, and the very
town itself threatened.

Alarm-bells warned the frightened inhabitants of impending danger; many
fled to the United States Mint for refuge, and to cellars,
cisterns, and dark alleys. This was during the wild reign of Spotted
Horse along the shores of the Platte, before he was captured by
Major Downing at the battle of Sand Creek, and finally sent to
Europe on exhibition as a genuine child of the forest.

Those were stirring times, when every man had an eye to business, and could
hardly afford to spare it long enough to wink.

It is related of a certain minister who was officiating at a funeral that,
while standing by the coffin offering the final prayer, he noticed one
of the mourners kneeling upon the loose earth recently thrown from the
grave.

This man was a prospector, like all the rest, and in an absent-minded way
he had tearfully been sifting the soil through his fingers. Suddenly
he arose and began to stake out a claim adjoining the grave.

This was, of course, observed by the clergyman, who hastened the ceremonials
to a conclusion, and ended his prayer thus: "Stake me off a claim, Bill.
We ask it for Christ's sake.

Amen."
Horace Greeley's visit was fully appreciated, and his name given to a
mountain hamlet, long after known familiarly as "Saint's Rest,"
because there was nothing stimulating to be found thereabout.

Poor Meeker, for many years agricultural editor of the New York
_Tribune_, founded that settlement.

He was backed by Greeley, and established the Greeley _Tribune_ at
Saint's Rest.

In 1877 Meeker was made Indian agent, and he did his best to live
up to the dream of the Indian-maniacs; but, after two years of
self-sacrifice and devotion to the cause, he was brutally betrayed
and murdered by Chief Douglas, of the Utes, his guest at the time.

Mrs. Meeker and her daughters, and a Mrs.

Price and her child, were taken captive and subjected to the usual treatment
which all women and children may expect at the hands of the noble red-man.
They were rescued in due season; but what was rescue to them save a
prolongation of inconsolable bereavement?

When General Grant visited Central, the little mountain town received
him royally.

A pavement of solid silver bricks was laid for him to walk upon from his
carriage to the hotel door. One sees very little of this barbaric
splendor nowadays even in Denver, the most pretentious of far
Western burgs.

She is a metropolis of magnificent promises. Alighting at the airy
station, you take a carriage for the hotel, and come at once to
the centre of the city.

Were you to continue your drive but a few blocks farther, you would
come with equal abruptness to the edge of it.

The surprise is delightful in either case, but the suddenness of the
transition makes the stranger guest a little dizzy at first.

There are handsome buildings in Denver--blocks that would do credit
to any city under the sun; but there was for years an upstart air, a
palpable provincialism, a kind of ill-disguised "previousness,"
noticeable that made her seem like the brisk suburb of some other
place, and that other place, alas!

invisible to mortal eye. Rectangular blocks make a checker-board of the
town map. The streets are appropriately named Antelope, Bear, Bison,
Boulder, Buffalo, Coyote, Cedar, Cottonwood, Deer, Golden, Granite,
Moose, etc.

The names of most trees, most precious stones, the great States and
Territories of the West, with a sprinkling of Spanish, likewise beguile
you off into space, and leave the once nebulous burg beaming in
the rear.

Denver's theatre is remarkably handsome. In hot weather the atmosphere
is tempered by torrents of ice-water that crash through hidden aqueducts
with a sound as of twenty sawmills.

The management _dams_ the flood when the curtain rises and the
players begin to speak; the music lovers _damn_ it from the moment
the curtain falls.

They are absorbed in volumes of silent profanity between the acts;
for the orchestra is literally drowned in the roar of the rushing element.
There was nothing that interested me more than a copy of Alice
Polk Hill's "Tales of the Colorado Pioneers"; and to her I return
thanks for all that I borrowed without leave from that diverting
volume.

Somehow Denver, after my early visit, leaves with me an impression
as of a perfectly new city that has just been unpacked; as if the
various parts of it had been set up in a great hurry, and the
citizens were now impatiently awaiting the arrival of the rest of
the properties.

Some of the streets that appeared so well at first glance, seemed,
upon inspection, more like theatrical flats than realities; and
there was always a consciousness of everything being wide open and
uncovered.

Indeed, so strongly did I feel this that it was with difficulty I
could refrain from wearing my hat in the house.

Nor could I persuade myself that it was quite safe to go out alone
after dark, lest unwittingly I should get lost, and lift up in vain
the voice of one crying in the wilderness; for the blank and weird
spaces about there are as wide as the horizon where the distant
mountains seem to have slid partly down the terrestrial incline,--spaces
that offer the unwary neither hope nor hospice,--where there is
positively shelter for neither man nor beast, from the red-brick
heart of the ambitious young city to her snow-capped ultimate
suburb.

CHAPTER III.

The Garden of the Gods.

The trains run out of Denver like quick-silver,--this is the prettiest
thing I can say of Denver. They trickle down into high, green
valleys, under the shadow of snow-capped cliffs.

There the grass is of the liveliest tint--a kind of salad-green.

The air is sweet and fine; everything looks clean, well kept, well
swept--perhaps the wind is the keeper and the sweeper. All along the way
there is a very striking contrast of color in rock, meadows, and
sky; the whole is as appetizing to the sight as a newly varnished
picture.

We didn't down brakes until we reached Colorado Springs; there we changed
cars for Manitou. Already the castellated rocks were filling us
with childish delight.

Fungi decked the cliffs above us: colossal, petrified fungi, painted
Indian fashion.

At any rate, there is a kind of wild, out-of-door, subdued harmony in
the rock-tints upon the exterior slopes of the famed Garden of the
Gods, quite in keeping with the spirit of the decorative red-man. Within
that garden color and form run riot, and Manitou is the restful
outpost of this erratic wilderness.

It is fitting that Manitou should be approached in a rather primitive
manner. I was glad when we were very politely invited to get out of the
train and walk a plank over a puddle that for a moment submerged the
track; glad when we were advised to foot it over a trestle-bridge
that sagged in the swift current of a swollen stream; and gladder
still when our locomotive began to puff and blow and slaken its
pace as we climbed up into the mouth of a ravine fragrant with the
warm scents of summer--albeit we could boast but a solitary brace
of cars, and these small ones, and not overcrowded at that.

Only think of it! We were scarcely three hours by rail from Denver;
and yet here, in Manitou, were the very elements so noticeably
lacking there.

Nature in her natural state--primitive forever; the air seasoned with
the pungent spices of odoriferous herbs; the sweetest sunshine in
abundance, and all the shade that makes sunshine most agreeable.

Manitou is a picturesque hamlet that has scattered itself up and down a
deep ravine, regardless of the limiting lines of the surveyor. The
railway station at Manitou might pose for a porter's lodge in the
prettiest park in England. Surely there is hope for America when she can
so far curb her vulgar love of the merely practical as to do that
sort of thing at the right time and in the right place.

A fine stream brawls through the bed of this lovely vale. There are
rustic cottages that cluster upon the brink of the stream, as if
charmed by the music of its song; and I am sure that the cottagers
dwelling therein have no wish to hang their harps upon any willows
whatever; or to mingle their tears, though these were indeed the
waters of Babylon that flow softly night and day through the green
groves of Manitou.

The breeze stirs the pulse like a tonic; birds, bees, and butterflies
dance in the air; the leaves have the gloss of varnish--there is no dust
there,--and everything is cleanly, cheerful and reposeful. From the hotel
veranda float the strains of harp and viol; at intervals during the day
and night music helps us to lift up our hearts; there is nothing like
it--except more of it. There is not overmuch dressing among the women,
nor the beastly spirit of loudness among the men; the domestic
atmosphere is undisturbed.

A newspaper printed on a hand-press, and distributed by the winds for aught
I know, has its office in the main lane of the village; its society
column creates no scandal. A solitary bicycle that flashes like a
shooting star across the placid foreground is our nearest approach
to an event worth mentioning.

Loungers lounge at the springs as if they really enjoyed it. An amiable
booth-boy displays his well-dressed and handsomely mounted foxskins,
his pressed flowers of Colorado, his queer mineralogical jewelry,
and his uncouth geological specimens in the shape of hideous
bric-a-brac, as if he took pleasure in thus entertaining the public;
while everybody has the cosiest and most sociable time over the
counter, and buys only by accident at last.

There are rock gorges in Manitou, through which the Indian tribes
were wont noiselessly to defile when on the war-path in the brave
days of old; gorges where currents of hot air breathe in your face
like the breath of some fierce animal.

There are brilliant and noisy cataracts and cascades that silver the rocks
with spray; and a huge winding cavern filled with mice and filth and the
blackness of darkness, and out of which one emerges looking like a
tramp and feeling like--well! There are springs bubbling and steeping
and stagnating by the wayside; springs containing carbonates of
soda, lithia, lime, magnesia, and iron; sulphates of potassa and
soda, chloride of sodium and silica, in various solutions.

Some of these are sweeter than honey in the honeycomb; some of them smell
to heaven--what more can the pampered palate of man desire?

Let all those who thirst for chalybeate waters bear in mind that the Ute
Iron Spring of Manitou is 800 feet higher than St.

Catarina, the highest iron spring in Europe, and nearly 1000 feet higher
than St. Moritz; and that the bracing air at an elevation of 6400
feet has probably as much to do with the recovery of the invalid as has
the judicious quaffing of medicinal waters. Of pure iron springs, the
famous Schwalbach contains rather more iron than the Ute Iron, and
Spa rather less.

On the whole, Manitou has the advantage of the most celebrated
medicinal springs in Europe, and has a climate even in midwinter
preferable to all of them.

On the edge of the pretty hamlet at Manitou stands a cottage half
hidden like a bird's nest among the trees.

I saw only the peaks of gables under green boughs; and I wondered
when I was informed that the lovely spot had been long untenanted,
and wondered still more when I learned that it was the property of
good Grace Greenwood.

Will she ever cease wandering, and return to weave a new chaplet of
greenwood leaves gathered beneath the eaves of her mountain home?

At the top of the village street stands Pike's Peak--at least it seems
to stand there when viewed through the telescopic air. It is in reality
a dozen miles distant; but is easily approached by a winding trail,
over which ladies in the saddle may reach the glorious snow-capped
summit and return to Manitou between breakfast and supper--unless
one should prefer to be rushed up and down over the aerial railway.

From the signal station the view reminds one of a map of the world.

It rather dazes than delights the eye to roam so far, and imagination
itself grows weary at last and is glad to fold its wings.

Manitou's chief attraction lies over the first range of hills--the
veritable Garden of the Gods.

You may walk, ride or drive to it; in any case the surprise begins
the moment you reach the ridge's top above Manitou, and ceases not
till the back is turned at the close of the excursion--nor then
either, for the memory of that marvel haunts one like a feverish
dream.

Fancy a softly undulating land, delicately wooded and decked with
many an ornamental shrub; a landscape that composes so well one can
scarcely assure himself that the artist or the landscape gardener
has not had a hand in the beautifying of it.

In this lonely, silent land, with cloud shadows floating across it,
at long intervals bird voices or the bleating of distant flocks
charm the listening ear.

Out of this wild and beautiful spot spring Cyclopean rocks, appalling
in the splendor of their proportions and the magnificence of their
dyes.

Sharp shafts shoot heavenward from breadths of level sward, and
glow like living flames; peaks of various tinges overlook the tops
of other peaks, that, in their turn, lord it among gigantic bowlders
piled upon massive pedestals.

It is Ossa upon Pelion, in little; vastly impressive because of the
exceptional surroundings that magnify these magnificent monuments,
unique in their design and almost unparalleled in their picturesque
and daring outline.

Some of the monoliths tremble and sway, or seem to sway; for they are
balanced edgewise, as if the gods had amused themselves in some
infantile game, and, growing weary of this little planet, had fled
and left their toys in confusion.

The top-heavy and the tottering ones are almost within reach; but
there are slabs of rock that look like slices out of a mountain--I
had almost said like slices out of a red-hot volcano; they stand
up against the blue sky and the widespreading background in brilliant
and astonishing perspective.

I doubt if anywhere else in the world the contrasts in color and
form are more violent than in the Garden of the Gods.

They are not always agreeable to the eye, for there is much crude
color here; but there are points of sight where these columns, pinnacles,
spires and obelisks, with base and capital, are so grouped that the
massing is as fantastical as a cloud picture, and the whole can be
compared only to a petrified after-glow.

I have seen pictures of the Garden of the Gods that made me nearly burst
with laughter; I mean color studies that were supremely ridiculous
in my eyes, for I had not then seen the original; but none of these
makes me laugh any longer.

They serve, even the wildest and the worst of them, to remind me of
a morning drive, in the best of company, through that grand garden
where our combined vocabularies of delight and wonderment were
exhausted inside of fifteen minutes; and where we drove on and on,
hour after hour, from climax to climax, lost in speechless
amazement.

Glen Eyrie is the valley of Rasselas--I am sure it is. The Prince of
Abyssinia left the gate open when he, poor fool! went forth in search
of happiness and found it not. Now any one may drive through the domain
of the present possessor and admire his wealth of pictorial
solitude--without, however, sharing it further.

If it were mine, would I permit thus much, I wonder? Only the elect
should enter there; and once the charmed circle was complete, we
would wall up the narrow passage that leads to this terrestrial paradise,
and you would hear no more from us, or of us, nor we of you, or
from you, forever.

On my first visit to Colorado Springs I made a little pilgrimage.

I heard that a gentle lady, whom I had always wished to see, was at her
home on the edge of the city. No trouble in finding the place: any one
could direct me.

It was a cosy cottage in the midst of a garden and shaded by thickly
leaved trees.

Some one was bowed down among the strawberry beds, busy there; yet
the place seemed half deserted and very, very quiet.

Big bamboo chairs and lounges lined the vine-curtained porch. The shades
in the low bay-window were half drawn, and a glint of sunshine lighted
the warm interior. I saw heaps of precious books on the table in
that deep window.

There was a mosquito door in the porch, and there I knocked for admittance.
I knocked for a long time, but received no answer.

I knocked again so that I might be heard even in the strawberry bed.

A little kitten came up out of the garden and said something kittenish
to me, and then I heard a muffled step within.

The door opened--the inner door,--and beyond the wire-cloth screen, that
remained closed against me, I saw a figure like a ghost, but a very
buxom and wholesome ghost indeed.

I asked for the hostess. Alas!

she was far away and had been ill; it was not known when she would
return.

Her address was offered me, and I thought to write her,--thought to tell
her how I had sought out her home, hoping to find her after years of
patient waiting; and that while I talked of her through the
wire-cloth screen the kitten, which she must have petted once upon
a time, climbed up the screen until it had reached the face of the
amiable woman within, and then purred and purred as only a real
kitten can.

I never wrote that letter; for while we were chatting on the porch she
of whom we chatted, she who has written a whole armful of the most
womanly and lovable of books, Helen Hunt Jackson, lay dying in San
Francisco and we knew it not.

But it is something to have stood by her threshold, though she was
never again to cross it in the flesh, and to have been greeted by
her kitten.

How she loved kittens! And now I can associate her memory with the
peacefulest of cottages, the easiest of veranda chairs, a bay-window
full of books and sunshine, and a strawberry bed alive with berries
and blossoms and butterflies and bees.

And yonder on the heights her body was anon laid to rest among the
haunts she loved so dearly.

CHAPTER IV.

A Whirl across the Rockies.

A long time ago--nearly a quarter of a century--California could
boast a literary weekly capable of holding its own with any in the
land.

This was before San Francisco had begun to lose her unique and delightful
individuality--now gone forever. Among the contributors to this once
famous weekly were Mark Twain, Bret Harte, Prentice Mulford, Joaquin
Miller, Dan de Quille, Orpheus C. Kerr, C. H.

Webb, "John Paul," Ada Clare, Ada Isaacs Menken, Ina Coolbrith, and
hosts of others.

Fitz Hugh Ludlow wrote for it a series of brilliant descriptive
letters recounting his adventures during a recent overland journey;
they were afterward incorporated in a volume--long out of print--entitled
"The Heart of the Continent."

In one of these letters Ludlow wrote as follows of the probable future of
Manitou: "When Colorado becomes a populous State, the springs of the
Fontaine-qui-Bouille will constitute its Spa.

In air and scenery no more glorious summer residence could be imagined.
The Coloradian of the future, astonishing the echoes of the rocky
foothills by a railroad from Denver to the springs, and running
down on Saturday to stop over Sunday with his family, will have
little cause to envy us Easterners our Saratoga as he paces up and
down the piazza of the Spa hotel, mingling his full-flavored Havana
with that lovely air, unbreathed before, which is floating down
upon him from the snow peaks of the range."

His prophecy has become true in every particular.

But what would he have thought had he threaded the tortuous path now
marked by glistening railway tracks?

What would he have said of the Grand Cañon of the Arkansas, the Black
Cañon of the Gunnison, Castle Cañon and Marshall Pass over the crest
of the continent?

I suppose a narrow-gauge road can go anywhere. It trails along the slope
of shelving hills like a wild vine; it slides through gopher-hole
tunnels as a thread slides through the eye of a needle; it utilizes
water-courses; it turns ridiculously sharp corners in a style
calculated to remind one of the days when he played "snap-the-whip"
and happened to be the snapper himself.

This is especially the case if one is sitting on the rear platform
of the last car.

We shot a cañon by daylight, and marvelled at the glazed surface of the
red rock with never so much as a scratch over it.
In a little while the water
in the big shell was boiling.

"Now get some other shells for dishes," said Jack to Mark.

Soon Mark had piled up a lot of smaller shells.

"Help me gather some eggs now," said Jack, "and we'll put them in to
boil. Then we'll invite the rest of the folks to breakfast."

The two boys soon uncovered from the sand a pile of the eggs, and in a
little while they were steaming in the hot water. Then Jack arranged the
shell-dishes on the sand. He went over to where the others were gloomily
considering their plight.

"Breakfast is ready," he announced.

"This isn't any time for joking," spoke Professor Henderson, rather
sternly.

"But I mean it," went on Jack. "Just come over and see. I'm not fooling
you."

Wondering what he had done they all followed him.

"Welcome to Hotel Terra del Fuego!" cried Mark. "We haven't much of a
variety, but what there is we can recommend."

He began to dip the eggs out of the water with a bit of shell and placed
them on the improvised dishes.

"Everyone sit down," commanded Jack. "The bill of fare is ready."

They all joined in the short laugh that followed, and soon were seated
in a circle about the beach-oven. The eggs proved to be very good, even
though there was no pepper. The salt of the sea water they were boiled
in was more than sufficient.

"Now if there was only bread in that ammunition bag Washington brought
with the gun," said Andy, "we wouldn't want a better meal."

"He'p yo'se'f!" exclaimed the colored man with a grin as he extended a
canvas bag that was tied to the stock of the electric gun.

The old hunter opened it and found it filled with ship biscuits.

"Well I am stumped!" he exclaimed.

"I grabbed up de wrong thing in my haste," Washington explained. "I
thought I had de electrical lightning bullets, but I didn't. Howsomever
de gun's got some in de chamber."

"It's a lucky mistake," commented the professor as he munched a biscuit
and an egg. "Bullets are good but these are better, when one is
hungry."

They managed to make a fairly good meal, so that even hungry Nellie was
satisfied. The boys found a spring of fresh water up on shore, and this
furnished something to drink, for which they were grateful.

They sat about on the beach, after the breakfast and discussed what they
had better do. It was evident that an attempt to regain possession of
the ship, with their small force and only one weapon, was out of the
question.

"We've got to use strategy," said Andy. "If we could play some trick on
the savages we might scare them away. Otherwise I don't see what we are
to do."

"It's a bad state of affairs," replied professor Henderson. "Even if we
got the ship we might find it so badly damaged that it would be
impossible to run it. It is a terrible thing," and he heaved a deep
sigh.

The hours passed with no change in the situation. The savages remained
in possession of the submarine, and did not seem inclined to quit the
vessel. Most of them were inside, but quite a number paddled about the
stranded craft in their canoes.

There was nothing for the adventurers to do but to await developments.
With no chance of attacking the force of natives, they might consider
themselves lucky if the savages did not come ashore to give battle.

The sun was high in the heavens when, in the shade of a big tree where
they had all taken refuge from the heat, Nellie again announced that she
was hungry.

"I guess the boys will have to provide another meal," said Mr.
Henderson.

Jack and Mark said they guessed they could find some more turtle eggs,
and Washington volunteered to accompany them. As they were looking for a
nest in the sand they saw one of the tortoises scurrying down to the
ocean.

"Git her, quick!" cried the colored man. "Turn her ober on her back!"

The boys did so, though they did not know what Washington's object was.
The big animal lay bottom side up, vainly moving its flippers. In a few
minutes Washington had killed the turtle and cut it out of the shell.

"Now we'll hab turtle soup!" he exclaimed.

Soon the fire was again blazing in the improvised stove, and a little
later an appetizing smell filled the air. Washington had made the soup,
and, in addition, had cooked a number of the turtle eggs.

Big clam shells again served for dishes and a better meal than the
breakfast was served.

"Now if we only had some dessert," spoke Mr. Henderson in a joking
tone, "we wouldn't want much more. But I suppose dessert is out of the
question."

Jack and Mark looked at each other and, without a word went off toward
the woods. In a little while they came back, their arms filled with
cocoanuts.

"How will these do for dessert?" asked Jack.

"Fine!" cried Mr. Henderson.

The fruit was broken open with stones and the delicious milk and soft
pulp eaten with much relish. Then the adventurers stretched out beneath
the trees and rested. The thoughts of each one were busy with plans for
recovering the submarine, though no one seemed to be able to suggest any
thing.

It was getting dusk, when, somewhat discouraged over the result of the
visit of the savages, they were all seated on the beach. They were
beginning to think again of something to eat when Andy Sudds, discovered
the long black box which Washington had brought with him in his flight
from the _Porpoise_, and dropped in a hollow.

"I suppose you've got something very fine in there, Washington?"

"I declare to goodness I don't know what dat air contraption am
conglomerated with," said the colored man. "I jest grabbed it up and
run."

The old hunter had, in the meanwhile, taken the cover off.

"What in the world have we struck," he exclaimed.

"Sky rockets!" cried Jack, with a glance at the contents of the box.

"Yes," said Professor Henderson. "I took some aboard in case we might
have to signal for help on the water."

"Hurrah!" yelled Andy.

"What's the matter?" asked Jack.

"We'll use the sky rockets as weapons against the natives!" shouted the
old hunter, capering about on the sand.


CHAPTER XIX

REGAINING THE SHIP


At first the others did not know what he meant. Andy seemed much
excited, and for a time the professor thought the heat and worry might
have affected the hunter's mind.

"We'll show 'em a thing or two!" cried Andy. "I once scared a lot of
Indians this way so they didn't know whether they were on their head or
their feet. Hurrah!"

"What are you talking about?" asked Mr. Henderson. "Hadn't you better
sit down and rest a bit?"

"I'm all right," replied Andy. "I'm talking about those sky rockets.
They'll be better than bullets. You see," he went on, "after it gets
dark we'll shoot the rockets over the ship. The savages will think they
are in the midst of a lot of falling stars, and if they don't take to
their boats and leave us the ship I'll miss my guess, that's all."

"Good!" exclaimed the inventor. "We'll try it."

The rockets were taken out and examined. They were big affairs of
several pound weight and were intended for far-off signalling at sea.

Andy, with the aid of the boys, Tom and Bill, soon constructed a rough
sort of support from which to set off the fire-works. As soon as it grew
dark, which it did about seven o'clock, preparations were made to try
the experiment.

With a whizz and roar the first rocket went sailing skyward. Up through
the black night it went, trailing behind it a shower of fire and sparks.
Then, with a loud report like that of a gun it burst directly over the
ship and a rain of brilliantly colored globes of flame descended.

"Shot number one!" cried Andy, who was setting off the rockets.

For a few seconds after the first flight there came no sound from the
natives at the ship. Then, just as the second rocket was set off there
issued a long-drawn howl, which was succeeded by cries of fear.

"We've waked 'em up!" shouted Jack.

In rapid succession several more rockets were sent over the _Porpoise_.
By the light of them could be seen a mass of natives crowded out on the
small deck, while others were in their canoes.

"I think I'll try it a little lower this time," remarked Andy. "Maybe I
can hit some of 'em!"

He slanted the support closer to the ground and set off two rockets at
once. Straight across the sandy beach they flew, directly toward the
crowd of natives on the ship. Right into the midst of the savages the
trailing comet of fire shot, with a hiss, roar and sputter that was
enough to strike terror into the bravest heart.

There was a long piercing howl of fear. Then, as the natives felt the
hot sparks scatter over their half-naked bodies, they broke into a wild
stampede. Over the side of the ship they plunged, into the sea, and swam
off. Those in boats paddled quickly away.

For good measure Andy sent another rocket into the midst of the fleeing
ones, and this served to quicken their departure. By the light of the
last one it could be seen that the ship was deserted, though the water
all about her was black with the swimming savages, and the canoes.

"I guess they won't come back in a hurry!" cried Andy. "Come on! We'll
board the ship now, and get the electric guns to ward off any further
attacks!"

"That's the talk!" cried Mark.

Toward the _Porpoise_ all started on a run. As they neared her they
found that the rising tide had floated her.

"We must see if the natives damaged her," spoke Mr. Henderson as soon as
he set foot on deck. "If they have it will be a hard matter to make
repairs so far from civilization."

A hasty examination, however, showed that the savages had disturbed
little. The engine was soon set in motion, and, in ten minutes the ship
was steaming away from the coast, headed toward the south, the goal they
were so eagerly seeking.

As soon as they were well out to sea, and all sight of the canoes of the
savages had been lost, supper was served, and all brought good appetites
to the table. For, though the improvised meals on shore had tasted good,
there had not been much to them.

For several days the _Porpoise_ was kept on her course, sailing along
under the water by day, and upon the surface at night. It was one
pleasant afternoon, while Nellie, Jack and Mark were sitting out on the
deck, during one of the times when the boat had risen to the surface to
renew the air supply, that a strange commotion was observed off their
lee. The ocean seemed to be boiling.

"What is that?" asked the little girl.

The two boys looked to where she pointed. Indeed the ocean seemed to be
bubbling up and down in a strange manner.

"It's a school of porpoises," said Jack.

Just then the water became alive with big fish. They leaped over each
other, springing high into the air and falling back into the sea with
resounding splashes.

"They're not porpoises! They're whales! Baby whales!" yelled Mark. "Look
out or some of the big ones may ram the boat!"

As he spoke the water all about the submarine was seen to be fairly
swarming with the small whales. There were scores of them, and, at
times, they were so thick that it appeared possible to walk out upon
them without getting very deep into the water.

Suddenly the ship careened to one side and the sea rushed over the deck.
It was evident that one of the big whales, which were deeper down in the
water, had struck the vessel.

Nellie screamed and tried to grab the hand rail that was about the
platform. She missed her grip. The next instant she was floundering in
the ocean, in the midst of the school of whales.

"Man overboard!" yelled Jack, remembering vaguely that he had read this
was the proper call to make in case of accident.

His cry brought Washington and the professor up the companionway on the
jump.

"Launch the boat!" cried the inventor as he saw what had happened.

Mark was already in action. At the first sight of Nellie slipping over
the side he had thrown off his coat, broken the laces of his shoes in
order the more quickly to remove the foot coverings, and had dived into
the swirling water which surrounded the submarine.

He struck out in the direction where the little girl had disappeared,
and as her golden head appeared above the mass of foam he yelled in
encouragement.

By this time the small boat was launched and the colored man and Jack
were pulling toward him. Mark succeeded in reaching Nellie as she was
going down the second time. He grabbed her long locks and managed to
keep her up until the little craft was alongside of him.

"Git in quick, 'fore dem whales eat yo' up!" cried Washington.

He hauled the unconscious child in first, and then Jack gave Mark a
hand. As if by magic all the whales had disappeared and the sea was
quiet again. In a few minutes the rescuers and the rescued one went back
again on the _Porpoise_, where Professor Henderson soon brought Nellie
around again. Beyond the shock and wetting neither she nor Mark was
harmed.

It was Jack's watch on deck that night. He had the tour from eight until
twelve o'clock and when, about ten, every one but himself had retired,
he took his position in the door of the conning tower and prepared to
pass the time as best he could.

The ship was moving along at half speed, and, as the automatic steering
attachment was working Jack had little to do. He sat looking at the
stars that twinkled in the sky, the blazing Southern Cross showing among
the constellations, when he heard a slight noise near the companionway.

He looked in that direction and, to his horror, he saw the ghostly white
shape that had, on previous occasions, caused him and the others fright.

At first the boy resolved to shut himself up in the tower and wait until
the uncanny thing had disappeared. Then his courage came back and he
thought he would try to solve the mystery.

He argued that if the weird white object was human and could witness his
movements the best thing to do would be to try and creep upon it
unobserved. On the contrary, if the ghost was some natural phenomenon,
or a supernatural agent, all he could do would be of no avail.

So he decided the best thing to do would be to crawl upon the thing,
keeping as near to the deck as possible and trying to hide himself. With
this in view he put on a long rain coat that hung in the conning tower,
and then, like a snake, commenced to wiggle his way toward the middle of
the platform where the white object still stood.

Nearer and nearer to it Jack came. His heart was beating fast and he was
much frightened, but he nerved himself to continue. As he came closer he
could see that the object looked more and more like a man, completely
robed in white garments.

Jack was now within ten feet of the strange object. It was a man, he was
sure of it, but whether a present or former inhabitant of the earth he
could not decide. Jack's hair was beginning to raise. A cold shiver ran
down his spine as the white thing lifted an arm and seemed to point
directly at him. At the same time it groaned in a deep tone.

Jack let out a yell that could be heard all over the ship. He made a
spring for the object, determined to discover what it was or die.

At that instant the whole ship seemed to rise in the air. It left the
water and began moving skyward. Right out of the waves the _Porpoise_
was lifted until the big screw was clear of the water and it was
churning around in the tunnel without any resistance, racing at top
speed now that it had no water to thrust against.

Then the ghost seemed to vanish into thin air, and Jack felt himself
falling down the hatchway.


CHAPTER XX

ON A VOLCANIC ISLAND


In an instant the ship was in confusion. The professor, followed by old
Andy, Washington, Mark, Bill and Tom, came rushing from their berths,
all in their night clothing, to see what the trouble was. They met in a
tangled mass, stumbling over Jack at the foot of the steps.

"Is the ship on fire?" called Mrs. Johnson from her cabin.

"I hope not!" called the professor. "But something has happened. Don't
be frightened!"

By this time Jack, who had been somewhat stunned, recovered his senses
and worked his way out of the mass of bodies.

"The ghost! The ghost!" he cried. "I saw him again!"

"Land a' massy!" yelled Washington.

"What has happened to the ship?" cried the professor. "Is it a tidal
wave?"

"I was on deck," panted Jack. "I saw the white thing! I crept up on it!
All at once the ship rose in the air!"

"And it's still rising!" shouted the inventor. "I must see what this
means!"

He made his way to the deck, and his loud shout soon brought the others
up to him.

"Shut off the engine!" Mr. Henderson called down to Washington, who
hurried to obey.

"What has happened?" asked Andy, rushing towards him.

"We have run upon an island," answered the professor. "This is the worst
thing that has yet happened to us."

"What sort of an island is it that shoots you up in the air?" asked the
old hunter.

"It's hard to say," replied Mr. Henderson. "We will have to wait until
morning to find out."

The boys and men went up on deck and there beheld a curious sight. The
_Porpoise_ had been lifted bodily from the surface of the ocean where
she had been sailing and was now raised about ten feet above the crest
of the billows. It was too dark to see the extent of the island she
rested on, but, from the circle of foam around the outer edge it did not
appear to be very big.

The excitement occasioned by the appearance of the ghost, Jack's yells
and fall, and the rising of the ship, had subsided somewhat. Mrs.
Johnson and her daughter, who were much frightened, were assured there
was no immediate danger, and the men and boys put on more substantial
clothing than that of their night robes.

It seemed as if morning would never come, but at length there was a pale
light in the east and soon it changed to a rosy glow, showing that the
sun was coming.

The professor was early on deck, and Mark and Jack were not far behind.
As soon as it was light enough they could see that the ship was held
fast on top of a small rocky isle, about one hundred feet in diameter,
which rose abruptly from the water.

"It's a volcanic island," decided the professor. "We are in the midst of
subterranean disturbances and this is probably one of the effects of
some under-sea eruption. The pinnacle of rock rose from the ocean,
forced up by some power underneath, just as our ship came over it. That
accounts for the sudden rising into the air of the _Porpoise_. No wonder
we were all scared."

"The next question," began old Andy, "is how are we to get off?"

"That's the point," agreed Mr. Henderson. "Here we are, high and dry,
and we might as well be a broken flying machine as a submarine for all
the power we have."

"Will we have to stay here forever?" asked Nellie, who had come up on
deck.

"I hope not," answered the professor, smiling for the first time since
the accident. "We will find a way to get down, never fear, little girl."

"I suppose we might dig some sort of a canal down to the water,"
remarked Jack. "If we could we might float the ship."

"I'm afraid you'd find it slow digging through this volcanic rock,"
answered Andy. "It's like flint."

"Well, there's no use worrying over it," went on the professor in as
calm a tone as he could muster. "It's time for breakfast, and we have to
eat whether we're on the top of an island that shoots out of the water
when you least expect it, or sailing along as we ought to."

Accordingly Washington prepared the morning meal, and they all found
they had appetites for it, in spite of their fright. Afterward they all
came on deck again and looked about them.

They were in the midst of a wild waste of water. Not a sign of land
could be seen in any direction, and there was no evidence of a sail or
steamship as far as the horizon showed.

It is not a handsome edifice, nor is it in the least like a castle, nor
like what one supposes a castle should be. Were it anywhere else, it
might pass for the country residence of a gentleman of the old
school, or for an unfashionable suburban hotel, or for a provincial
seminary.

It is built of solid cedar logs that seem destined to weather the storms
of ages. These logs are secured by innumerable copper bolts; and the whole
structure is riveted to the rocks, so that neither wind nor wave nor
earthquake shock is likely to prevail against it.

Handsomely finished within, it was in the colonial days richly
furnished; and as Sitka was at that time a large settlement composed
of wealthy and highbred Russians, governed by a prince or a baron whose
petty court was made up of the representatives of the rank and
fashion of St.

Petersburg and Moscow, the colonial castle was most of the time the scene
of social splendor.

The fame of the brilliant and beautiful Baroness Wrangell, first
chatelaine of the castle, lives after her.

She was succeeded by the wife of Governor Kupreanoff, a brave lady, who
in 1835 crossed Siberia on horseback to Behring Sea on her way to
Sitka.

Later the Princess Maksontoff became the social queen, and reigned in the
little castle on Katalan's Rock as never queen reigned before.

A flagship was anchored under the windows, and the proud Admiral spent
much of his time on shore. The officers' clubhouse, yonder down the
grassy street, was the favorite lounging place of the navy. The
tea-gardens have run to seed, and the race-course is obliterated,
where, doubtless, fair ladies and brave men disported themselves
in the interminable twilights of the Alaskan summer. In the reign
of the Princess Maksontoff the ladies were first shown to the
sideboard.

When they had regaled themselves with potent punch and caviare, the
gentlemen followed suit. But the big brazen samovar was forever steaming
in the grand salon, and delicious draughts of caravan tea were in order
at all hours.

What days they were, when the castle was thronged with guests, and
those of all ages and descriptions and from every rank in and out
of society!

The presidential levee is not more democratic than were the _fétes_
of the Princess Maksontoff. To the music of the Admiral's band
combined with the castle orchestra, it was "all hands round."

The Prince danced with each and every lady in turn.

The Princess was no less gracious, for all danced with her who chose,
from the Lord High Admiral to midshipmite and the crew of the
captain's gig.

You will read of these things in the pages of Lutka, Sir George Simpson,
Sir Edward Belcher, and other early voyagers. They vouch for the
unique charm of the colonial life at that day. Washington Irving, in his
"Astoria," has something to say of New Archangel (Michael), or
"Sheetka," as he spells it; but it is of the time when the ships
of John Jacob Astor were touching in that vicinity, and the reports
are not so pleasing.

While social life in the little colony was still more enjoyable, a
change came that in a single hour reversed the order of affairs.

For years Russia had been willing, if not eager, to dispose of the great
lands that lay along the northwestern coast of America.

She seemed never to have cared much for them, nor to have believed much
in their present value or possible future development.

No enterprise was evinced among the people: they were comparative
exiles, who sought to relieve the monotony of their existence by
one constant round of gaity.

_Soirées_ at the castle, tea-garden parties, picnics upon the thousand
lovely isles that beautify the Sitkan Sea; strolls among the sylvan
retreats in which the primeval forest, at the very edge of the town,
abounds; fishing and hunting expeditions, music, dancing, lively
conversation, strong punch, caviare and the steaming samovar,--those
were the chief diversions with which noble and serf alike sought
to lighten the burden of the day.

While Russia was willing to part with the lone land on the Pacific, she
was determined that it should not pass into the hands of certain
of the powers for whom she had little or no love.

Hence there was time for the United States to consider the question
of a purchase and to haggle a little over the price.

For years the bargain hung in the balance. When it was finally settled,
it was settled so suddenly that the witnesses had to be wakened
and called out of their beds.

They assembled secretly, in the middle of the night, as if they
were conspirators; and before sunrise the whole matter was fixed
forever.

On the 18th of October, 1867, three United States ships of war anchored
off Katalan's Rock.

These were the Ossipee, the Jamestown and the Resaca.

In the afternoon, at half-past three o'clock, the terrace before the
castle was surrounded by United States troops, Russian soldiers,
officials, citizens and Indians.

The town was alive with Russian bunting, and the ships aflutter
with Stars and Stripes and streamers.

There was something ominous in the air and in the sunshine. Bang! went
the guns from the Ossipee, and the Russian flag slowly descended from
the lofty staff on the castle; but the wind caught it and twisted
it round and round the staff, and it was long before a boatswain's
chair could be rigged to the halyards, and some one hauled up to
disentangle the rebellious banner.

Meanwhile the rain began to fall, and the Princess Maksontoff was in
tears.

It was a dismal hour for the proud court of the doughty governor.
The Russian water battery was firing a salute from the dock as the
Stars and Stripes were climbing to the skies--the great continent
of icy peaks and pine was passing from the hands of one nation to
the other.

In the silence that ensued, Captain Pestehouroff stepped forward and
said: "By authority of his Majesty the Emperor of Russia, I transfer
to the United States the Territory of Alaska." The prince governor then
surrendered his insignia of office, and the thing was done. In a few
months' time fifty ships and four hundred people had deserted
Sitka; and to-day but three families of pure Russian blood remain.

Perhaps the fault-finding which followed this remarkable acquisition of
territory on the part of the United States government--both the
acquisition and the fault-finding were on the part of our government--had
best be left unmentioned.

Now that the glorious waters of that magnificent archipelago have
become the resort of summer tourists, every man, woman and child
can see for his, her and its self; and this is the only way in which
to convince an American of anything.

Thirty years ago Sitka was what I have attempted to describe above.
To-day how different!

Passing its barracks at the foot of Katalan's Rock, one sees a handful
of marines looking decidedly bored if off duty.
The steps that lead up to the steep incline of the rock to the
castle terrace are fast falling to decay.

Weeds and rank grass trail over them and cover the whole top of the rock.
The castle has been dismantled.

The walls will stand until they are blown up or torn down, but all
traces of the original ornamentation of the interior have disappeared.

The carved balustrades, the curious locks, knobs, hinges, chandeliers,
and fragments of the wainscoting, have been borne away by enterprising
curio hunters. There was positively nothing left for me to take.

One may still see the chamber occupied by Secretary Seward, who
closed the bargain with the Russian Government at $7,200,000, cash
down.

Lady Franklin occupied that chamber when she was scouring these
waters in the fearless and indefatigable, but fruitless, search for
the relics of the lost Sir John.

One handsome apartment has been partially restored and suitably furnished
for the use of the United States District Attorney.

Two rooms on the groundfloor are occupied by the signal officers; but the
rest of the building is in a shameful condition, and only its traditions
remain to make it an object of interest to every stranger guest.

It is said that twice in the year, at the dead hour of the night,
the ghost of a bride wanders sorrowfully from room to room.

She was the daughter of one of the old governors--a stern parent, who
forced her into a marriage without love.

On the bridal eve, while all the guests were assembled, and the bride,
in wedding garments, was the centre of attraction, she suddenly
disappeared. After a long search her body was found in one of the
apartments of the castle, but life was extinct.

At Eastertide the shade of this sad body makes the round of the deserted
halls, and in passing leaves after it a faint odor of wild roses.

The basement is half filled with old rubbish. I found rooms where
an amateur minstrel entertainment had been given. Rude lettering upon
the walls recorded the fact in lampblack, and a monster hand pointed
with index finger to its temporary bar. Burnt-cork _débris_ was scattered
about, and there were "old soldiers" enough on the premises to
have quite staggered a moralist.

The Muscovite reign is over. The Princess is in her grave on the hill
yonder,--a grave that was forgotten for a time and lost in the jungle
that has overgrown the old Russian cemetery. The Indians mutilated that
tomb; but Lieutenant Gilman, in charge of the marines attached to
the Adams, restored it; and he, with his men, did much toward
preserving Sitka from going to the dogs.

Gone are the good old days, but the Americanized Sitka does not
propose to be behind the times. I discovered a theatre. It was in one
of the original Russian houses, doomed to last forever--a long,
narrow hall, with a stage at the upper end of it.

A few scenes, evidently painted on the spot and in dire distress; a
drop-curtain depicting an utterly impracticable roseate ice-gorge
in the ideal Alaska, and four footlights, constituted the sum total
of the properties.

The stage was six feet deep, about ten feet broad, and the "flies" hung
like "bangs" above the foreheads of the players. In the next room,
convenient in case of a panic, was the Sitka fire department, consisting
of a machine of one-man-power, which a small boy might work without
endangering anybody or anything.

Suburban Sitka is sweet and sad. One passes on the way to the wildwood,
where everybody goes as often as may be,--a so-called "blarney
stone." Many a fellow has chipped away at that stone while he chatted
with his girl--I suppose that is where the blarney comes in,--and
left his name or initials for a sacred memory.

There are dull old Russian hieroglyphs there likewise. Love is alike in
all languages, you know.

The truth about the stone is merely this: it is a big soft stone
by the sea, and of just the right height to rest a weary pilgrim.

There old Baranoff, the first governor, used to sit of a summer afternoon
and sip his Russian brandy until he was as senseless as the stone
beneath him; and then he was carried in state up to the colonial
castle and suffered to sober off.

Beyond the stone, and the curving beach with the grass-grown highway
skirting it, is the forest; and through this forest is the lovers'
lane, made long ago by the early colonists and kept in perfect trim
by the latest,--a lane that is green-arched overhead and fern-walled
on either side, and soft with the dust of dead pine boughs underfoot.

There also are streams and waterfalls and rustic bridges such as one
might look for in some stately park in England, but hardly in Alaska.
Surely there is no bit of wilderness finer than this. All is sweet and
grave and silent, save for the ripple of waters and the sighing
of winds.

As for the Siwash village on the other side of Sitka, it is a Siwash
village over again.

How soon one wearies of them! But one ought never to weary of the
glorious sea isles and the overshadowing mountains that lie on
every side of the quaint, half-barbarous capital.

Though it is dead to the core and beginning to show the signs of
death, it is one of the dreamiest spots on earth, and just the one
for long summer solitude,--at least so we all thought, for on the
morrow we were homeward bound.

CHAPTER XIV.

From the Far North.

Sitka is the turning-point in the Alaskan summer cruise. It is the beginning
of the end; and I am more than half inclined to think that in most
cases--charming as the voyage is and unique in its way beyond any
other voyage within reach of the summer tourist--the voyager is
glad of it.

One never gets over the longing for some intelligence from the outer world;
never quite becomes accustomed to the lonely, far-away feeling
that at times is a little painful and often is a bore.

During the last hours at Sitka, Mount Edgecombe loomed up gloriously,
and reminded one of Fugjyamma. It is a very handsome and a highly
ornamental mountain.

So are the islands that lie between it and the Sitkan shore handsome and
ornamental, but there are far too many of them.

The picture is overcrowded, and in this respect is as unlike the Bay of
Naples as possible; though some writers have compared them, and of
course, as is usual in cases of comparison, to the disadvantage of
the latter.

Leaving Sitka, we ran out to sea.

It was much easier to do this than go a long way round among the
islands; and, as the weather was fair, the short cut was delightful.

We rocked like a cradle--the _Ancon_ rocks like a cradle on the slightest
provocation.

The sea sparkled, the wavelets leaped and clapped their hands.

Once in awhile a plume of spray was blown over the bow, and the delicate
stomach recoiled upon itself suggestively; but the deliciousness
of the air in the open sea and the brevity of the cruise--we were
but five or six hours outside--kept us in a state of intense delight.

Presently we ran back into the maze of fiords and land-locked lakes, and
resumed the same old round of daily and nightly experiences.

Juneau, Douglas Island, Fort Wrangell, and several fishing stations
were revisited. They seemed a little stale to us, and we were inclined
to snub them slightly. Of course we thought we knew it all--most of us
knew as much as we cared to know; and so we strolled leisurely
about the solemn little settlements, and, no doubt, but poorly
succeeded in disguising the superior air which distinguishes the
new arrival in a strange land.

It is but a step from a state of absolute greenness on one's arrival at a
new port to a _blasé_ languor, wherein nothing can touch one
further; and the step is easily and usually taken inside of a week.

May the old settlers forgive us our idiocy!

There was a rainy afternoon at Fort Wrangell,--a very proper background,
for the place is dismal to a degree.

An old stern-wheel steamboat, beached in the edge of the village,
was used as a hotel during the decline of the gold fever; but while
the fever was at its height the boat is said to have cleared $135,000
per season.

The coolie has bored into its hollow shell and washes there, clad in a
semi-Boyton suit of waterproof.

I made my way through the dense drizzle to the Indian village at
the far end of the town.

The untrodden streets are grass-grown; and a number of the little houses,
gray with weather stains, are deserted and falling to decay.

Reaching a point of land that ran out and lost itself in mist, I
found a few Indians smoking and steaming, as they sat in the damp
sand by their canoes.

A long footbridge spans a strip of tide land. I ventured to cross it,
though it looked as if it would blow away in the first gust of wind. It
was a long, long bridge, about broad enough for a single passenger;
yet I was met in the middle of it by a well-blanketed squaw, bound
inland.

It was a question in my mind whether it were better to run and leap
lightly over her, since we must pass on a single rail, or to lie
down and allow her to climb over me.

O happy inspiration!

In the mist and the rain, in the midst of that airy path, high above
the mud flats, and with the sullen tide slowly sweeping in from
the gray wastes beyond the capes, I seized my partner convulsively,
and with our toes together we swung as on a pivot and went our ways
rejoicing.

The bridge led to the door of a chief's house, and the door stood open.

It was a large, square house, of one room only, and with the floor sunk
to the depth of three feet in the centre.

It was like looking into a dry swimming bath. A step, or terrace, on the
four sides of the room made the descent easy, and I descended. The chief,
in a cast-off military jacket, gave me welcome with a mouthful of
low gutterals.

I found a good stove in the lodge and several comfortable-looking beds,
with chintz curtains and an Oriental superabundance of pillows. A few
photographs in cheap frames adorned the walls; a few flaming
chromos--Crucifixions and the like--hung there, along with fathoms
of fishnet, clusters of fish-hooks, paddles, kitchen furniture,
wearing apparel, and a blunderbuss or two.

Four huge totem poles, or ponderous carvings, supported the heavy beams
of the roof in the manner of caryatides. These figures, half veiled
in shadow, were most impressive, and gave a kind of Egyptian solemnity
to the dimly lighted apartment.

The chief was not alone.

His man Friday was with him, and together we sat and smoked in a silence
that was almost suffocating.

It fairly snapped once or twice, it was so dense; and then we three
exchanged grave smiles and puffed away in great contentment. The
interview was brought to a sudden close by the chief's making me a very
earnest offer of $6 for my much-admired gum ulster, and I refusing
it with scorn--for it was still raining.

So we parted coldly, and I once more walked the giddy bridge with
fear and trembling; for I am not a somnambulist, who alone might
perform there with impunity.

It was a bad day for curios. The town had been sacked on the voyage up;
yet I prowled in these quarters, where one would least expect to find
treasure, inasmuch as it is mostly found just there.

Presently the most hideous of faces was turned up at me from the
threshold of a humble lodge.
A third time came the sound, and the splash was even nearer.

"They're firing on us!" yelled Jack.

At his cry the professor ran on deck. He was just in time to see the
fourth shot made, and this time the shell dropped into the water just
astern of the _Porpoise_ and so close that when it exploded it sent a
shower of spray all over the deck.

"Here! Stop that!" yelled Mr. Henderson, shaking his fist in the
direction of the steamer. "You nearly hit us that time. Do your
practicing in some other direction!"

"I don't think they can hear you," said Jack. "And besides, I don't
believe they are practicing."

"Then what in the world are they doing?"

"Shooting at us I guess."

"Why do they want to shoot at us? We haven't done them any damage."

"Perhaps they think we are a torpedo boat," suggested Jack. "Maybe that
vessel's nation is at war with some other one and wants to sink us if
it can."

"I believe you're right!" exclaimed Mr. Henderson. "But this will never
do. They must stop!"

Once more the big gun on the ship was fired and the shell came
dangerously close. At the same time several other reports, less in
volume were heard, and the water all about the submarine began to bubble
as the missiles from the machine guns cut the waves.

"Maybe it's an English vessel sent to capture Mark and me because of
that anarchist trouble at the hotel," Jack went on.

"Nonsense!" exclaimed the captain. "But whatever it is, we must stop it,
or they will sink my ship. Wave your handkerchief, Jack."

The boy sprang to the top of the conning tower, in order to permit those
on the vessel to see him more plainly, and vigorously shook the white
rag. That it was observed was evident when some one on the steamer
wig-wagged back a reply. In a few minutes a boat was seen to put off
from the ship, and soon a little launch, in command of a lieutenant in
uniform, drew up alongside the _Porpoise_.

"Who is captain of this craft?" asked the lieutenant as he came aboard.

"I am," replied Mr. Henderson. "What do you mean by firing on me?"

"I am Lieutenant Muchmore," said the other, saluting. "Captain Wackford,
of the _Sylph_, in His Britannic Majesty's service, presents his
compliments, and asks you to pardon the occurrence. You see we took you
for a derelict and were trying to sink you."

"I thought perhaps war had broken out between some country and the
United States since we left port," went on Mr. Henderson, "and that you
were trying to make a capture."

"No, it was only that we thought you a waterlogged craft, and a danger
to navigation," repeated the lieutenant. "But what sort of a ship have
you?"

"Come below and I'll show you the finest submarine that ever was built,"
answered the inventor with pardonable pride. "If you don't mind, give
your launch orders to go back to the ship, and I'll show something that
will make you open your eyes."

Anxious to see what the strange little craft could do Lieutenant
Muchmore sent his launch back, and went below with Captain Henderson. He
was astonished at what he saw, and unlike most Englishmen was willing to
say so.

Mr. Henderson then went to the conning tower. He directed the man-hole
cover to be clamped on, and then filled the tanks. The ship sank fifty
feet below the surface and then shot forward.

Seated in the cabin the lieutenant was observing with wonder showing on
his face at the accomplishment of sailing along under water. Suddenly
the lights were shut off, and the shutters moved back from the
bull's-eye windows. The sea, glowing in the beams of the search light,
was alive with fish, large and small, beautiful and hideous.

"Wonderful!" exclaimed the Englishman.

The bull's-eyes were closed, the lights switched on, and then, speeding
the engine almost to the top notch the captain steered the submarine
straight for the war-ship.

He had carefully noted her direction before starting his own craft, and
he resolved to do a little manoeuvering that would still further
astonish the visitor. By careful reading of the different gages Mr.
Henderson was able to come to the surface right in front of the _Sylph_,
to the no small astonishment of the men on the deck of the vessel.

Then, just to show what the _Porpoise_ could do, the inventor darted
around the war-ship in a circle. He sunk below the surface, went under
the keel of the _Sylph_ and came up on the other side. Then he went the
whole length of her, under water, starting at the stern and ending at
the bow, where he brought the submarine to a rest in a smother of foam.

"Great! Wonderful! Surprising!" were some of the adjectives Lieutenant
Muchmore used as he stepped from the conning tower, with Captain
Henderson, onto the deck.

At the appearance of the officer and the inventor a group of those on
the _Sylph_ gave three cheers for the little vessel.

"Is she for sale?" asked Captain Wackford.

"No, thank you," replied Mr. Henderson with a laugh.

"Because if she is I'll give you free passage to England with her, on my
ship," went on the commander. "My government would give a fortune for a
boat that can do what yours does."

"It is not for sale," repeated Mr. Henderson, "but I have some one on
board who would appreciate a free passage to England, or any northern
port."

"Who is it?" asked Captain Wackford.

"A Mrs. Johnson and her daughter."


CHAPTER XXIII

CAUGHT IN AN ICE FLOE


Mr. Henderson soon explained the finding of the lady and the little
girl, and Captain Wackford readily agreed to give them passage to New
York, as the _Sylph_ was to call at that port.

So Nellie and her mother were put aboard the warship, after bidding
farewell to the captain and crew of the submarine. Mr. Henderson and the
boys promised to write to them as soon as they got back from their
voyage to the south pole, and, amid a chorus of good-byes the _Porpoise_
resumed her journey.

For several days the submarine forged to the south, and the weather
became noticeably cooler. Some of the nights were chilly, and those on
watch were glad of the heavy coats they had brought along.

One morning, after a week of travel, when no interruptions had occurred
by reason of accidents, old Andy came up on deck, and sniffing the air,
said:

"We'll sight ice before night, or I'm a Dutchman."

"What makes you think so?" asked Jack.

"I can smell it," replied the hunter, whereat Jack, and Mark who had
joined him, laughed.

"That is no joke," put in Professor Henderson, who, coming up the
companionway heard what was said. "Old sea captains will tell you they
can smell an iceberg long before they can see it."

"I don't claim to be a sea captain," said Andy, "but I once was on a
whaling voyage and I learned to sniff ice in the air. I saved the ship
from collision with a berg once."

"Let me see," began the inventor as the adventurers sat about the supper
table after the meal was finished, "who have the watches on deck
to-night?"

"Washington first and Bill second," replied Jack looking at the chart.

"Keep a sharp watch for the icebergs," advised the captain. "If you feel
a sudden chill in the air, and see something white, stop the engine at
once and call for me."

When the _Porpoise_ had been put in shape for the night, and the
company, tired out from their labors over a general "house cleaning"
which Captain Henderson had insisted on, went to bed, Washington took
his place in the conning tower.

It was quite cold, but as the temperature for several days past had been
steadily falling, nothing was thought of it.

"I guess I'll git out my fur-lined sealskin coat," said the colored man
to himself as he felt the chill night air, that seemed to increase in
frigidity along about eleven o'clock. He went to the cabin to get his
overcoat, and, returning on deck prepared to spend the rest of his hour
of watch in ease and comfort. He stretched out on the bench in the
conning tower, noted that the machinery was working right and that the
proper course was being steered, and then he let his thoughts drift to
the many adventures he and his employer had gone through of late, and
also while on the trip "Through the Air to the North Pole."

Washington gave one frightened, startled look, in a few minutes, so
comfortable had he fixed himself, but happening to look forward through
the glass-covered porthole of the tower, he saw something that made the
cold chills run down his back.

There, right in front of the _Porpoise_, and not a cable-length away was
a tall, mysterious, white thing which was shimmering in the pale light
of the moon that had lately risen.

Washington gave one frightened, startled look, and then, with a tongue
that could hardly move, he yelled out:

"De ghost! De ghost! He'll git me suah!"

Then the colored man made a dive for the stairway leading to the cabin,
but missed it and brought up with a crash on the steel floor of the
conning tower.

"What is it?" called Professor Henderson, springing out of his bunk.

"De ghost!" wailed Washington from the huddled up heap he was in.

"Catch him!" yelled the captain.

"I dasn't," moaned Washington.

The next instant the ship quivered from stem to stern. There was a
terrible shock, followed by a grinding, crashing sound. Then the craft
seemed to be pressed down by some great weight. It heeled over to one
side, and the water began to pour down the open man-hole.

"Quick! Clamp on the covers!" shouted Mr. Henderson as he felt the sea
dashing into the interior of the boat.

Jack and Mark sprang to obey. It took all their strength, for the water
was running in like a mill-race.

"What has happened?" asked Andy, as he tried to climb up the
companionway ladder, that was tilted backward.

"I guess we've hit your iceberg!" cried Mr. Henderson.

"I knew I smelled the frozen stuff," replied the old hunter.

They got the covers on the manhole only just in time and they all
crowded into the cabin, while Jack switched on the electric lights.

"Is the ship damaged?" asked Mark.

"I think not," replied Mr. Henderson. "But we are sinking. Look at the
depth gage."

The hand on the clock-face was moving slowly around. From ten it went to
twenty feet, then to thirty and kept going until it stood at seventy.

"Look to the air tanks," ordered Mr. Henderson to Washington, who, by
this time had recovered from his fright. "See if they are all right."

The colored man came back in a few minutes and reported that the supply
of compressed atmosphere was safe and that there was plenty of it.

"That's good," remarked Mr. Henderson. "Whatever else happens we can
breathe for a while."

"But what has happened?" asked Andy.

"I think the top part of an iceberg toppled down on us," was the reply.
"You know about nine-tenths of a berg is under water. Sometimes there is
a warm current of the ocean underneath the ice, and it melts. Then it
becomes top-heavy and tilts over. One of that sort must have caught us,
and has shoved us down into the sea."

"But why don't we rise again when the ice floe slips off us?" asked
Mark.

"Because, in all probability the ice will not slip off us," answered the
professor grimly. "It may be so large that it has caught us like a bug
under a barn door."

"Then we are fast in the ice under water," spoke Andy after a pause.

"It looks like it," came from the inventor. "However we will not give up
yet. We may be able to make our way out. Start the engine at full speed,
Washington."

The machinery which the professor had shut down at the first cry of
alarm was set going. Soon the throb and hum told that the big screw was
revolving.

Meanwhile the _Porpoise_ had regained an even keel, and had stopped
sinking, remaining at the depth of seventy feet below the surface.

"We will first try to go straight ahead," said the captain.

He turned on more power and they all waited in anxiety. The test would
tell whether they could escape in that direction or not.

But, though the powerful screw churned the water to foam in the tunnel,
the _Porpoise_ never budged. It was as if she was held in a vice.

"It's of no use," remarked Mr. Henderson with a shake of his head as he
watched the speed gage and noted that it remained stationary. "We must
now try the other way."

Once more the big screw was set going, this time in the opposite
direction, so as to pull the ship out of the ice if it was possible. But
this, too, was of no avail.

"It looks as if the ice had us," said Andy, trying to speak in a
cheerful tone. "But there's one way more to try."

"What is that?" asked Mr. Henderson.

"If we were in the air ship we could go up," replied the old hunter.
"But, as it is, we had better go down. Why don't you fill all the water
tanks, and try to sink beneath the iceberg? It can't go down so very far
into the water, and I reckon we could slip under it."

"The very thing!" exclaimed the professor, whose mind was too sorely
troubled over the happening to enable him to think of plans of escape.
"That's the best thing to do."

Under the inventor's direction Washington filled the tanks and then, ere
the pumps had ceased working, the screw was started and the deflecting
rudder inclined to cause the ship to dive.

One, two, three minutes passed, and still the _Porpoise_ did not move
toward the bottom of the sea. She remained submerged and stationary.
Anxious eyes gazed at the dials. The indicating hands trembled under the
throbbing of the engines, but did not move.

"It will not work!" exclaimed Mr. Henderson in sorrowful tones.

"What does it mean?" asked Bill, who had come up to where the others
stood.

"It means that we are prisoners in the ice; caught between the upper and
lower parts of a gigantic berg, and held here under the water."

"Can't we ever get out?" asked Jack, a tremor coming into his voice.
"Can't we escape when the ice melts?"

"The ice of the southern polar sea seldom melts in this latitude,"
replied the professor.

An ominous silence followed his words.


CHAPTER XXIV

THE SHIP GRAVEYARD


Truly the adventurers were in a position that might well cause the
stoutest heart to quail. With hundreds of tons of ice above, below, and
on every side of them, their chances of escaping alive from this frozen
tomb were very small.

"Can't we make an attempt to get out of this prison?" asked Jack.

"Indeed we will," said the professor. "We will try all the means at our
command. If they all fail--"

He dared not finish the sentence, but they all knew what he meant. It
was now about one o'clock in the morning. The ship had become stationary
after the uneasy motion caused by the oscillation of the big berg.

"We may as well turn in and get a little sleep," remarked Mr. Henderson.
"We can all work better if we get some rest."

It is doubtful whether any of them slept, for the horror of their
position was too fresh in their minds. Still, lying down in the bunks
rested them.

It was six o'clock when Washington awoke. In spite of the dangers of the
icy grave, he had managed to get a little sleep. He prepared breakfast
and called the others.

"Make a good meal," advised Mr. Henderson. "We have plenty of work ahead
of us."

"Are you going to free the ship?" asked Mark.

"I am going to try," was the answer.

A little later the inventor was busy in one of the small store rooms aft
when Jack came up. The professor was carefully taking out a box
labelled:

          DYNAMITE! DANGEROUS!

"What are you going to do?" asked the boy.

"I am going to try the same experiment we attempted on the volcanic
island," was the reply. "Only, this time, I am afraid we shall have to
complete it to the end. There is little likelihood of the ice falling
apart."

"Then you are going to blow it up?" went on Jack.

"That's what I hope to do," the inventor went on. "I see no other way,
and, though there is a risk, it is not so great a one as to wait to be
crushed in the ice as it freezes more solidly."

Under the directions of Mr. Henderson they got out the diving suits. The
professor, the two boys and Andy put them on. The dynamite, in
specially prepared water-proof packages, with long fuses was laid in
readiness close to the door of the diving chamber.

Into the cell, the four who were to make the perilous journey under the
ice, took their places. The water was slowly admitted, and then, with
the electric lights in their helmets throwing out powerful gleams, they
started forward as the outer door swung open.

It was well they had all taken the precautions to don thick
undergarments and clothing, for, even through the heavy rubber diving
suits, the terrible cold of the southern polar sea struck a chill to
their very bones.

As the professor had said, the ship was caught between the upper and
lower parts of the iceberg. On either side, ahead and to the rear there
was open water. Beneath their feet there was a floor of ice. It was as
if they and the ship had been placed between two great sheets of the
frozen matter.

Their progress was slow, for the water hampered their movements and each
one had some of the dynamite to carry. The footing, too, was insecure,
for the icy bed of the ocean was slippery.

As they were huddled together, the professor in the lead, and their
lamps making a faint illumination in the darkness, they suddenly became
aware of a great shadow over them. They looked up, and their hearts
nearly ceased beating as they saw a gigantic sperm whale right over
them, and between the ice. The terrible animal had observed them also,
and, food being scarce in those frigid regions, had evidently made up
its mind to dine on some choice morsels.

The whale was nearly as large again as the submarine, and to the
frightened voyagers seemed more immense than a house. With slow motions
of the flukes the animal placed itself right over the boys and men,
ready to rush at and take them into its terrible maw.

Old Andy, who alone seemed to retain his presence of mind, stepped to
the front. The professor and the boys wondered what he was going to do.
Then Andy held up one of the electric guns.

Always thinking of his chosen calling, the old hunter had picked up the
weapon as he was leaving the _Porpoise_. It might almost have been a
cobweb stretched from star to star--each strand woven from a star
beam,--but it was ever changing in form and color. Now it was scarf-like,
fluttering and waving in a gentle breeze; and now it hung motionless--a
deep fringe of lace gathered in ample folds. Anon it opened suddenly
from the horizon, and spread in panels like a fan that filled the
heavens.

As it opened and shut and swayed to and fro as if it were a fan in motion,
it assumed in turn all the colors of the rainbow, but with a delicacy
of tint and texture even beyond that of the rainbow.
Sometimes it was like a series of transparencies--shadow pictures
thrown upon the screen of heaven, lit by a light beyond it--the
mysterious light we know not of.

That is what the pilot and I saw while most of the passengers were
sleeping. It was the veritable _aurora borealis_, and that alone were
worth the trip to Alaska.

One day we came to Fort Tongass--a port of entry, and our last port
in the great, lone land--for all the way down through the British
possessions we touch no land until we reach Victoria or Nanaimo. Tongass
was once a military post, and now has the unmistakable air of a desert
island.

Some of us were not at all eager to go on shore. You see, we were beginning
to get our fill of this monotonous out-of-the-world and out-of-the-way
life. Yet Tongass is unique, and certainly has the most interesting
collection of totem poles that one is likely to see on the voyage.

At Tongass there is a little curving beach, where the ripples sparkle
among the pebbles. Beyond the beach is a strip of green lawn, and at the
top of the lawn the old officers' quarters, now falling to decay.

For background there are rocks and trees and the sea. The sea is everywhere
about Tongass, and the sea-breezes blow briskly, and the sea-gulls
waddle about the lawn and sit in rows upon the sagging roofs as if they
were thoroughly domesticated.

Oh, what a droll place it is!

After a little deliberation we all went ashore in several huge
boat-loads; and, to our surprise, were welcomed by a charming young
bride in white muslin and ribbons of baby-blue.

Somehow she had found her way to the desert island--or did she
spring up there like a wild flower?

And the grace with which she did the honors was the subject of unbounded
praise during the remainder of the voyage.

This pretty Bret Harte heroine, with all of the charms and virtues and
none of the vices of his camp-followers, led us through the jagged
rocks of the dilapidated quarters, down among the spray-wet rocks on the
other side of the island, and all along the dreary waste that
fronts the Indian village.

Oh, how dreary that waste is!--the rocks, black and barren, and scattered
far into the frothing sea; the sandy path along the front of the Indian
lodges, with rank grass shaking and shivering in the wind; the solemn
and grim array of totem poles standing in front or at the sides of the
weather-stained lodges--and the whole place deserted. I know not where
the Indians had gone, but they were not there--save a sick squaw
or two.

Probably, being fishermen, the tribe had gone out with their canoes,
and were now busy with the spoils somewhere among the thousand passages
of the archipelago.

The totem poles at Tongass are richly carved, brilliantly colored, and
grotesque in the extreme. Some of the lodges were roomy but sad-looking,
and with a perpetual shade hovering through them.

We found inscriptions in English--very rudely lettered--on many of the
lodges and totem poles:
"In memory of" some one or another chief or notable red-man. Over one
door was this inscription: "In memory of ----, who died by his own
hand." The lodge door was fastened with a rusty padlock, and the place
looked ghoulish.

I think we were all glad to get out of Tongass, though we received our
best welcome there.

At any rate, we sat on the beach and got our feet wet and our pockets
full of sand waiting for the deliberate but dead-sure boatmen to
row us to the ship.

When we steamed away we left the little bride in her desert island
to the serene and sacred joy of her honeymoon, hoping that long
before it had begun to wane she might return to the world; for in
three brief weeks we were beginning to lust after it.

That evening we anchored in a well-wooded cove and took on several
lighter-loads of salmon casks.

Captain Carroll and the best shots in the ship passed the time in
shooting at a barrel floating three hundred yards distant. So ran our
little world away, as we were homeward bound and rapidly nearing
the end of the voyage.

CHAPTER XV.

Out of the Arctic.

When Captain Cook--who, with Captain Kidd, nearly monopolizes the young
ladies' ideal romance of the seas--was in these waters, he asked the
natives what land it was that lay about them, and they
replied:
"Alaska"--great land.

It _is_ a great land, lying loosely along the northwest coast,--great
in area, great in the magnitude and beauty of its forests and in the
fruitfulness of its many waters; great in the splendor of its ice
fields; the majesty of its rivers, the magnificence of its snow-clad
peaks; great also in its possibilities, and greatest of all in its
measureless wealth of gold.

In the good old days of the Muscovite reign--1811,--Governor Baranoff
sent Alexander Kuskoff to establish a settlement in California where
grain and vegetables might be raised for the Sitka market.

The ruins of Fort Ross are all that remain to tell the tale of that
enterprise.

The Sitkan of to-day manages to till a kitchen-garden that suffices;
but his wants are few, and then he can always fall back on canned
provision if his fresh food fails.

The stagnation of life in Alaska is all but inconceivable. The summer
tourist can hardly realize it, because he brings to the settlement
the only variety it knows; and this comes so seldom--once or twice a
month--that the population arises as a man and rejoices so long
as the steamer is in port.

Please to picture this people after the excitement is over, quietly
subsiding into a comatose state, and remaining in it until the next
boat heaves in sight.

One feeds one's self mechanically; takes one's constitutional along
the shore or over one of the goat-paths that strike inland; nodding
now and again to the familiar faces that seem never to change in
expression except during tourist's hours; and then repairs to that
bed which is the salvation of the solitary, for sleep and oblivion
are the good angels that brood over it.

In summer the brief night--barely forty winks in length--is so
silvery and so soft that it is a delight to sit up in it even if
one is alone.

Lights and shadows play with one another, and are reflected in sea and sky
until the eye is almost dazzled with the loveliness of the scene. I
believe if I were banished to Alaska I would sleep in the daytime--say
from 8 a. m.
to 5 p. m.

,--and revel in the wakeful beauty of the other hours.

But the winter, and the endless night of winter!--when the sun sinks
to rest in discouragement at three or four o'clock in the afternoon,
and rises with a faint heart and a pale face at ten or eleven in the
forenoon; when even high noon is unworthy of the name--for the dull
luminary, having barely got above the fence at twelve o'clock, backs
out of it and sinks again into the blackness of darkness one is
destined to endure for at least two thirds of the four and twenty!

Since the moon is no more obliging to the Alaskans than the sun is,
what is a poor fellow to do? He can watch the aurora until his eyes ache;
he can sit over a game of cards and a glass of toddy--he can always get
the latter up there; he can trim his lamp and chat with his chums and
fill his pipe over and over again. But the night thickens and the
time begins to lag; he looks at his watch, to find it is only 9
p. m., and there are twelve hours between him and daylight.

It is a great land in which to store one's mind with knowledge, provided
one has the books at hand and good eyes and a lamp that won't
flicker or smoke.

Yet why should I worry about this when there are people who live through
it and like it?--or at least they say they do.

In my mind's eye I see the Alaska of the future--and the not far-distant
future.

Among the most beautiful of the islands there will be fine openings;
lawns and flowers will carpet the slopes from the dark walls of
the forest to the water's edge.

In the midst of these favored spots summer hotels will throw wide their
glorious windows upon vistas that are like glimpses of fairy land.
Along the beach numerous skiffs await those who are weary of towns;
steam launches are there, and small barges for the transportation
of picnic parties to undiscovered islands in the dim distance.

Sloop yachts with the more adventurous will go forth on voyages of
exploration and discovery, two or three days in length, under the
guidance of stolid, thoroughbred Indian pilots.

There may be an occasional wreck, with narrow escapes from the watery
grave--let us hope so, for the sake of variety. There will be fishing
parties galore, and camping on foreign shores, and eagle hunts,
and the delights of the chase; with Indian retinues and Chinese
cooks, and the "swell toggery" that is the chief, if not the only,
charm of that sort of thing.

There will be circulating libraries in each hotel, and grand pianos,
and private theatricals, and nightly hops that may last indefinitely,
or at least until sunrise, without shocking the most prudent; for
day breaks at 2 a. m.

There will be visits from one hotel to the other, and sea-voyages
to dear old Sitka, where the Grand Hotel will be located; and there
will be the regular weekly or semi-weekly boat to the Muir glacier,
with professional guides to the top of it, and all the necessary
traps furnished on board if desired.

And this wild life can begin as early as April and go on until the
end of September without serious injury.

There will be no hay fever or prickly-heat; neither will there be
sunstrokes nor any of the horrors of the Eastern and Southern
summer.

It will remain true to its promise of sweet, warm days, and deliciously
cool evenings, in which the young lover may woo his fair to the
greatest advantage; for there is no night there.

Then everyone will come home with a new experience, which is the best
thing one can come home with, and the rarest nowadays; and with a
pocketful of Alaskan garnets, which are about the worst he can
come home with, being as they are utterly valueless, and unhandsome
even when they are beautifully symmetrical.

Oh, the memory of the voyage, which is perhaps the most precious
of all!

--this we bring home with us forever. The memory of all that is
half civilized and wholly unique and uncommon: of sleepy and smoky wigwams,
where the ten tribes hold powwow in a confusion of gutturals, with a
plentiful mixture of saliva; for it is a moist language, a gurgle
that approaches a gargle, and in three weeks the unaccustomed ear
scarcely recovers from the first shock of it; a memory of totem
poles in stark array, and of the high feast in the Indian villages,
where the beauty and chivalry of the forest gathered and squatted
in wide circles listening to some old-man-eloquent in the very
ecstasy of expectoration; the memory of a non-committing, uncommunicative
race, whose religion is a feeble polytheism--a kind of demonolatry;
for, as good spirits do not injure one, one's whole time is given
to the propitiation of the evil.

This is called Shamanism, and is said to have been the religion of
the Tartar race before the introduction of Buddhism, and is still the
creed of the Siberians; a memory of solitary canoes on moonlit
seas and of spicy pine odors mingled with the tonic of moist kelp
and salt-sea air.

A memory of friends who were altogether charming, of a festival
without a flaw. O my kind readers! when the Alaska Summer Hotel Company
has stocked the nooks and corners of the archipelago with caravansaries,
and good boats are filling them with guests who go to spend the
season in the far Northwest, fail not to see that you are numbered
among the elect; for Alaska outrivers all rivers and out-lakes all
lakes--being itself a lake of ten thousand islands; it out-mountains
the Alps of America, and certainly outdoes everything else everywhere
else, in the shape of a watering place.

And when you have returned from there, after two or three months' absence
from the world and its weariness, you will begin to find that your
"tum-tum is white" for the first time since your baptismal day, and that
you have gained enough in strength and energy to topple the totem
pole of your enemy without shedding a feather.

There is hope for Alaska in the line of a summer resort.

As ghosts scent the morning air and are dispersed, so we scented the air,
which actually seemed more familiar as we approached Washington in the
great Northwest; and the spirit of peace, of ease and of lazy
contentment that had possessed our souls for three weeks took flight.

It was now but a day's sail to Victoria, and yet we began to think we
would never get there.

We were hungry for news of the world which we had well-nigh forgotten.

Three weeks!

It seemed to us that in this little while cities might have been
destroyed, governments overthrown, new islands upheaved and old
ones swallowed out of sight.

Then we were all expecting to find heaps of letters from everybody
awaiting us at Victoria or Port Townsend, and our mouths fairly
watered for news.

We took a little run into the sea and got lost in a fog; but the pilot
whistled for the landmarks, and Echo answered; so that by the time
the fog was ready to roll away, like a snowy drop-curtain, we knew
just where we were, and ran quietly into a nook that looked as if
it would fit us like a bootjack.

The atmosphere grew smoky; forest fires painted the sky with burnt
umber, and through this veil the sun shone like a copper shield.

Then a gorgeous moonlight followed. There was blood upon that moon,
and all the shores were like veins in moss-agate and the sea like
oil.

We wound in and out, in and out, among dreamy islands; touched for a
little while at Nanaimo, where we should have taken in a cargo of coal
for Portland, whither the _Ancon_ was bound; but Captain Carroll
kindly put us all ashore first and then returned for his freight.

We hated to sleep that night, and did not sleep very much. But when
we awakened it was uncommonly quiet; and upon going on deck--lo!

we were at Victoria. What a quiet, pretty spot!

What a restful and temperate climate!

What jutting shores, soft hills, fine drives, old-countrified houses and
porters' lodges and cottages, with homely flowers in the door-yards
and homely people in the doors!

--homely I mean in the handsomest sense, for I can not imagine the
artificial long survives in that community.

How dear to us seemed civilization after our wanderings in the
wilderness! We bought newspapers and devoured them; ran in and out of
shops just for the fun of it and because our liberty was so dear
to us then.

"They like a warm climate."

"And you don't think it would be feasible to use dynamite," asked Mark.

"We can't get out to place it where it would blow up the fish and not
us," answered Mr. Henderson. "If we could it might serve."

A silence fell on the group. They were in sore straits and there seemed
no hope of rescue. The big disk-like bodies that covered the windows did
not move, but remained there, staring with horrible persistency into the
interior of the ship.


CHAPTER XXVI

LAND UNDER ICE


Suddenly the craft began to move. Slowly at first, then, with more speed
it forged ahead through the water.

"Are we free?" asked Andy, starting up.

"Who started the machinery?" demanded the professor.

"No one," replied Jack. "We are all here. There is no one in the engine
room."

"But we are moving," said Mark.

"It's dem sucker-fish!" exclaimed Washington. "Dey is takin' us off to
der dens an' dere we'll all be eat up!"

"I'm afraid part of it is true," said Mr. Henderson. "The creatures are
certainly making off with us. How powerful they must be!"

"Will dey take us to a cave?" faltered Washington. "Will dey eat us up?"

"I don't think they'll eat us up," spoke the inventor. "It would defy
even their powerful sucking apparatus to bore through the steel sides of
the _Porpoise_. What I am afraid of is that they may move us to some
hidden depth where we will be caught under the rocks or in the ice, and
so lose what little chance there is of getting free."

"And the worst of it is we can't do a thing to help ourselves!"
exclaimed Andy. "This is the worst game I was ever up against!"

The adventurers were indeed helpless. They could not get out of their
ship to attack the monsters, even had they dared to. Their engine,
powerful as it was, had proved no match for the creatures, and now they
were being carried away, ship and all, to some unknown place.

The ship did not go through the water fast. Though the suckers seemed to
be working in union their bodies were too unwieldly, and the ship so
large, that their pace was slow. Nevertheless they kept steadily on.

Several times, in their desperation, the adventurers tried the force of
the big screw against that of the suckers. It was of no avail. Neither
was the device of emptying the tanks, and trying to force the craft up
as far as the roof of ice would permit it to go.

"It's of no use," announced Mr. Henderson with something that sounded
like a groan. "We must prepare for the worst."

"How long can we live here without going to the surface after a fresh
supply of air?" asked Bill.

"About three days," was the answer. "I took the precaution to put a
double supply into the tanks, in readiness for an emergency, but I never
thought of such a terrible situation as this."

The submarine seemed to be moving more rapidly now. It was useless to
try to see through either the windows in the side or in the conning
tower, for all the glass was covered by the horrible bodies.

"What will they do with us when they get us where they want us?" asked
Andy.

"What can they do except hold us prisoners until--until--" The professor
broke off the sentence he dared not finish.

For an hour or more the craft was moved through the water at moderate
speed. Then it came to a stop. Those on board were alert for what might
happen next.

"I guess dey done got us in der cave," said Washington with chattering
teeth. "Now dey'll begin to devour us wid dem terrible big mouths!
Golly, I wish I was home!"

"Stop that nonsense!" exclaimed Mr. Henderson. "Be a man! There is no
danger yet. The sides of the _Porpoise_ will defy worse enemies than
those attacking us!"

At that instant the ship began to move again. It was hauled slowly
through the water.

"They are pulling us backward!" said Andy, as he watched the needle of
the compass.

Once more the submarine was stopped. Then it moved forward at a more
rapid pace than at any time since the suckers had seized it. An instant
later it brought up against some solid object with such a jar that those
inside were thrown off their feet.

"Something has hit us!" cried Jack.

"More likely we've struck something," said the professor.

Again the ship forged to the rear, and once again it was sent swiftly
ahead. Then came the second shock, harder than the first, which sent
some of the party headlong.

"They are banging us against a rock!" cried Mr. Henderson.

"Do you mean those sea suckers?"

"Yes. They have probably found that the shell of the _Porpoise_ is too
hard even for their powerful jaws. So they have taken us to some place
where the rocks show and are banging us against them in order to break
the ship, so they can get at what is inside."

Once more the ship was drawn backward and again dashed against the
stone. The shock was a hard one and toppled over all who were not
clinging to something.

"They are ramming us bow on against the rocks," cried Andy. "It will
break us apart if they hit us many more times!"

Washington hurried forward. He came back with his eyes showing terror.

"There's a lot of rocks right ahead ob us!" he exclaimed. "I see 'em
through th' little window jest above th' screw. There's land under this
here water!"

"Land under this ice do you mean?" asked the professor.

"That's what I mean, an' we's bein' rammed agin th' rocks!"

"There it goes again!" cried Jack, as the ship shivered from stem to
stern against the impact of the blow.

"This can not last long," said Mr. Henderson. "If they strike us many
more times some of the places will start, the water will come in, and we
will drown!"

"But what can we do?" asked Jack.

"Let's go out now and see if we can't kill some of the beasts with the
guns," suggested Andy.

"I cannot permit it," answered the inventor. "Our position is bad enough
as it is, but to go out would be to lose our lives for a certainty. The
suckers would swallow us up in a moment. I must find some other way."

There was a period of silence, while all waited anxiously for what was
to happen next. It was not long in coming. The next impact of the ship
against the rocks was the hardest yet, and it seemed that more of the
suckers must have gripped the craft.

"She's leakin' a little!" exclaimed Washington coming back from an
inspection forward. "De water am tricklin' in!"

"We must fight them!" exclaimed Andy. He ran to get a gun and his diving
suit.

"Don't try to go out!" warned the professor. "You will surely be
killed."

"I'd rather be killed out there than die shut up in the ship!" cried the
old hunter. "I'm going out!"

"Wait!" exclaimed Jack suddenly. "I have a plan that may save us!"

"What is it? Speak quickly!" said Mr. Henderson. "We are in desperate
straits!"

As he spoke there came another crash against the rocks.

"We must electrocute the suckers!" cried the boy.

"Electrocute them? What do you mean?"

"Take the wires from the electric light circuit, attach one to each end
of the ship, and start the dynamo at full speed!" answered Jack.

"What good will that do?"

"The ship is steel," went on the boy. "It will become charged with a
powerful current. We can insulate ourselves by putting on rubber boots,
but the shock of the electricity will kill the creatures!"

"Good for you!" exclaimed Mr. Henderson. "Quick boys, everybody lend a
hand! Washington, detach the wires and run one to the bow and the other
to the stern of the ship. Then get out the boots."

In a few minutes the dynamo was ready to send a death-dealing current
through the entire ship. The professor and all the others put on the
boots, that were a part of the diving equipment. The dynamo was started
at full speed and the purring hum told that electricity of great power
was being developed.

The professor stood with his hand on a switch, ready to close the
circuit as soon as sufficient power had accumulated. Once more the
suckers backed the ship in order to give it impetus for another impact
on the stones.

Click! The professor snapped the switch shut. There was a burst of
bluish-green flame, and the movement of the boat suddenly ceased.

"I guess that does for 'em!" shouted Andy.

"Wait a few minutes," advised the professor. "The suckers may not all be
dead yet!"

He kept the current flowing throughout the length of the ship for
several minutes, and then turned it off.

"Now to see if the plan worked," he said. The windows in the cabin were
eagerly scanned.

"Hurrah!" cried Mark. "The suckers have gone!"

"I guess the electricity killed them," spoke Mr. Henderson. "We will
venture out now in our diving suits and see what sort of a place we are
in."

Soon the adventurers were arrayed in the heavy suits. Under them they
wore thick clothing, and in each suit was placed a small flat heater,
operated by a storage battery. The heaters were made of coils of fine
wires, and the electric current, meeting with much resistance in passing
through them, heated the coils, so there was considerable warmth.

It was all needed as they found when they felt the water entering the
diving chamber, for the fluid was as cold as an ocean full of icebergs
could make it. Protected however by the heavy suits, warm clothing and
the heaters the divers were fairly comfortable.

The outer door was opened and they all started back in amazement at the
sight which met their eyes. Before them lay a forest of real trees, with
bushes growing among them, while the ground, instead of being like the
usual ocean bed was covered with grass.

As Washington had said, on getting a small view of the place from the
little window, it was real land under water.

Their first surprise at the strange spectacle over, the adventurers
glanced about for a sight of the terrible sea suckers. But they need not
have feared. Lying in a huddled up mass toward the rear of the
_Porpoise_ were the dead bodies of the ugly creatures. The electricity
had finished them.


CHAPTER XXVII

ATTACKED BY AN OCTUPUS


They walked some distance away from the ship, for the land under the
water was easy to travel on. It looked exactly as if some beautiful
valley had suddenly been submerged in the middle of summer, when
everything was fresh and green.

They had gone perhaps a quarter of a mile from the _Porpoise_ when
Professor Henderson motioned to them that they had better return. On
their way back they passed what looked to be a large cave in the side of
a hill. Wondering what could be in it, Mark and Jack paused to peer into
the black opening.

The next instant two long white things, like slender serpents shot out.
With the rapidity of lightning they wrapped themselves, one about each
boy, and, before the horrified companions of the lads could do anything
the unfortunate youths were whisked out of sight into the cavern.

For a few seconds no one knew what to do. To rush in to the rescue of
the boys would have been foolhardy, as the terrible octupus, which they
knew had grabbed the lads, would have been a match for all of the
adventurers, unarmed as they were.

It would be necessary to return to the ship and come back with some of
the electric guns, which they had neglected to bring with them. In the
meanwhile the beast might, and probably would, kill Mark and Jack. But
there was nothing else to do.

The professor motioned for Andy to remain on the watch at the mouth of
the cavern, so as to be on hand in case he could help the boys, while
the others were hurrying toward the ship. Then, leading the way, the
Professor signalled for Tom and Bill to follow him.

They could not hurry much for the heavy suits and the resistance of the
water impeded their progress. But they made all the speed they could,
urged on by a terrible fear.

Meanwhile old Andy stood in front of the cave, hoping against hope that
there might be some way of aiding the boys. If it had happened above
water he would not have hesitated to rush in and give battle to the
beast, even though he was unarmed. If he had his knife now he would
venture in, at the risk of his life.

"Oh, why didn't I bring my gun along!" thought Andy regretfully.

His hand dropped to his side and his fingers came in contact with a big
knife in the belt of the diving suit. Here was a weapon he had forgotten
all about.

He drew forth the blade. It seemed a small one with which to attack so
large and terrible a creature as the octupus. Yet to remain there,
knowing the boys were being killed was more than old Andy could stand.
Grasping the handle with a firm grip he started toward the cave. His
foot caught in something, and he nearly fell.

Looking down to see what had tripped him he saw a long thin pole,
straight as a lance. It had once been a tree limb, but all the branches
were stripped off.

"Now if I only had an iron point for that," Andy thought. Then he
recollected the knife in his hand.

"The very thing," he remarked aloud, the words sounding startlingly loud
in the confinement of the copper helmet. "If I only had something to
fasten the knife on the pole I could make a spear to attack the
octupus."

Then he saw long streamers of sea weed growing up from the ocean bed.
They were very tough, a kind of wirey grass that was as strong as rope.
Andy cut several streamers and, with a hunter's skill bound the knife to
the end of the staff.

Now he had a weapon formidable enough to venture in and give battle to
the monster. He hesitated no longer, fearing that even the short delay
might have been too much and that the boys were dead. He entered the
cave. At first he could perceive nothing for it was quite dark. Then, as
his eyes became used to the gloom, which the lamp in his helmet faintly
illuminated, he saw, far back in the rear, the horrible octupus.

Two dark objects, around which were wrapped several folds of the
terrible arms, Andy guessed to be Mark and Jack, and when he was a faint
glow coming from them he was sure they were the boys, the gleams coming
from the lamps in their helmets.

Warily the hunter approached the creature. If he had hoped to take it
unawares he was disappointed, for, when he had come within ten feet,
holding his improvised lance outstretched ready for a deadly thrust, the
creature shot out two long arms toward Andy.

Now the battle began. The snake-like feelers, armed with big saucer
shaped suckers, lashed about in the water, seeking to clasp the hunter
in their deadly embrace. But Andy, who had fought many kinds of wild
animals on land, did not lose his presence of mind in confronting this
beast of the sea.

Nimbly, in spite of the handicap of the heavy diving suit, Andy dodged
the arms. Watching his chance he thrust at one, and the sharp knife
severed the end. But another arm shot out, while the wounded one was
drawn in, and the battle was as much against the old hunter as before.

Once more he thrust his lance, and this time he severed one of the arms
close to the ugly body. The creature, in its rage and pain, redoubled
its efforts to clasp Andy.

Punch on a note of reserve.

"But you ought to be jazzing for joy, like the other fools in their
Paradise of nigger minstrelsy."
"My years excuse me from choric exercises," said the Sage. "And,
anyhow, it doesn't take me that way."
"Then you are not in the movement. You are not in touch with the spiritual
pulse of our throbbing Metropolis; you take no active part in the
New Life that is springing from the seed of England's sacrifices.

True, your years, as you say, are against you, however well you
wear them: it is to the young that we look first for signs of the great
Regeneration. And in particular we look to those who are to be the
mothers of that future race which should reap the full harvest of
our blood and tears.

"And what do we find?" continued the Cynic. "We find a contempt for the
old virtues of simplicity and reticence; we find the distinction of
sex wiped out, and with it all reverence and sense of mystery.

Nature is a back number with them; they must for ever be plastering
their noses with powder--not just privily, as used to be the
better way of faded charmers, but shamelessly in public places. In dress
they barely keep within the bounds of decency prescribed by the police.
They make their own advances, rounding up and capturing their
'boys' for partners, lest the haunts of jazzery should be closed
against them.

And in this competition for their favours the good modest fellows
who only a little while ago were fighting our battles for us are
now giving themselves the airs of spoilt beauties.

What do you make of all this in your scheme of Renaissance?"
"I admit much of what you say," said Mr. Punch, "but I ascribe it, in
part at least, to a natural reaction from the strain and horror
of War."

"'Reaction'!" snorted the Cynic. "A very comfortable word. But what were
the sufferings from which they are 'reacting'? The loss, you will say,
of the flower of our chivalry in battle? Well, one would think that might
have steadied them. Is this what our manhood died for--to make a
British carnival?"
"I don't pretend to understand that side of it," said the Sage,
"but I know that during the War we respected the silence of their
grief; and I know that nature must choose its own way of recovering
from a loss and reasserting its claim to happiness.

Remember, too, that War must always have its demoralising features,
however splendid the cause for which you are fighting. 'Let us eat and
drink, for to-morrow we die,' says the soldier in his brief
intervals of release. And some of us at home went more than half-way to
meet him, imitating an attitude excusable in him but not in us. And that
attitude is bound to survive for a little time the causes that
induced it.

But you must not forget that many of the type which you are now attacking
did noble work in the War; and they will do it again."
"That may be," said the Cynic; "but is it necessary to have an orgy of
_Carmagnole_ in between?"

"I think perhaps it is like the case of a crew or a team going out of
training. They permit themselves a certain relaxation before they
start training for the next contest.

But I think too that there is something to be said for your reference to
the _Carmagnole_. We are passing through a phase of Revolution, very
natural after a great upheaval.

The sense of freedom--the very thing for which we have been
fighting--is apt to turn the heads of the young and thoughtless.

"The octupus must have recently dined when it grabbed us, for
it didn't offer to eat us. And it didn't grip us as tightly as it might
have or I reckon we wouldn't have come out alive. I thought sure we were
going to be killed, however."

"So did I," put in Jack.

"I don't want any more such fights this trip," said Andy with a weak
smile.


CHAPTER XXVIII

OUT OF THE ICE


Worn out with their encounter with the octupus, Andy and the boys were
glad to take to their bunks. The others, too, who were weary from
traveling under water, felt the need of rest, and so it was decided to
let the ship remain stationary down on the bottom of the ocean for
several hours before going on further.

"When we get rested up we'll have a good meal, and then try to gain the
surface of the ocean," said the professor.

There was quiet on board the _Porpoise_ for a long time. Washington was
the first to awake and he at once set about getting a meal. When it was
ready he called the professor, and, one after another all the
adventurers rose from their bunks and refreshed themselves with hot
coffee, bacon, eggs and preserves, all prepared from condensed foods, of
which a large supply had been brought.

"Now to see if we can make our way upward through the ice," announced
Mr. Henderson.

"We ought to be far enough south to strike the open polar sea which I
believe exists."

The engine was started after the small leaks in the bow, caused by the
ramming of the boat on the rocks, had been stopped up, and the
professor, entering the conning tower, turned her due south.

The screw vibrated in the tunnel, the water rushed out in a big stream,
the engines and dynamos hummed, and the hearts of all were lightened as
they knew they were nearing the goal of their journey.

Several hours passed and the professor, who was keeping watch of the
gages noted they had covered more than one hundred miles. As the supply
of compressed air was getting low Mr. Henderson, not wanting to run any
chances, decided to make an attempt to reach the surface and refill the
tanks.

Accordingly the water tanks were emptied of their ballast, the rudder
was set to force the ship to the surface, and soon the depth gage showed
a constantly decreasing amount of water over the heads of the
adventurers.

"Now, if we don't hit the ice above us we'll be all right," spoke Mr.
Henderson. "We are within fifteen feet of the surface."

Hardly had he ceased speaking when the _Porpoise_ brought up against
something with a bump that jarred everyone. Then the submarine went
scraping along, hitting the conning tower every now and then.

"Not clear of the ice yet," said Mr. Henderson. "We must go down a
little and try again."

We soon grew vastly weary; for most plains are, after all, mere
platitudes. And then Salt Lake City, the Mormon capital, with its
lake shimmering like a mirage in the great glow of the valley; and a
run due north through the well-tilled lands of the thrifty "saints,"
getting our best wayside meals at stations where buxom Mormon women
served us heartily; still north and west, flying night and day out
of the insufferable summer dust that makes ovens of those midland
valleys.

There was a rich, bracing air far north, and grand forests of spicy pine,
and such a Columbia river-shore to follow as is worth a week's
travel merely to get one glimpse of; and at last Portland, the
prettiest of Pacific cities, and heaps of friends to greet me there.

Bright days were to follow, as you shall soon see; for I was still bound
northward, with no will to rest until I had plowed the floating fields
of ice and dozed through the pale hours of an arctic summer under
the midnight sun.

CHAPTER V.

Off for Alaska.

If you are bound for Alaska, you can make the round trip most
conveniently and comfortably by taking the steamer at Portland,
Oregon, and retaining your state-room until you land again in
Portland, three weeks later.

Or you can run north by rail as far as Tacoma; there board a fine
little steamer and skim through the winding water-ways of Puget
Sound (as lovely a sheet of water as ever the sun shone on), debark
at Port Townsend, and here await the arrival of the Alaska steamer,
which makes its excursion trip monthly--at least it used to before
the Klondyke hoards deranged the time-table and the times.

If this does not satisfy you, you may take passage at San Francisco
for Port Townsend or Victoria, and connect at either port with the
Alaska boat.

Those who are still unsuited had better wait a bit, when, no doubt, other
as entirely satisfactory arrangements will be made for their
especial convenience.

I went by train to Tacoma. I wanted to sniff the forest scents of Washington
State, and to get a glimpse of the brave young settlements scattered
through the North-western wilderness. I wanted to skirt the shore of
the great Sounds, whose praises have been ringing in my ears ever
since I can remember--and that is a pretty long time now.

I wanted to loaf for a while in Port Townsend, the old jumping-off
place, the monogram in the extreme northwest corner of the map of
the United States of America--at least such it was until the Alaskan
annex stretched the thing all out of shape, and planted our flag
so far out in the Pacific that San Francisco lies a little east of
the centre of the Union, and the Hawaiian islands come within our
boundaries; for our Aleutian-island arm, you know, stretches a
thousand miles to the west of Hawaii--it even chucks Asia under the
chin.

It was decided to go no farther that night, however, as the professor
wanted to take some observations by daylight and ascertain his position.
So filling their lungs with the air, cold and piercing though it was,
the adventurers descended to their cabin, and lots were drawn to see who
would stand the two night watches. It fell to Mr. Henderson to take the
first, and Washington the second. The captain accordingly took up his
position in the conning tower and prepared to pass several hours.

He was busy thinking over the exciting times he and his companions had
passed through, and planning new trips to see more wonders of the world,
when his attention was attracted by slight noise near the man hole
leading to the amidship companionway.

The professor looked up, and was startled to see a tall white object,
with outstretched arms advancing toward him with slow and stealthy
tread.

"The ghost again!" exclaimed the inventor softly. "I must catch it now,
and see what foolishness it is," for the professor did not believe in
spirits.

He got down on his hands and knees the better to escape observation,
should the white thing prove to be a bodily substance, and started to
crawl toward it. He came within ten feet of the thing, and could make
out that it was a man, or at least the semblance of one, all clothed in
white.

Nearer and nearer the inventor crawled to the thing. It turned to face
him now and Mr. Henderson could not help feeling startled as he saw the
object had no head. The neck ended in a white stump.

In spite of a little feeling of qualmishness, which even his boasted
disbelief in ghosts did not save him from, Mr. Henderson was about to
spring upon the thing and solve the mystery.

At that instant, however, Washington, who was coming on deck to take up
his watch, appeared at the head of the companionway, and caught sight of
the terrible object.

The yells of the colored man as he dove downward and back into the
cabin, aroused the ship. Determined to solve the mystery, in spite of
everything, the professor made a leap forward. He slipped, and tumbled
down the iron stairway. At the same time, the ghost, with a blood
curdling yell, leaped over the professor's back, and disappeared down
the stairs of the conning tower.

In an instant the crew were rushing from their bunk rooms, seeking a
meaning for the disturbance.

"It was the ghost again," explained the professor as he picked himself
up, not much the worse for his tumble. "I tried to catch it, but I
didn't. Come, Washington, it is your turn to stand watch."

"Not to-night," said Washington firmly.

It was no use to urge him, so Jack good-naturedly stood Washington's
trick. Nothing further however occurred that night.

In the morning the professor made several observations and found that he
was within one hundred and fifty miles of the south pole.

"We'll make it to-morrow, if we have luck," he said.


CHAPTER XXIX

THE BOILING WATER


The hours passed and the strange voyage continued.

The _Porpoise_ traveled along at good speed, and the professor devoted
most of his time to looking after the different scientific instruments
and gages, for they were nearing the south pole. The deflecting compass,
which when it came directly over the place corresponding to the pole,
would point straight up and down, was assuming more and more of a
perpendicular position.

"We are getting there!" exclaimed the professor with delight. "A few
hours more and we will have won the goal!"

There was considerable excitement on board when the professor's
announcement was made. Though few of the adventurers cared as much for
the scientific achievement as did Mr. Henderson, they were all glad he
was about to succeed. To most of them the locating of the south pole was
no different from visiting some new country, excepting that there were
more adventures than on most voyages.

We dodged under the narrow awnings of the shops, and bargained blindly in
the most unmusical lingos. Within were to be had stores of toy
canoes--graceful little things hewn after the Haida model, with prows
and sides painted in strange hieroglyphics; paddles were
there--life-size, so to speak,--gorgeously dyed, and just the things
for hall decorations; also dishes of carved wood of quaint pattern,
and some of them quite ancient, were to be had at very moderate
prices; pipes and pipe-bowls of the weirdest description; halibut
fish-hooks, looking like anything at all but fish-hooks; Shaman
rattles, grotesque in design; Thlinket baskets, beautifully plaited
and stained with subdued dyes--the most popular of souvenirs; spoons
with bone bowls and handles carved from the horns of the mountain
goat or musk-ox; even the big horn-spoon itself was no doubt made
by these ingenious people; Indian masks of wood, inlaid with abalone
shells, bears' teeth, or lucky stones from the head of the catfish;
Indian wampum; deer-skin sacks filled with the smooth, pencil-shaped
sticks with which the native sport passes the merry hours away in
games of chance; bangles without end, and rings of the clumsiest
description hammered out of silver coin; bows and arrows; doll
papooses, totem poles in miniature.

There were garments made of fish-skins and bird-skins, smelling
of oil and semi-transparent, as if saturated with it; and half-musical
instruments, or implements, made of twigs strung full of the beaks
of birds that clattered with a weird, unearthly Alaskan clatter.

There were little graven images, a few of them looking somewhat idolatrous;
and heaps upon heaps of nameless and shapeless odds and ends that boasted
more or less bead-work in the line of ornamentation; but all chiefly
noticeable for the lack of taste displayed, both in design and the
combination of color.

The Chilkat blanket is an exception to the Alaskan Indian rule.

It is a handsome bit of embroidery, of significant though mysterious
design; rich in color, and with a deep, knotted fringe on the lower
edge--just the thing for a lambrequin, and to be had in Juneau for
$40, which is only $15 more than is asked for the same article in
Portland, Oregon, as some of us discovered to our cost.

There were quantities of skins miserably cured, impregnating the air
with vilest odors; and these were waved at you and wafted after you at
every step.

In the forest which suddenly terminates at the edge of the town there is
game worth hunting.

The whistler, reindeer, mountain sheep and goat, ermine, musk-rat,
marmet, wolf and bear, are tracked and trapped by the red-man; but
I doubt if the foot of the white-man is likely to venture far into
the almost impenetrable confusion of logs and brush that is the
distinguishing feature of the Alaskan wilderness.

Beautiful antlers are to be had in Juneau and elsewhere; and perhaps
a cinnamon or a black cub as playful as a puppy, and full of a
kind of half-savage fun.

In the upper part of the town, where the stumps and brush are
thickest, there are cosy little log-cabins, and garden patches that
seem to be making the most of the summer sunshine.

In the window of one of these cabins we saw a face--dusky,
beautiful, sensitive. Dreamy eyes slumbered under fringes that might
have won a song from a Persian poet; admirably proportioned features,
delicious lips, almost persuaded us that a squaw-man might in some
cases be excusable for his infatuation.

Later we discovered that the one beauty of Alaska was of Hawaiian
parentage; that she was married, and was as shy of intruders as a
caged bird.

Very dissimilar are the ladies of Juneau.

In the evening the town-crier went to and fro announcing the opening
of the ball. It was still drizzling; the cliffs that tower above the
metropolis were capped with cloud; slender, rain-born rivulets plunged
from these airy heights into space and were blown away like smoke.

Sometimes we caught glimpses of white, moving objects, far aloft against
the black wall of rock: these were mountain sheep.

The cannonading at Douglas Island continued--muffled thunder
that ceases neither night nor day. Nobody seemed to think of sleeping.

Professor Henderson went to the water tank, thinking to throw some of
the fluid over himself and his companions, but he found it so warm that
it almost burned his hand.

"Keep up your courage!" exclaimed the inventor. "We will soon be at the
top!"

Almost as he spoke the _Porpoise_ bounded from the waves, and fell back
in a splash of foam on the surface of the billows. They were at the
surface.

The professor rushed for the manhole and soon opened it. He crawled out
on the deck, followed by the others. They breathed in deep breaths of
the fresh air.

The submarine continued to sail on. Every minute the sea seemed to boil
more violently, until at last the waves were covered with a cloud of
steam, through which it was difficult to observe where they were going.

"Hadn't we better turn back," suggested Mark.

"Our only hope is to press on," replied Mr. Henderson. "We may cross
this zone of boiling water soon."

He went into the conning tower to make an observation. He came on the
deck the next minute, very much excited.

"What's the matter? Are we sinking?" asked Andy.

"We are directly over the south pole!" exclaimed the professor. "We have
reached the goal! We have come to the spot hundreds of men have tried to
reach! It has been left for us to succeed. Look at the deflecting
needle!"

They crowded into the conning tower to note it. The slender hand of
steel stood straight up and down, indicating that the ship was over the
south pole, one of the two chief centres of magnetism of the earth.

"If we only dared stop to make some scientific notes and observations,"
said the professor, "we could render much valuable aid to the seekers
after truth. But it would be sure death to stay in the boiling water!"

"I guess we'd better be getting out of this if we want to reach home
alive," spoke Andy.

Indeed they were all suffering very much, for the heat from the water
was awful.

"Speed her up, Washington!" called the professor. "We must get out of
here!"

"Which way shall I steer?" asked the colored man.

"Straight ahead. We are now bound north!"

"Bound north!" cried Jack.

"Certainly," answered the professor. "We have passed over the exact spot
where the south pole is. The deflecting needle is beginning to tilt
again. The compass is indicating a northerly direction. You know that
after you go as far south as you can, you have to begin to go back
north. Well, we have gone as far south as we can. Now we are going
north. We have turned the southern end of the globe, and are on our way
back."

For several hours the _Porpoise_ continued along on top of the water. By
degrees, as they left the vicinity of the boiling ocean, it became
cooler. The water ceased to seethe and bubble, and Jack found, on
experiment, that he could bear his hand in it.

"Hurrah!" he cried, "we are safe now."

"Next we'll have to prepare to freeze to death," spoke Mark. "It's
either one extreme or the other this trip. But we've had lots of fun and
excitement."

"Plenty of the last," agreed Jack.

On and on went the submarine. Once it was out of the range of the
terrible heated zone, the atmosphere rapidly cooled, until the
adventurers were glad to don their heavy garments again.

"This marks the ending of the first half of the voyage," announced the
professor. "Now we are going back. We have accomplished something no
other living man has done and I am proud of it. Proud of all of you, and
proud of the ship!"

Several hours later, when it was deemed safe, the _Porpoise_ was sunk
beneath the waves, and once more she speeded along through the water at
a fast speed. The ship seemed to know she was going home, for never had
she made better time.

"We have solved every problem that we met," said the professor while he,
with Jack and Mark, were in the conning tower, as Washington was
preparing a meal.

"Except two," said Jack.

"What are they?"

But in a thousand quiet ways they are setting themselves to make good."

"To make good money, you mean. Our world seems made up of profiteers
and of those who would be profiteers but can't, and so abuse those
who can.

Can you name to me a period when there was a wilder rush for wealth,
or a more blatant display of luxury? Sometimes I wish the War back;
England was at her best when the call for sacrifice came home to her. But
how--we hear great talk of Reconstruction, but I am reminded rather
of the Restoration."

"My friend," said the Sage, "I shall believe that this too is only a
temporary phase. Memory is not our strong point, but you can perhaps
throw back your mind to a year ago and recall how near we came to the
ruin of our hopes.

Victory took us by surprise; and we were less prepared for Peace at that
moment than we ever had been for War. And, just as in the first days of
the fighting we went astray, running after the cry, 'Business-as-usual,'
so to-day we are making as bad a mistake when we run after
'Pleasure-as-usual'--or rather more than usual.

But we soon revised that early error, and we shan't waste much time about
revising this. For though we lacked imagination then, and still
lack it, we have the gift, perhaps even more useful if less showy,
of common sense.

And when common sense is found in natures that are honest and hearts
that are clean it may make mistakes, but not for long.

"No, I am an optimist, and an incorrigible old fool, if you like, but
I am certain that the spirit which won the War is not going to
fail us at this second call.

"Of course it is; who did you think it was?" asked Bill.

"What are you doing on deck in your night shirt?" asked the boy, letting
the helper rise.

"Me? On deck? Ain't I in my bunk?"

"I should say not," replied Jack. "What are you doing on deck?"

"Well! well!" remarked Bill, rubbing his eyes. "I've gone and done it
again."

"Done what?"

"Walked in my sleep. I'm a great sleep walker. Greatest you ever knew.
Once I climbed to the top of our barn when I was asleep."

"So you're the ghost of the submarine," exclaimed Jack. "That explains
it."

"I guess you're right," admitted Bill, as the others came on deck to see
what all the row was about. "I never thought of it when I heard about
the ghost, but I can account for it now. I'd get out of my bunk, wander
out on deck, and then crawl back again. Of course, being barefoot, or in
fur slippers, I made no sounds. I don't wonder you thought I was a
spirit. Queer I didn't wake up after some of the things I went through."

"And you always managed to get back to your bunk in time so that we
never caught you at it," said Jack. "However, it's all over now."

And so it was, for after that Bill tied a chair in front of his bunk,
and if he did get out in his sleep he stumbled against it and awoke
before he had gone far.

Northward the _Porpoise_ continued on her journey. She entered a vast
field of ice, and only her ability to sink below the surface enabled her
to get through it unharmed. There were few adventures going home. Once a
big whale rammed the ship, as had happened on the going voyage, and
several times they were surrounded by hordes of wild polar fish and
walrusses, but there were no accidents, and in a couple of weeks the
ship entered the temperate zone.

Then came lazy happy days of sailing through the tropical region. They
landed at several islands and renewed their supply of food.

"I'm coming back this way some day," observed Mr. Henderson one
afternoon as the ship was sailing along on top of the waves.

"What for?" asked Jack.

BARRY PAIN can ever be really dull, just as no story starting with a
mysterious murder can lack a certain intrigue; but the fact remains
that my wish, heroically resisted, to look on to the last chapter
was prompted more often by impatience than by any compelling
curiosity.

Others may be happier.

* * * * *
The author of _A Journal of Small Things_ has done much to make us
understand the sufferings of stricken France and the more intimate
sorrows of war.

_Chill Hours_ (MELROSE) deals with that dark period before the end,
when, to some, it seemed all but certain that the will to victory
must fail.

Of the three parts of this gracious little book the first consists
of six sketches of life behind the lines, life both gentle and
simple, as affected by war.

"Odette in Pink Taffeta," an episode of bereavement, is in particular
exquisitely visualised.

"Their Places" and "The Second Hay" treat, with a quiet intensity of
conviction, of the absolutely deadening absorption, by overwork and
anxiety, of peasant wives and children left to carry on in the
absence of their men.

The third part is a series of hospital vignettes. They do not attempt
to be too cheery, but they have the stamp of realised truth.

"Nostalgia," the second part, is in another mood--recalled memories
of the beauties of a loved land and of dear common things affectionately
seen.

To those who dare look at war with open eyes and who take pleasure in
sincere and beautifully-phrased writing I commend Mrs.

HELEN MACKAY'S book without reserve.

* * * * *
"To the big hole and underground," suggested Jack.

"We shall see," said Mr. Henderson with a twinkle in his eyes.


THE END


The Dave Dashaway Series

By ROY ROCKWOOD


Author of the "Speedwell Boys Series" and the "Great Marvel Series."

=12mo. Illustrated. Price per volume, 60 cents, postpaid.=

=Never was there a more clever young aviator than Dave Dashaway. All
up-to-date lads will surely wish to read about him.=


[Illustration: DAVE DASHAWAY THE YOUNG AVIATOR]

          DAVE DASHAWAY THE YOUNG AVIATOR
          _or In the Clouds for Fame and Fortune_

          This initial volume tells how the hero ran away
          from his miserly guardian, fell in with a
          successful airman, and became a young aviator of
          note.


          DAVE DASHAWAY AND HIS
          HYDROPLANE
          _or Daring Adventures Over the Great Lakes_

          Showing how Dave continued his career as a birdman
          and had many adventures over the Great Lakes, and
          how he foiled the plans of some Canadian
          smugglers.


          DAVE DASHAWAY AND HIS GIANT AIRSHIP
          _or A Marvellous Trip Across the Atlantic_

          How the giant airship was constructed and how the
          daring young aviator and his friends made the
          hazardous journey through the clouds from the new
          world to the old, is told in a way to hold the
          reader spellbound.


          DAVE DASHAWAY AROUND THE WORLD
          _or A Young Yankee Aviator Among Many Nations_

          An absorbing tale of a great air flight around the
          world, of adventures in Alaska, Siberia and
          elsewhere. To be sure there was a kind of infantile
          cyclone out on the plains, memorable for its superb atmospheric
effects, and the rapidity with which we shut down the windows to
keep from being inflated balloon-fashion.

          And there was a brisk hail-storm
          at the gate of the Rockies that peppered us smartly for a few
moments.

          Then there were some boys who could not eat enough,
          and who turned from the dessert in tearful
          dismay; and one little kid who dived out of the top bunk in a
moment of rapture, and should have broken his neck--but he didn't!

       We were quite sybaritical as to hours, with breakfast and dinner
courses, and mouth-organs and cigarettes and jam between meals.

Frosted cake and oranges were left untouched upon the field after
the gastronomical battles were fought so bravely three or four times
a day.

Perhaps the pineapples and bananas, and the open barrel of strawberries,
within reach of all at any hour, may account for the phenomenon.

Pueblo!

Ah me, the heat of that infernal junction! Pueblo, with the stump of
its one memorable tree, or a slice of that stump turned up on
end--to make room for a new railway-station, that could just as
well have been built a few feet farther on,--and staring at you,
with a full broadside of patent-medicine placards trying to cover
its nakedness.

On closer inspection we read this legend: "The tree that grew here
was 380 years old; circumference, 28 feet; height, 79 feet; was cut
down June 25, 1883, at a cost of $250."

       So perished, at the hands of an amazingly stupid city council, the
oldest landmark in Colorado.

Under the shade of this cottonwood Kit Carson, Wild Bill, and many another
famous Indian scout built early camp fires.

       

          
          FRED FENTON ON THE TRACK
          _or The Athletes of Riverport School_

          Track athletics form a subject of vast interest to
          many boys, and here is a tale telling of great
          running races, high jumping, and the like. Fred
          again proves himself a hero in the best sense of
          that term.


          FRED FENTON: MARATHON RUNNER
          _or The Great Race at Riverport School_

          Fred is taking a post-graduate course at the
          school when the subject of Marathon running came
          up. A race is arranged, and Fred shows both his
          friends and his enemies what he can do. An
          athletic story of special merit.

       Even "KATHARINE TYNAN" must sometimes fall below her own standard,
and _The Man from Australia_ (COLLINS), though written with
considerable grace and charm, is too thin in plot to be altogether
satisfactory.

_John Darling_, a youngish man of wealth and an extremely liberal
disposition, came from Australia to visit his connexions in the
West of Ireland and--if opportunities occurred--to help them.

Opportunities did offer themselves in abundance.

The _Adairs_ in their various ways were ripe for a benefactor of
the _Darling_ type to appear, and _John_ soon got busy.

       In the course of his activities--for it would have been unkind (and
very dull) to bring him all the way from Australia to Ireland just
to serve as a travelling relief-fund--he is made to fall in love
with one of the _Adair_ girls.

       

.

          _4 Colored Illustrations. $1.25 net._
          =_At All Booksellers_=

       *       *       *       *       *

=CUPPLES & LEON CO. Publishers New York=


THE BOYS' OUTING LIBRARY

_12mo. Cloth. Illustrated. Jacket in full color._

_Price, per volume, 60 cents, postpaid._

[Illustration: THE SADDLE BOYS OF THE ROCKIES]

=THE SADDLE BOYS SERIES=

       *       *       *       *       *

BY CAPT. Round dances were in vogue,--round dances interspersed with flirtations
and fire-water; round dances that grew oblong and irregular before
sunrise--and yet it was sunrise at the unearthly hour of 3.30 a.
m., or thereabout.

       We all felt as if we had been cheated out of something when we saw
his coming; but perhaps it was only the summer siesta that had been
cut short,--the summer siesta that here passes for the more wholesome
and old-fashioned sleep of the world lower down on the map.

          During the night, having discharged
          freight and exhausted the resources
          of Juneau, including a
          post-office, and a post-mistress
          who sorts the mail twice a month, we steamed back to Douglas Island,
and dropped many fathoms of noisy chain into the deep abreast of
the camp.

The eve of the Fourth in the United States of America is nothing
in comparison with the everlasting racket at this wonderful mine.

       The iron jaws of the 120-stamp mill grind incessantly, spitting
pulverized rock and ore into the vats that quake under the mastication
of the mighty molars; cars slip down into the bowels of the earth,
and emerge laden with precious freight; multitudinous miners relieve
one another, watch and watch.

Electric light banishes even a thought of dusk; and were it now
winter--the long, dark, dreary winter of the North, with but half
a dozen hours of legitimate daylight out of the four and twenty--the
work at Douglas Island would go on triumphantly; and it will go
forever--or, rather, until the bottom drops out of the mine, just
as it drops out of everything in this life.

       All night long the terrible rattle and rumble and roar of the
explosive agent robbed us of our rest.

          I could think of nothing but the
          gnomes of the German fairy tale;
          the dwarfs of the black mountain,
          with their glowworm lamps,
          darting in and out of the tunnels in the earth like moles, and
heaping together the riches that are the cause of so much pleasure
and pain, and envy and despair, and sorrow and sin, and too often
death.

CHAPTER IX.

       

By Solitary Shores.

       Probably no one leaves Juneau with regret.

          Far more enjoyable was the day we
          spent in Ward's Cove, land-locked, wooded
          to the water's edge, and with forty-five
          fathoms of water of the richest
          sea-green hue.

       

       

          
          (it'll be all)

Page 32, "lauched" changed to "launched". (she had been launched)

Page 36, "reined" changed to "reigned". (pandemonium reigned)

Page 56, "stear" changed to "steer". (to steer properly)

Page 57, "stear" changed to "steer". (ship will steer)

Page 63, "helmet" changed to "helmets". (their helmets were)

Page 67, "stearing" changed to "steering". (professor was steering)

Page 72, "assasinate" changed to "assassinate". (to assassinate Lord)

Page 76, "want's" changed to "wants". (cabin wants to)

Page 82, "innner" changed to "inner". (inner door was)

Page 87, "stearing" changed to "steering". (Washington was steering)

Page 89, "propellors" changed to "propellers". (about the propellers)

Page 90, "propellor" changed to "propeller". (big propeller in)

Page 140, "begining" changed to "beginning". (run was beginning)

Page 158, "wierd" changed to "weird". (weird white object)

Page 162, "subterreanean" changed to "subterranean". (of subterranean
disturbances)

Page 182, "Britanic" changed to "Britannic". (His Britannic Majesty's)

Page 182, word "was" removed from text. (show something that) Original
read "show was something that".

Page 187, "beeing" changed to "being". (was being steered)

Page 187, "firghtened" changed to "frightened". (gave one frightened)

Page 192, "folowed" changed to "followed". (silence followed his)

Page 193, "oscilation" changed to "oscillation". (oscillation of the
big)

Page 195, "preparel" changed to "prepared". (prepared water-proof)

Page 215, "impossile" changed to "impossible". (flesh was impossible)

Page 226, "hemlet" changed to "helmet". (his helmet was off)

Page 229, "see" changed to "sea". (polar sea which)

Page 236, "hurridly" changed to "hurriedly". (and hurriedly eaten)

Page 239, "degress" changed to "degrees". (and ten degrees)

Page 242, "seeth" changed to "seethe". (to seethe and bubble)

Page 243, extraneous word "more" removed. (once more she) Original read
"once more more she".

Seven instances of "manhole" and nine of "man-hole" were retained.

"Octopus" is spelled "octupus" in this volume. This was changed in the
table of contents and a chapter header to reflect text usage.

One instance each of Penson/Pensen was retained.