Produced by Charles Franks and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team.


THE WORKS OF KATHLEEN NORRIS

MARTIE THE UNCONQUERED

VOLUME VIII


AFFECTIONATELY DEDICATED TO

JOSEPH SEXTON THOMPSON


BOOK I

CHAPTER I


At about four o'clock on a windy, warm September afternoon, four
girls came out of the post-office of Monroe, California. They had
loitered on their way in, consciously wasting time; they had spent
fifteen minutes in the dark and dirty room upon an absolutely
unnecessary errand, and now they sauntered forth into the village
street keenly aware that the afternoon was not yet waning, and
disheartened by the slow passage of time. At five they would go to
Bonestell's drug store, and sit in a row at the soda counter, and
drink effervescent waters pleasingly mingled with fruit syrups and
an inferior quality of ice cream. Five o'clock was the hour for
"sodas," neither half-past four nor half-past five was at all the
same thing in the eyes of Monroe's young people. After that they
would wander idly toward the bridge, and separate; Grace Hawkes
turning toward the sunset for another quarter of a mile, Rose
Ransome opening the garden gate of the pretty, vine-covered cottage
near the bridge, and the Monroe girls, Sarah and Martha, in a
desperate hurry now, flying up the twilight quiet of North Main
Street to the long picket fence, the dark, tree-shaded garden, and
the shabby side-doorway of the old Monroe house.

Three of these girls met almost every afternoon, going first to each
other's houses, and later wandering down for the mail, for some
trivial errand at drug store or dry-goods store, and for the
inevitable ices. Rose Ransome was not often with them, for Rose was
just a little superior in several ways to her present companions,
and frequently spent the afternoon practising on her violin, or
driving, or walking with the Parker girls and Florence Frost, who
hardly recognized the existence of Grace Hawkes and the Monroes. The
one bank in Monroe was the Frost and Parker Bank; there were Frost
Street and Parker Street, the Frost Building and the Parker
Building. May and Ida Parker and Florence Frost had gone to Miss
Bell's Private School when they were little, and then to Miss
Spencer's School in New York.

But even all this might not have accounted for the exclusive social
instincts of the young ladies if both families had not been very
rich. As it was, with prosperous fathers and ambitious mothers, with
well-kept, old-fashioned homes, pews in church, allowances of so
many hundred dollars a year, horses to ride and drive, and servants
to wait upon them, the three daughters of these two prominent
families considered themselves as obviously better than their
neighbours, and bore themselves accordingly. Cyrus Frost and Graham
Parker had come to California as young men, in the seventies; had
cast in their lot with little Monroe, and had grown rich with the
town. It was a credit to the state now; they had found it a mere
handful of settlers' cabins, with one stately, absurd mansion
standing out among them, in a plantation of young pepper and willow
and locust and eucalyptus trees.

This was the home of Malcolm Monroe, turreted, mansarded, generously
filled with the glass windows that had come in a sailing vessel
around the Horn. Incongruous, pretentious, awkward, it might to a
discerning eye have suggested its owner, who was then not more than
thirty years old; a tall, silent, domineering man. He was reputed
rich, and Miss Elizabeth--or "Lily"--Price, a pretty Eastern girl
who visited the Frosts in the winter of 1878, was supposed to be
doing very well for herself when she married him, and took her
bustles and chignons, her blonde hair with its "French twist," and
her scalloped, high-buttoned kid shoes to the mansion on North Main
Street.

Now the town had grown to several hundred times its old size;
schools, churches, post-office, shops, a box factory, a lumber yard,
and a winery had come to Monroe. There was the Town Hall, a plain
wooden building, and, at the shabby outskirts of South Main Street,
a jail. The Interurban Trolley "looped" the town once every hour.

All these had helped to make Cyrus Frost and Graham Parker rich.
They, like Malcolm Monroe, had married, and had built themselves
homes. They had invested and re-invested their money; they had given
their children advantages, according to their lights. Now, in their
early fifties, they were a power in the town, and they felt for it a
genuine affection and pride, a loyalty that was unquestioning and
sincere. In the kindly Western fashion these two were now accorded
titles; Cyrus, who had served in the Civil War, was "Colonel Frost,"
and to Graham, who had been a lawyer, was given the titular dignity
of being "Judge Parker."

Malcolm Monroe kept pace with neither his old associates nor with
the times. His investments were timid and conservative, his faith in
the town that had been named for his father frequently wavered. He
was in everything a reactionary, refusing to see that neither the
sheep of the old Spanish settlers nor the gold of the early pioneers
meant so much to this fragrant, sun-washed table land as did wheat
and grapes and apple trees. Monroe came to laugh at "old Monroe's"
pigheadedness. He fought the town on every question for
improvements, as it came up. The bill for pavements, the bill for
sewerage, the bill for street lights, the high school bill, found in
him an enemy as the years went by. He denounced these innovations
bitterly. When the level of Main Street was raised four feet, "old
Monroe" almost went out of his senses, and the home site, gloomily
shut in now by immense trees, and a whole block square, was left
four feet below the street level, so that there must be built three
or four wooden steps at all the gates. The Monroe girls resented
this peculiarity of their home, but never said so to their father.

Rose Ransome, the pretty, neat little daughter of a pretty, neat
little widow, was cultivated eagerly by the Monroes, and patronized
kindly by the Frost and Parker girls. She had lived all of her
twenty years in Monroe, and was too conscientious and amiable to
snub the girls supposedly beneath her, and too merry, ladylike, and
entertaining to be quite ignored by the richer group. So she
brightly, obligingly, and gratefully lunched and drove, read and
walked, and practised music with May and Ida and Florence, when they
wanted her, and when they did not, or when Eastern friends visited
them, or there was for some reason no empty seat in the surrey, she
turned back to the company of Grace Hawkes and of Sally and Martie
Monroe. Rose admitted frankly to her mother that with the latter
group she had "more fun," but that with her more elevated friends
she enjoyed, of course, "nicer times." Politically she steered a
diplomatic middle course between the two, implying, with equal
readiness, that she only associated with the poor Monroes because
Uncle Ben made her, or that she accepted invitations from the Frost
and Parker faction simply to be amiable.

Sally Monroe, innocent, simple, unexacting at twenty-one, really
believed Rose to be the sweetly frank and artless person she seemed,
but Martie, two years younger, had her times of absolutely detesting
Rose. Sally was never jealous, but Martie burned with a fierce young
jealousy of all life: of Rose, with her dainty frocks and her rich
friends, her curly hair and her violin; of Florence Frost's riding
horse; of Ida Parker's glib French; of her own brother, Leonard
Monroe, with his male independence; of the bare-armed women who
leaped on the big, flat-backed horses in the circus; of the very
Portuguese children who rode home asleep of a summer afternoon, in
fragrant loads of alfalfa.

To-day she was vaguely smarting at Grace's news: Grace was going to
work. She, like the Monroe girls, had often discussed the
possibilities of this step, but opportunities were not many, and the
idle, pleasant years drifted by with no change. But Ellie Hawkes,
Grace's big sister, who had kept books in the box factory for three
years, was to be married now; a step down for Ellie--for her
"friend" was only Terry Castle, a brawny, ignorant giant employed by
the Express Company--but a step up for Grace. She would be a wage-
earner; her pretty, weak face grew animated at the thought, and her
shrill voice more shrill.

Martie Monroe had no real desire to work in the box factory, to walk
daily the ugly half mile that lay between it and her home, to join
the ranks of toilers that filed through the poorer region of town
every morning. But like all growing young things she felt a
desperate, undefined need. She could not know that self-expression
is as necessary to natures like hers as breath is to young bodies.
She could only grope and yearn and struggle in the darkness of her
soul.

She was nineteen, a tall, strong girl, already fully developed, and
handsome in a rather dull and heavy way. Her hands and feet were
beautifully made, her hair, although neglected, of a wonderful silky
bronze, and her skin naturally of the clear creamy type that
sometimes accompanies such hair. But Martie ruined her skin by
injudicious eating; she could not resist sweets; natural indolence,
combined with the idle life she led, helped to make her too fat. Now
and then, in the express office, in the afternoon, the girls got on
the big freight scales, and this was always a mortification to
Martie. Terry Castle and Joe Hawkes would laugh as they adjusted the
weights, and Martie always tried to laugh, too, but she did not
think it funny. Martie might have seemed to her world merely a
sweet, big, good-natured tomboy, growing into an eager, amusing,
ignorant young woman, too fond of sleeping and eating.

But there was another Martie--a sensitive, ambitious Martie--who
despised idleness, dependence, and inaction; who longed to live a
thousand lives--to conquer all the world; a Martie who was one day a
great singer, one day a wartime nurse, one day a millionaire's
beautiful bride, the mother of five lovely children, all carefully
named. She would waken from her dreams almost bewildered, blinking
at Sally or at her mother in the surprised fashion that sometimes
made folk call Martie stupid, humbly enough she thought of herself
as stupid, too. She never suspected that she was really "dreaming
true," that the power and the glory lay waiting for the touch of her
heart and hand and brain. She never suspected that she was to Rose
and Grace and Sally what a clumsy young swan would be in a flock of
bustling and competent ducks. Martie did not know, yet, where her
kingdom lay, how should she ever dream that she was to find it?

Rose was going back to stay with her cousin in Berkeley to-morrow,
it was understood, and so had to get home early this afternoon.
Rose, as innocent as a butterfly of ambition or of the student's
zeal, had finished her first year in the State University and was to
begin her second to-morrow.

Monroe's shabby Main Street seemed less interesting than ever when
Rose had tripped away. A gusty breeze was blowing fitfully, whisking
bits of straw and odds and ends of paper about. The watering cart
went by, leaving a cool wake of shining mud. Here and there a
surrey, loaded with stout women in figured percales, and dusty,
freckled children, started on its trip from Main Street back to some
outlying ranch.

As the three girls, arms linked, loitered across the square, Dr. Ben
Scott--who was Rose Ransome's mother's cousin and was regarded as an
uncle--came out of the Court House and walked toward his buggy. The
dreaming white mare roused as she heard his voice, and the old
brown-and-white setter sprang into the seat beside him.

"Howdy, girls!" said the old man, his big loose figure bulging
grotesquely over the boundaries of the seat. "Father pretty well?"

"Well enough, Doc' Ben, but not pretty!" Martie said, laughing. The
doctor's eyes twinkled.

"They put a tongue in your head, Martie, sure enough!" he said,
gathering up the reins.

"It was all they did put, then!" Martie giggled.

The girls all liked Doc' Ben. A widower, rich enough now to take
only what practice he pleased, simple in his tastes, he lived with
his old servant, his horse and cow, his dog and cat, chickens and
bees, pigeons and rabbits, in a comfortable, shabby establishment in
an unfashionable part of town. Monroe described him as a "regular
character." His jouncing, fat figure--with tobacco ash spilled on
his spotted vest, and stable mud on his high-laced boots--was
familiar in all her highways and byways. His mellow voice, shot with
humorous undertones even when he was serious, touched with equal
readiness upon Plato, the habits of bees, the growth of fungus,
fashions, Wordsworth, the Civil War, or the construction of
chimneys. He was something of a philosopher, something of a poet,
something of a reformer.

Martie, watching him out of sight, said to herself that she really
must go down soon and see old Dr. Ben, poke among his old books,
feed his pigeons, and scold him for his untidy ways. The girl's
generous imagination threw a veil of romance over his life; she told
Sally that he was like some one in an English story.

After he had gone, the girls idled into the Town Library, a large
room with worn linoleum on the floor, and with level sunlight
streaming in the dusty windows. At the long table devoted to
magazines a few readers were sitting; others hovered over the table
where books just returned were aligned; and here and there, before
the dim bookcases that lined the walls, still others loitered, now
and then picking a book from the shelves, glancing at it, and
restoring it to its place. The room was warm and close with the
smell of old books. The whisking of pages, and occasionally a
sibilant whisper, were its only sounds. From the ceiling depended
signs, bearing the simple command: "Silence"; but this did not
prevent the girls from whispering to the energetic, gray-haired
woman who presided at the desk.

"Hello, girls!" said Miss Fanny Breck cheerfully, in the low tone
she always used in the library. "Want anything to read? You don't?
What are you reading, Martie?"

"I'm reading 'Idylls of the King,'" Sally said.

"I've got 'Only the Governess,'" added Grace.

"I didn't ask either of you," Miss Breck said with the brisk amused
air of correction that made the girls a little afraid of her. "It's
Martie here I'm interested in. I'm going to scold her, too. Are you
reading that book I gave you, Martie?"

Martie, as Grace and Sally turned away, raised smiling eyes. But at
Miss Fanny's keen, kindly look she was smitten with a sudden curious
inclination toward tears. She was keenly sensitive, and she felt an
undeserved rebuke.

"Don't like it?" asked the librarian, disposing of an interruption
with that casual ease that always fascinated Martie. To see Miss
Fanny seize four books from the hands that brought them into her
range of vision, flip open the four covers with terrific speed,
manipulate various paper slips and rubber stamps with energy and
certainty, vigorously copy certain mysterious letters and numbers,
toss the discarded books into a large basket at her elbow and then,
for the first time, as she handed the selected books to the
applicant, glance up with her smile and whispered "Good afternoon,"
was a real study in efficiency.

"I don't understand it," Martie smiled.

"Did you read it?" persisted the older woman.

"Well--not much." Martie had, in fact, hardly opened the book, an
excellent collection of some twenty essays for girls under the
general title "Choosing a Life Work."

"Listen. Why don't you study the Cutter system, and familiarize
yourself a little with this work, and come in here with me?" asked
Miss Fanny, in her firm, pushing voice.

"When?" Martie asked, considering.

"Well--I can't say when. I'm no oracle, my dear. But some day the
grave and reverend seigneurs on my Board may give me an assistant, I
suppose."

"Oh--I know--" Martie was vague again. "What would I get?"

Miss Fanny's harsh cheeks and jaw stiffened, her eyes half closed,
as she bit her lip in thought.

"Fifteen, perhaps," she submitted.

Martie dallied with the pleasing thought of having fifteen dollars
of her own each month.

"But can't Miss Fanny make you feel as if you were back in school?"
she asked, when the girls were again in Main Street. "I'd just as
lieves be in the lib'ary as anywheres," she added.

"I drather be in the box factory," Grace said. "More money."

"More work, too!" Martie suggested. "Come on, let's go to
Bonestell's!"

Other persons of all ages were in the drug store, seated on stools
at the high marble counter, or at the little square cherry tables in
the dim room at the rear. Drugs were a lesser consideration than
brushes, stationery, cameras, candy, cigars, post cards, gum,
mirrors, celluloid bureau sets, flower seeds, and rubber toys and
rattles, but large glass flagons of coloured waters duly held the
corners of the show windows on the street, and dusty and fly-specked
cards advertising patent medicines overlapped each other.

The three girls nodded to various acquaintances, and, as they slid
on to seats at the counter, greeted the soda clerk familiarly. This
was Reddy Johnson, a lean, red-headed youth in a rather dirty white
jacket buttoned up to the chin. Reddy was assisted by a blear-eyed
little Swedish girl of about sixteen, who rushed about blindly with
her little blonde head hanging. He himself did not leave the
counter, which he constantly mopped with a damp, mud-coloured rag.
He plunged the streaked and sticky glasses into hot water, set them
on a dripping grating to dry, turned on this faucet of sizzling
soda, that of rich slow syrup, beat up the contents of glasses with
his long-handled spoon, slipped them into tarnished nickelled
frames, and slid them deftly before the waiting boys and girls. Hot
sauce over this ice cream, nuts on that, lady fingers and whipped
cream with the tall slender cups of chocolate for the Baxter girls,
crackers with the tomato bouillon old Lady Snow was noisily sipping;
Reddy never made a mistake.

Presently he, with a swift motion, set a little plate of sweet
crackers before the girls. These were not ordinarily served with
five-cent orders, and the three instantly divided them, concealing
the little cakes in their hands, and handing the tell-tale plate
back to the clerk. A wise precaution it proved, for a moment later
"old Bones," as the proprietor of the establishment was nicknamed,
sauntered through the store. In a gale of giggles the girls went
out, stealthily eating the crackers as they went. This adventure was
enough to put them in high spirits; Martie indeed was so easily
fired to excitement that the crossing of wits with Dr. Ben, the
personal word with Miss Fanny, and now Reddy's gallantry, had
brightened her colour and carried her elation to the point of
effervescence. Sparkling, chattering, flushed under her shabby
summer hat, Martie sauntered between her friends straight to her
golden hour.

Face to face they came with a tall, loosely built, well-dressed
young man, with a straw hat on one side of his head. Such a
phenomenon was almost unknown in the streets of Monroe, and keenly
conscious of his presence, and instantly curious as to his identity,
the girls could not pass him without a provocative glance.
"Stunning!" said each girl in her heart. "Who on earth--?"

Suddenly he blocked their way.

"Hello, Sally! Hello, Martie! Too proud to speak to old friends?"

"Why--it's Rodney Parker!" Martie said in her rich young voice.
"Hello, Rodney!"

All four shook hands and laughed joyously. To Rodney the
circumstance, at the opening of his dull return home, was welcome;
to the girls, nothing short of delight. He was so handsome, so
friendly, and in the four years he had been at Stanford University
and the summers he had spent in hunting expeditions or in eastern
visits to his aunt in New York, he had changed only to improve!

Even in this first informal greeting it was Martie to whom he
devoted his special attention. Sally was usually considered the
prettier of the two, but Martie was lovely to-night. Rodney turned
with them, and they walked to the bridge together. Sally and Grace
ahead.

The wind had fallen with the day, the air was mild and warm, and in
the twilight even Monroe had its charm. Flowers were blooming in
many dooryards, yellow light streamed hospitably across the
gravelled paths, and in the early darkness women were waiting in
porches or by gates, and whirling hoses over the lawns were drawing
all the dark, hidden perfumes into the damp night air.

"You've not changed much, Martie--except putting up your hair. I
mean it as a compliment!" said Rodney, eagerly, in his ready, boyish
voice.

"You've changed a good deal; and I mean that as a compliment, too!"
Martie returned, with her deep laugh.

His own broke out in answer. He thought her delightful. The creamy
skin, the burnished hair that was fanned into an aureole under her
shabby hat, the generous figure with its young curves, had helped to
bring about in Rodney Parker a sweet, irrational surrender of
reason. He had never been a reasonable boy. He knew, of course, that
Martie Monroe was not in his sisters' set, although she was a
perfectly NICE girl, and to be respected. Martie was neither one
thing nor the other. With Grace, indeed, who was frankly beneath the
Parkers' notice, he might have had almost any sort of affair; even
one of those affairs of which May and Ida must properly seem
unaware. He might have flirted with Grace, have taken her about and
given her presents, in absolute safety. Grace would have guessed him
to be only amusing himself, and even confident Rodney, his mother's
favourite and baby, would never have attempted to bring Grace Hawkes
home as his sisters' equal.

But with Martie there was a great difference. The Monroes had been
going down slowly but steadily in the social scale, yet they were
Monroes, after all. Lydia Monroe had been almost engaged to Clifford
Frost, years ago, and still, at all public affairs, the Monroes, the
Parkers, and the Frosts met as old friends and equals. Indeed, the
Parker girls and Florence Frost had been known to ask the girls'
only brother, Leonard Monroe, to their parties, young as he was, men
being very scarce in Monroe, and Leonard, although his sisters were
not asked, had gone.

So that when Rodney Parker stopped Martie Monroe on the way home,
and fell to flattering and teasing her, and walked beside her to the
bridge, he quite innocently plunged himself into social hot water,
and laid a disturbing touch upon the smooth surface of the girl's
life.

They talked of trivialities, laughing much. Rodney asked her if she
remembered the dreadful day when they had been sent up to apologize
to the French teacher, and Martie said, "Mais oui.'" and thrilled at
the little intimate memory of disgrace shared.

"And are you still such a little devil, Martie?" he asked, bringing
his head close to hers.

"That I'll leave you to find out, Rod!" she said laughingly.

"Well--that's one of the things I'm back here to find out!" he
answered gaily.

Yes, he was back to stay; he was to go into the Bank. He confidently
expected to die of the shock and Martie must help him bear it.
Martie promised to open an account. His Dad might let him have a
car, if he behaved himself; did Martie like automobiles? Martie knew
very little about them, but was sure she could honk the horn. Very
well; Martie should come along and honk the horn.

How did they come to be talking of dancing? Martie could not
afterward remember. Rodney had a visit promised from a college
friend, and wondered rather disconsolately what might be arranged to
amuse him. Fortnightly dances--that was the thing; they ought to
have Friday Fortnightlies.

The very word fired the girl. She heard the whine of violins, the
click of fans, the light shuffle of satin-clad feet. Her eyes saw
dazzling lights, shifting colours, in the dull September twilight.

"You could have one at your house," Rodney suggested.

"Of course we could! Our rooms are immense," Martie agreed eagerly.

"To begin--say the last Friday in October!" the boy said. "You look
up the date, and we'll get together on the lists!"

Get together on the lists! Martie's heart closed over the phrase
with a sort of spasm of pleasure. She and Rodney conferring--
arranging! The bliss--the dignity of it! She would have considered
anything, promised anything.

Grace was gone now, and generous little Sally still ahead of them in
the shadows. Martie said a quick, laughing good-night, and ran to
join her sister just before Sally opened the side gate. It was now
quite dark.

The two girls crossed the sunken garden where clumps of flowers
bloomed dimly under the dark old trees, gave one apprehensive glance
at the big house, which showed here and there a dully lighted
window, and fled noiselessly in at the side door. They ran through a
wide, bare, unaired hallway, and up a long flight of unlighted
stairs that were protected over their dark carpeting by a worn brown
oilcloth.

Sally, and Martie breathless, entered an enormous bedroom, shabbily
and scantily furnished. The outline of a large walnut bedstead was
visible in the gloom, and the dark curtains that screened two bay
windows. Across the room by a wide, dark bureau, a single gas jet on
a jointed brass arm had been drawn out close to the mirror, and by
its light a slender woman of twenty-seven or eight was straightening
her hair. Not combing or brushing it, for the Monroe girls always
combed their hair and coiled it when they got up in the morning, and
took it down when they went to bed at night. Between times they only
"straightened" it.

As the younger girls came in, and flung their hats on the bed, their
sister turned on them reproachfully.

"Martie, mama's furious!" she said. "And I do think it's perfectly
terrible, you and Sally running round town at all hours like this.
It's after six o'clock!"

"I can't help it if it is!" Martie said cheerfully. "Pa home?"

She asked the all-important question with more trepidation than she
showed. Both she and Sally hung anxiously on the reply.

"No; Pa was to come on the four-eleven, and either he missed it, or
else something's kept him down town," Lydia said in her flat, gentle
voice. "Len's not home either ..."

"Praise God from whom all blessings flow!" Martie ejaculated
piously, with her gay, wild laugh. "Tell Lyd who we met, Sally!" she
called back, as she ran downstairs.

She dashed through the dining room, noting with gratitude that dear
old Lyd had set the table in spite of her disapproval. Beyond the
big, gloomy room was an enormous pantry, with a heavy swinging door
opening into a large kitchen. In this kitchen, in the dim light from
one gas jet, and in the steam from sink and stove, Mrs. Monroe and
her one small servant were in the last hot and hurried stages of
dinner-getting.

Martie kissed her mother's flushed and sunken cheek; a process to
which Mrs. Monroe submitted with reproachful eyes and compressed
lips.

"I don't like this, Martie!" said her mother, shaking her head.
"What were you and Sally doing to be so late?"

"Oh, nothing," Martie said ashamedly. "I'm awf'ly sorry. I had no
idea what time it was!"

"Well, I certainly will have Pa speak to you, if you can't get into
the house before dark!" Mrs. Monroe said in mild protest. "Lyd
stopped her sewing to set the table."

"Len home?" Martie, now slicing bread, asked resentfully.

"No. But a boy is different," Mrs. Monroe answered as she had
answered hundreds of times before. "Not that I approve of Len's
actions, either," she added. "But a man can take care of himself, of
course! Len's always late for meals," she went on. "Seems like he
can't get it through his head that it makes a difference if you sit
down when things are ready or when they're all dried up. But Pa's
late anyway to-night, so it doesn't matter much!"

Martie carried the bread on its ugly, heavy china plate in to the
table, entering from the pantry just as her father came in from the
hall.

"Hello, Pa!" said the girl, placing the bread on the wrinkled cloth
with housewifely precision.

Malcolm Monroe gave his youngest daughter glance of lowering
suspicion. But there was no cause for definite question, and Martie,
straightening the salt-cellars lovingly, knew it.

"Where's your sister?" her father asked discontentedly.

"Upstairs, straightening her hair for dinner, I THINK." Martie was
sweetly responsive. "But I can find out, Pa."

"No matter. Here, take these things." Martie carried away the
overcoat and hat, and hung them on the hat rack in the hall.

"Joe Hawkes wants to know if you wish to pay him for driving you up,
Pa," Sally said, coming in from the steps. Dutifully, meekly, she
stood looking at her father. Lydia, coming in from the kitchen, gave
him a respectful yet daughterly kiss. Singly and collectively there
was no fault to be found with the Monroe girls to-night, even by the
most exacting parent.

"Your sister said you were upstairs, Sally," Malcolm said, narrowing
his eyes.

"So I was, Pa, but I came down to light the hall gas, and while I
was there Joe came to the door," Sally answered innocently.

"H'm! Well, you tell him to charge it." Malcolm sat down by the
fireplace. There was no fire, the evening was not cold enough for
one. He began to unlace his shoes. "Brother home?" he asked,
glancing from Lydia, who was filling the water glasses from a glazed
china pitcher, to Martie, who was dragging and pushing six chairs
into place.

"Not yet--no, sir!" the two girls said together unhesitatingly.
Leonard could take care of himself under his father's displeasure.
Martie added solicitously, "Would you like your slippers, Pa? I know
where they are; by the chestard."

He did not immediately answer, being indeed in no mood for a civil
response, and yet finding no welcome cause for grievance. He sat, a
lean, red-faced man, with a drooping black moustache, a high-bridged
nose, and grizzled hair, looking moodily about him.

"Get them--get them; don't stand staring there, Martie!" he burst
out suddenly. Martie caught up his shoes and dashed upstairs.

She went into the large, vault-like apartment that had been her
mother's bedroom for nearly thirty years. To a young and ardent
nature, facing the great question of loving and mating, any place
less indicative of the warmth and companionship of marriage could
hardly have been imagined. The bedstead of heavy redwood was wide,
flat, and hard. It was flanked by a marble-topped table and a chair.
There were two large, curtained bay windows in this room, too, a
faded carpet, a wash-stand with two pallid towels on the rack,
several other stiff-backed chairs, and a large bureau with a square
mirror and a brown marble slab. Over this slab a thin strip of
fringed scarf was laid, and on the scarf stood a brown satin box,
with the word "Gloves" painted over the yellow roses that ornamented
its cover.

This was all. Mrs. Monroe kept in the box an odd castor, an empty
cologne bottle, a new corset string, five coat buttons, a rusty pair
of scissors, an old jet bar-brooch whose pin was gone, and various
other small odds and ends. She had but one pair of gloves, of black
shiny kid, somewhat whitened at the finger-tips, and worn only to
church or to funerals. They were a sort of institution, "my gloves,"
and were kept in the bureau drawer. They distinguished her state
from that of Belle, the maid, who had no gloves at all.

Opposite the bureau, but because of the enormous size of the room,
some twenty-five feet away, was the "chestard" the high "chest of
drawers" that had won its name from the children's contracted
pronunciation. This bleak article of furniture contained the smaller
pieces of Malcolm Monroe's wardrobe, which matched in plainness and
ugliness that of his wife. Stiff white collars caught and rasped
when the shallow upper drawer was opened; the middle drawers were
filled with brownish gray flannels, and shirts stiff-bosomed and
limp of sleeves. But if a curious Martie, making the bed, or putting
away the "wash," ever cautiously tugged out the lowest drawer, she
found it so loaded with papers, old account books, and bundles of
letters as to awe her young soul. These meant nothing to Martie, and
the drawer was heavy to open noiselessly and awkward to close in
haste, yet at intervals now and then she liked to peep at its
mysterious contents.

To-night, however, Martie gave it neither glance nor thought. She
picked up her father's slippers and ran downstairs again, going to
kneel before him and put them on his feet. As she did so her young
warm hand felt the cool, slender length of his foot in the thin
stocking, and she was conscious of repugnance that even the
slightest contact with her father always caused her. There was a
definite antagonism between Malcolm and his youngest daughter,
suspected by neither. But Martie knew that she did not like the
faint odour of his moustache, his breath, and his skin, on those
rather infrequent occasions when he kissed her, and her father was
well aware that in baffling him, evading him, and anticipating him,
Martie was more annoying than the three other children combined.

"Where's your son?" asked the man of the house, as the dinner,
accompanied by his wife, came in from the kitchen.

"I don't know, Pa," Mrs. Monroe said earnestly yet soothingly.
"Come, girls. Come, Pa!"

Malcolm rose stiffly, and went to his place.

"He comes and goes as if his father's house was a hotel, does he?"
he asked, as one merely curious. "Is that the idea?"

"Why, no, Pa." Mrs. Monroe was serving an uninteresting meal on
heavy plates decorated in toneless brown. Soda crackers and sliced
bread were on the table, and a thin slice of butter on a blue china
plate. The teaspoons stood erect in a tumbler of red pressed glass.
The younger girls had old, thin silver napkin rings; their mother's
was of orange-wood with "Souvenir of Santa Cruz" painted on it; and
Lydia and her father used little strips of scalloped and embroidered
linen. Lydia had read of these in a magazine and had made them
herself, and as her daughterly love swept over all the surface
ugliness of his character, she alone among his children sometimes
caught a glimpse of her father's heart. She had an ideal of
fatherhood, had gentle, silent, useless Lydia--formed upon the
genial, sunshiny type of parent popular in books, and she cast a
romantic veil over disappointed, selfish, crossgrained Malcolm
Monroe and delighted in little daughterly attentions to him. She sat
next to him at table, and put her own kindly interpretation upon his
moods.

"I confess I don't understand your tactics with that boy!" he said
now irritably.

"Well, he came in after school, and asked could he go out with the
other boys, and I didn't feel you would disapprove, Pa," Mrs. Monroe
said in a worried voice. "Do eat your dinner before it gets all
cold! Lenny'll be here. You'll get one of your bad headaches ...
here he is!"

For, to the great relief of his mother and sisters, Leonard Monroe
really did break in from the hall at this point, flinging his cap
toward the hat rack with one hand as he opened the door with the
other. A big, well-developed boy of seventeen was Lenny, dearest of
all her children to his mother, her son and her latest-born, and the
secret hope of his father's heart.

"Say--I'm awful sorry to be so late. Gosh! I ran all the way home. I
thought you'd be on the late train, Pa, and I waited to walk up with
you!" said Lenny, falling upon cooling mutton, boiled potatoes
glazed and sticky, and canned corn.

"Where did you wait?" his father asked, laying one of his endless
traps for an untruth.

"Bonestell's," Lenny answered, perceiving and evading it.

"Young Hawkes drove me up," Malcolm said in a mollified tone.

"Oh?" Lenny's mouth opened innocently. "That's the way I missed
you!"

The inevitable ill-temper on their father's part being partly
dissipated by this time, the girls were free to begin a
conversation. Martie's happiness was flooding her spirit like a
golden tide; she was conscious, under all the sordid actualities of
a home dinner, that something sweet--sweet--sweet--had happened to
her. She bubbled news.

Grace Hawkes actually was going to work Monday--Rose was going back
to visit Alma--they had met Doc' Ben, hadn't they, Sally? Oh, and
Rodney Parker was home!

"Lucky stiff!" Lenny commented in reference to Rodney.

"He's awfully nice!" Martie said eagerly. "He walked up with us!"

"With us--with YOU!" Sally corrected archly.

"What time was that?" their father asked suddenly.

"About--oh, half-past four or five. Sally and I went down for the
mail."

"Rodney Parker ..." Leonard began. "Say, mama, this is all cold," he
interrupted himself to say coaxingly.

"I'll warm it for you, Babe," Lydia said, rising as her mother began
to rise, and reaching for the boy's plate.

"Don't call me BABE!" he protested.

His older sister gave his rough head a good-natured pat as she
passed him.

"You're all the baby we have, Lenny--and he was an awfully sweet
baby, wasn't he, ma?" she said.

"Rodney Parker's going to be in the Bank; I bet he doesn't stay,"
Leonard resumed. "Could you get me into the Bank, Pa?"

"Dear me--I remember that boy as such a handsome baby, before you
were born, Martie," her mother said. "And to think he's been through
college!"

"I wish I could go to college, you bet!" observed Lenny. His father
shot him a glance.

"Your grandfather was a college graduate, my son, and as you know
only an accident cut short my own stay at my alma mater--hem!" he
said pompously. "I have no money to throw away; yet, when you have
decided upon a profession, you need only come to your father with a
frank, manly statement of your plans, and what can be done will be
done; you know that." He wiped his moustache carefully, and glanced
about, meeting the admiring gaze of wife and daughters.

"If you've got any sense, you'll go, Len," Martie said. "I wish
you'd let me go study to be a trained nurse, Pa! Miss Fanny wants me
to go into the lib'ary. I bet I could do it, and I'd like it, too ..."

"And speaking of your grandfather reminds me," Malcolm said heavily,
"that one of the things that delayed me to-day was a matter that
came up a week or two ago. When the town buys the old Archer ranch
as a Park, they propose to put twelve thousand dollars into
improvements--"

"Oh, joy!" said Martie. "Excuse me, Pa!"

"The trolley will pass it," her father pursued, "the Park being
almost exactly half-way between Monroe and Pittsville. Now
Pittsville ..."

"What do you bet they get all the glory?" Martie flashed. "Their
Woman's Club..." Her voice fell: "I DO beg your pardon, Pa!" she
said again contritely.

"I can discuss this with your mother," Malcolm said in majestic
patience.

"Oh, no! PLEASE, Pa!"

Her father studied her coldly, while the table waited with bated
breath.

"Pittsville," he resumed in a measured voice, without moving his
eyes from his third daughter, "is, as usual, making a very strong
and a most undignified claim for the Park. They wish it to be known
as the Pittsville Casino. But Selwyn told me to-day that our people
propose to take a leading share of the liability and to call the
Park the Monroe Grove."

He paused. His listeners exchanged glances of surprise and
gratification.

"Not that there's a tree there now!" Martie said cheerfully.

It was an unfortunate speech, breaking irreverently as it did upon
this moment of exaltation. Lydia hastily came to Martie's relief.

"Pa! ISN'T that splendid--for Grandfather Monroe! I think that's
very nice. They know what this town would have amounted to without
HIM! All those fine reference books in the library--and files and
files of bound magazine's! And didn't he give the property for the
church?"

Every one present was aware that he had; there was enthusiastic
assent about the table.

"They propose," Malcolm added as a climax, "to erect a statue of
Leonard Monroe in a prominent place in that Park; my gift."

"Pa!" said a delighted chorus. The girls' shining eyes were moist.

"It was Selwyn's idea that there should be a fund for the cost of
the statue," their father said. "But as the town will feel the added
taxation in any case, I propose to make that my gift. The cost is
not large, the time limit for paying it indefinite."

"Twenty thousand dollars?" Martie, who had a passion for guessing,
ventured eagerly.

"Not so much." But Malcolm was pleased to have the reality so much
more moderate than the guess. "Between two and three thousand."

"Some money!" Leonard exclaimed. He grinned at Martie
contemptuously. "TWENTY!" said he.

"Your sister naturally has not much idea of the value of money,"
Malcolm said, with what was for him rare tolerance. "Yes, it is a
large sum, but I can give it, and if my townspeople turn to me for
this tribute to their most distinguished pioneer ..."

During the rest of the meal no other subject was discussed.

The evening was bright with memories and dreams for Martie. When a
large dish of stewed apples in tapioca had been eaten, the whole
family rose and left the room, and Belle, the little maid, came in
wearily, alone, to attack the disordered table. For two hours the
sound of running water and the dragging of Belle's heavy feet would
be heard in the kitchen. Meanwhile, Belle's mother, in a small house
down in the village, would keep looking at the clock and wondering
whatever had become of Belle, and Belle's young man would loiter
disconsolately at the bridge, waiting.

The three Monroe girls and their mother went into the parlour,
Malcolm going across the hall to a dreary library, where he had an
old-fashioned cabinet desk, and Lenny gaining a reluctant consent to
his request to go down to "Dutch's" house, where he and Dutch would
play lotto.

"Why doesn't Dutch Harrison ever come here to play lotto?" Martie
asked maliciously. "You go to Dutch's because it's right down near
Bonestell's and Mallon's and the Pool Parlour!" Leonard shot her a
threatening glance, accepted a half-permission, snatched his cap and
was gone.

The parlour was large, cold, and uncomfortable, its woodwork brown,
its walls papered in dark green. Lydia lighted the fire, and as
Leonard had made his escape, Belle brought up a supplementary hodful
of coal. Martie lighted two of the four gas jets, and settled down
to solitaire. Sally read "Idylls of the King." Lydia and her mother
began to sew, the older woman busy with mending a hopelessly worn
table-cloth, the younger one embroidering heavy linen with hundreds
of knots. Lydia had been making a parasol top for more than a year.
They gossiped in low, absorbed tones of the affairs of friends and
neighbours; the endless trivial circumstances so interesting to the
women of a small town.

There were two gas jets, also on hinged arms, beside the white
marble fireplace, and one of these Sally lighted, taking her
father's comfortable chair. A hood of thin plum-coloured flannel,
embroidered in coloured flowers, was on the mantel, with shells, two
pink glass vases, and a black marble clock. On the old square piano,
where yellowing sheets of music were heaped, there was a cover of
the same flannel. Albums and gift books, Schiller's "Bell" with
Flaxman plates, and Dante's "Inferno" with Dore's illustrations--lay
on the centre table; Martie pushed them back for her game.

She looked a mere overgrown, untidy girl, to whose hair, belt,
finger-nails, and shoes she might have attended with advantage. But
Martie was a bride to-night, walking the realm of Romance.

She had never had an admirer, nor had Sally. Neither girl admitted
it, but it was true. Poor Lydia had had a taste of the joy of life,
and a full measure of the sorrow, seven years ago, when Clifford
Frost, twelve years her senior, at thirty-one the perfect match, had
singled her out for his favour. Martie and Sally could remember how
pleasantly exciting it was to have Cliff Frost so much at the house,
how Lydia laughed and bloomed! Lydia had been just Sally then: her
age, and her double.

What had gone wrong, the younger girls sometimes wondered. Pa had
been pompous, of course; Cliff had not been made exactly
comfortable, here by this marble mantel. Lydia had quavered out her
happy welcome, her mother had fluttered and smiled. And Cliff had
given her candy, and taken her to the Methodist Bazaar and the Elks'
Minstrels, and had given her a fan. The candy was eaten long ago,
and the dance music and the concerts long forgotten in the village,
but Lydia still had the fan.

For a year, for two, for three, the affair went on. There was a
cloud in the sky before Mary Canfield came to visit Mrs. Frost, but
with her coming, joy died in Lydia's heart. Mary was made for
loving; Mary's mother and father and aunts and cousins all made it
easy for any man to fall in love with her. Mary danced, played the
piano, chattered French, changed from one pretty frock to another,
tirelessly. In short, Mary was a marketable product, and Lydia was
not.

Cliff came to tell Lydia that he and Mary were to be married, and
that she had always been his best pal, and that their friendship had
been one of the sweetest things in his life. He kissed her in
brotherly fashion when he went away. Mary, lovely in bridal silks,
came to call on Lydia a few months later, and to this day when she
met faded, sweet Miss Monroe, the happy little wife and mother would
stop in street or shop and display little Ruth's charms, and chat
graciously for a few minutes. She always defended Lydia when the
Frost and Parker factions lamented that the Monroe girls were
inclined to be "common."

Martie thought of none of these things to-night. She thought of
Rodney Parker, and her heart floated upon clouds of rose-coloured
delight. Dreamily manipulating the cards, she remembered that
twilight meeting. "Are you still a little devil, Martie ... I'm
going to find out." Again they were walking slowly toward the
bridge. "How many people have told you you've grown awfully pretty,
Martie? ... You and I'll get together on the lists. ..."

The girl stopped, with arrested fingers and absent eyes. The rapture
of remembering thrilled her young body like a breath of flame blown
against her. She breathed with deep, slow respirations, holding her
breath with a risen breast, and letting it go with a long sigh. Now
and then she looked with an ashamed and furtive glance from her
mother's gray head and Lydia's busy fingers to Sally's absorbed face
under the opaque white globe of the gaslight, almost as if she
feared that the enchantment that held heart and brain would be
visible to watching eyes.

"Mind you," Lydia was saying in a low tone, "Flora said that Lou
acted very queer, from the very moment she went in--Lou asked her if
she wanted to look at poor Mr. Lowney, and Flora went in, and he was
all laid out, with flowers and all, in that upstairs room where Al
died. Grandma Lowney was there, and--oh, quite a few others, coming
and going, Mrs. Mallon and the Baxter girls. Flora only stayed a
minute, and when she and Lou went out, she says, 'Lou, has Annie
Poett been here since he was taken sick?' and Lou began to cry and
said that her mother answered the telephone when Annie called up
last week, and it seems Annie asked was Joe Lowney sick and Mrs.
King said 'No.'"

"For heaven's sake!" Mrs. Monroesaid, incredulous and absorbed.

"Well, that's what Flora said. But mind you, Ma, on Tuesday night
little Hildegarde King went to the door, and she says that Annie
Poett came in and went upstairs--Lou was dishing supper, you know
the Allens and Mrs. Gorman were there for the funeral, and they were
all at table--and, by the way, Flora says that Lou says that Lizzie
Alien was there in that house for three days--that is, it was nearly
three days, for they stayed for supper Wednesday night--and that
Lizzie never raised her hand to ONE THING, just did nothing but sit
around and cry, and say what a good brother Joe was!"

"Did you ever!" commented Mrs. Monroe.

"Anyway, nobody got up from the table, and all they had for it was
Hildegarde's word, and she wasn't sure it was Annie. Grandma Lowney
was asleep--they'd gotten her to lie down; she took more care of Joe
than any one else, you know, and she sat up both nights. Clara
Baxter says she looks awful; she doesn't believe she'll get over
it."

"I shouldn't wonder!" said Mrs. Monroe with a click of
commiseration.

"Lou told Flora that the night Joe was dying, Grandma broke out and
said to Paul King that if Joe hadn't gone with him out to Deegan
Point two weeks ago, he never would have had that chill. But Flora
says ..."

The low voices went on and on, even after Malcolm Monroe came in,
thoroughly tired and a little chilly, to take his own chair by the
fire. Sally, deposed, came to sit opposite Martie, and idly watched
the solitaire.

"Isn't Rodney Parker nice?" Sally whispered cautiously, after a
while.

"I think he is!" Martie answered hardily; but the happy colour came
to her cheeks.

"I'll bet all the girls go crazy about him!" Sally submitted.

A faint pang of jealousy, a vague sense of helplessness, seized upon
Martie. He had been so cordially gay and delightful with her; would
he be that with all the girls? Would Florence Frost, three years
older than he, fall a victim to his charm as quickly as she, Martie,
had fallen? Martie had mentioned Florence Frost this afternoon, and
by subtle, instinctive, girlish reasoning had found consolation in
his reply. "She's my sister's friend; she's awfully smart, you know-
-books and all that!" Rodney honestly felt an entire indifference to
this admirable young neighbour, and Martie understood his remark as
meaning exactly that.

She went on with her patience, the particular game known as the
"Idle Year." Sometimes Sally touched or mentioned a card. Sometimes,
as a final problem presented itself, the girls consulted as to the
wisdom of this play or that. Between games Martie shuffled
vigorously, and they talked more freely.

"I think he's crazy about you," said Sally.

"Oh, Sally, don't be such a fool!"

"I'm not fooling. Look at the way he turned back and walked with us,
and he never took his eyes off you!" Sally, somewhat dashed for an
instant by Martie's well-assumed scorn, gained confidence now, as
the new radiance brightened her sister's face. "Why, Mart," she said
boldly, "there is such a thing as love at first sight!"

Love at first sight! Martie felt a sort of ecstatic suffocation at
the words. An uncontrollable smile twitched at her mouth, she
recommenced her game briskly. Her heart was dancing.

"Lissun; do you suppose Ma would ever let us have a party here?"
Martie presently ventured.

Sally pursed her lips and shook a doubtful head.

"Oh, but, Sally, I don't mean a real party, of course. Just about
twenty--" Martie began.

"Lemonade and cake?" Sally supplied.

"Well--coffee and sandwiches, Rodney seemed to think. And punch."

"Punch! Martie! You know Pa never would."

"I don't see why not," Martie said discontentedly, slapping down her
cards noisily. Sally spoke only the truth, yet it was an irritating
truth, and Martie would have preferred a soothing lie.

"What about music for dancing?" Sally asked, after a thoughtful
interval.

"Angela Baxter," Martie said with reviving hope.

"But she charges two dollars; at least she did for the Baptist
euchre."

"Well--that's not so much!"

"We could make those cute brown-bread sandwiches Rose had," Sally
mused, warming to the possibility. "And use the Canton set. Nobody
in town has china like ours, anyway!"

"Oh, Sally," Martie was again fired, "we could have creamed chicken
and sandwiches--that's all anybody ever wants! And it's so much
sweller than messy sherbets and layer cake. And we could decorate
the rooms with greens--"

"Our rooms are lovely, anyway!" Sally stated with satisfaction.

"Why, with the folding doors open, and fires in both grates, they
would be perfectly stunning!" Martie spoke rapidly, her colour
rising, her blue eyes glittering like stars. "Of course, the back
room isn't furnished, but we could scatter some chairs around in
there; we'll need all the room for dancing, anyway!"

"We couldn't dance on this carpet," Sally submitted, perplexed, as
she glanced at the parlour's worn floor-covering.

"No, but we could in the back room--that floor's bare--and in the
hall," Martie answered readily. You see it's the first of a sort of
set of dances; the next would be at the Frosts' or the Barkers', and
it would mean that we were right in things--"

"Oh, it would be lovely if we could do it!" Sally agreed with a
sigh. "Play the Queen on here, Martie, and then you'll have a
space."

"Do you propose to play that game much longer, girls?" their father
asked, looking patiently over his book.

"Are we disturbing you, Pa?" Martie countered politely.

"Well--but don't stop on my account. Of course the sound of cards
and voices isn't exactly soothing. However, go on with your game--go
on with your game! If I can't stand it, I'll go back to the
library."

"Oh, no, Pa, it's too cold in there; this is the time of year you
always get that cold in your nose," Mrs. Monroe said pleadingly.

"I was going right up, anyway," Sally said with an apologetic air
and a glance toward the door.

"I'll go, too!" Martie jumbled the cards together, and rose. "It's
nearly ten, anyway."

A moment later she and Sally went out of the room together. But
while Sally went straight upstairs, to light the bedroom gas, fold
up the counterpane, and otherwise play the part of the good sister
she was, Martie noiselessly opened the side door and stepped out for
a breath of the sweet autumn night.

There was a spectacularly bright moon, somewhere; Martie could not
see it, but beyond the sunken garden she caught glimpses of silvery
brightness on the roofs of Monroe. Even here, under the dark trees,
pools of light had formed and the heavy foliage was shot with shafts
of radiance. A strong wind was clicking the eucalyptus leaves
together, and carrying bits of rubbish here and there about the
yard. Martie could hear voices, the barking of dogs, and the whine
of the ten o'clock trolley, down in the village.

The gate slammed. Leonard came in.

"Pa tell you to watch for me?" he asked fearfully.

"No." Martie, sitting on the top step and hugging her knees,
answered indifferently. "It's not ten yet. What you been doing?"

"Oh, nothing!" Len passed her and went in.

As a matter of fact, he had called for his chum, sauntered into the
candy store for caramels, joined the appreciative group that watched
a drunken man forcibly ejected from Casserley's saloon, visited the
pool room and witnessed a game or two, gone back into the street to
tease two hurrying and giggling girls with his young wit, and
drifted into a passing juggler's wretched and vulgar show. This, or
something like this, was what Len craved when he begged to "go out
for a while" after dinner. It was sometimes a little more
entertaining, sometimes less so; but it spelled life for the
seventeen-year-old boy.

He could not have described this to Martie, even had he cared to do
so. She would not have understood it. But she felt a vague yearning,
too, for lights and companionship and freedom, a vague envy of
Leonard.

The world was out there, beyond the gate, beyond the village. She
was in it, but not of it. She longed to begin to live, and knew not
how. Ten years before she had been only a busy, independent, happy
little girl; turning to her mother and sister for advice, obeying
her father without question. But Pa and Lydia, and Len with his
egotism, and Ma with her trials, were nothing to Martie now. In
battle, in pestilence, or after a great fire, she would have risen
head and shoulders above them all, would have worked gloriously to
reestablish them. She supposed that she loved them dearly. But so
terrible was the hunger of her heart for her share of life--for
loving, serving, planning, and triumphing--that she would have swept
them all aside like cobwebs to grasp the first reality flung her by
fate.

Not to stagnate, not to smother, not to fade and shrink like Lydia--
like Miss Fanny at the library, and the Baxter girls at the post-
office! Every healthy young fibre of Martie's soul and body rebelled
against such a fate, but she could not fully sense the barriers
about her, nor plan any move that should loosen her bonds. Martie
believed, as her parents believed, that life was largely a question
of "luck." Money, fame, friends, power, to this man; poverty and
obscurity and helplessness to that one. Wifehood, motherhood, honour
and delight to one school girl; gnawing, restless uselessness to the
next. "I only hope you girls are going to marry," their mother would
sometimes say plaintively; "but I declare I don't know who--with all
the nice boys leaving town the way they do! They combine to make
an ascent of the Wetterhorn under Ralph's leadership. Early in the
climb Ralph discovers that Sir Ernest Scrivener is none other
than his own mortal foe, Marmaduke Moorsdyke.

A perilous traverse of a glacier has to be undertaken. All cross
in safety except Sir Ernest, who makes imprudent remark which causes
a line of overhanging_ séracs _to collapse upon him and sweep
him down the glacier. Ralph dives unhesitatingly to the rescue of his
deadliest foe._]
Rather than face a second traverse of the awful glacier the
remaining members of the party continued the ascent. With shaken
nerves they pressed on to the best of their ability, but it was
nearly dark when they at length reached the summit, hoping to find
another and easier route to the foot.

But luck was against them. A devastating blizzard enveloped
them, and they lay huddled together behind a rock, chilled to the
bone by the driving particles of ice and snow.

"There is no escape," said Lord Tamerton mournfully to his sister,
Lady Margaret.

"We must prepare to meet our deaths like true mountaineers."

"True fiddlesticks!" replied Lady Margaret with spirit. "Ralph will
come back to us."
"Do you love him, Madge?" asked her brother.

"Yes," she replied simply.

"Then he will surely come back."
Even as he spoke a tall figure loomed out of the blizzard and raised
his hat with cold formality.

"Your cousin is safe in the hospital at Interlaken," said Ralph,
addressing Lord Tamerton with marked constraint.

"He has merely sustained a fractured patella. With your permission we
will now descend."
"What is the matter, Ralph?" cried Lady Margaret pleadingly; but,
ignoring her question, he busied himself in tying on the rope.

The descent which followed is still spoken of with bated breath by the
Swiss guides, than whom there is no more generous body of men in the
world.

Unerringly Ralph led his companions through arêtes, glissades,
bergschrunds, rücksacs, gendarmes, vorwaerts, couloirs, aiguilles,
never hesitating, never flinching from any obstacle, heedless, it
seemed, alike of the raging blizzard and the ever-thickening darkness.

At times he was obliged to carry the others one by one along razor
edges of hard blue ice.

At times he would cling precariously by one hand to a projecting
splinter of rock, while with the other he lowered them all bodily
into the depths of a crevasse, gripping his ice-axe meanwhile
steadfastly between his teeth.

Once at least he was compelled to hang downwards by his toes while
he hewed steps beneath him in a perpendicular wall of ice. And
through it all his face retained its stern impassivity and he
addressed no word to his exhausted companions.

At length the most wonderful feat in the history of climbing was
finished, and the party, weary but thankful, stood at the
foot of the mountain.

The three guides fell on their knees before their rescuer, but
he ignored them and turned his cold, hard gaze upon Lady
Margaret.

"You are now safe," he said icily. "My presence is no longer
necessary.
Take the third turning on the left, the second on the right and the
fifth on the left, and then ask again.

Before I leave I ought perhaps to congratulate you upon your approaching
marriage to your--er--amiable cousin;" and without waiting for a
reply he was gone

.

* * * * *

Alone, Ralph Wonderson sat upon a rock and reflected that no food
had passed his lips since that hurried breakfast in the Fahrjoch
Hut.

Wearily he drew out a packet of sandwiches from his pocket.

A moment later he was racing back to his former companions. In his
day he had been half-mile champion, but now he knocked a full
minute off his previous best time.

He found the others as he had left them. Lady Margaret looked up
with a glad cry as he flew round the corner.

"Madge," he cried, waving the piece of newspaper which had been
wrapped round his sandwiches,--"Madge, you _can't_ marry him!"

Lord Tamerton leaped forward with a white face. "What do you mean?"
he hissed. "You are mad. She _must_ marry him, or the family is
ruined."
"She _can't_ marry him," repeated Ralph calmly. "Sir Ernest Scrivener
_alias_ Marmaduke Moorsdyke is married already! Read this."
And he thrust the fragment of newspaper into Lord Tamerton's hand.

With a low cry of content Lady Margaret fell into her lover's arms.
"Oh, my dear!" she murmured.

And as they stood clasped in a close embrace the clouds parted
and far, far above them appeared the beautiful white summit of the
Wetterhorn shining dazzlingly in the sunlight.

* * * * *
Illustration: "BUSINESS AS USUAL DURING ALTERATIONS."
* * * * *
SPIT FOR SPAT.

Orator, in Hyde Park:--
"An' when the German Ambassador left St. Petersburg 'e spat in the
Russian Ambassador's face. An' the Russian Ambassador in Berlin
'e spat in the German Ambassador's face.

"
* * * * *
IN ORDER OF MERIT?

"Full reports of the Petersfield Gymkhana, Eastmeon Show, and Liphook
Horticultural Exhibition and Sports, will be published in to-morrow's
issue of the 'Hampshire Telegraph and Post,' which will contain also
a complete record of news of the Great European War."

--_Portsmouth Evening News._
* * * * *
The following letter was addressed to a Hong Kong chaplain by his
orderly:--
"Pleas sur excuse me this morning for I ham sitting for my examining
asion at the peak schools for my certificate sur and I will be down
as soon as possible sur to deliver the letters sur And if I ant
there before you go away sur put the keys under the steeps sur."

We feel confident he passed all right.

* * * * *

ON ACTIVE SERVICE.

Every August Bank Holiday we have a short Mixed Open Tournament at our
lawn-tennis club. It's quite a small, homely affair, but as our
President, Sir Benjamin Boogles, always offers two valuable prizes
(hall-marked), every member who can possibly enter does so.

Each year hitherto the Tournament has been finished in the one day;
but this year it is not finished yet--in fact, in one instance the
first game of the first set is still undecided, and the winners in
the other sets are anxiously awaiting the result in order that the
second round may proceed before the end of the season.

As I am one of the actors--I might almost say the protagonist--in
this protracted drama, I will explain the position.

Wilbrooke, our crack player, who can easily give most of us forty and
a bonus of five games in the set, and still beat us, recently
became engaged to Pattie Blobson, who is a hopeless rabbit at the
game, this being her first season.

Not unnaturally she insisted on his entering the Tournament with her.
I always enter with Joan, and though we are neither of us exactly
rabbits it would be rather hard to find a zoological term that
would fittingly describe our standard of play.

Of course there is no handicapping in "Opens," and Joan and I usually
reckon to be knocked out in the second round at latest, though we
did once get into the third round owing to one of our opponents, a
doctor, being summoned to a case in the middle of play.

Now this year we both thought our tennis would be over for the day
after the first quarter of an hour, as we were drawn to play our
first round against Wilbrooke and Pattie.

However, I won the toss, and to that fact the subsequent _impasse_
may be attributed. I elected to serve first, leaving Wilbrooke
the choice of sides.

The sun was not shining, so there was little in it from the point
of view of light; but the east end of the court is just a trifle
higher than the other, so he chose that.

I served first, and though I never peg them in to rabbits, I felt
justified in sending down a medium-paced ball in my partner's
interests.
It pitched correctly, broke (unintentionally) and buried itself in
Pattie's skirt.

Fifteen-love.

I banged my first ball to Wilbrooke with all my might. It fell within
the Club precincts, but that's the best I can urge for it.

My second was an easy lob, which he smashed, and, in spite of my
efforts to give it a clear path, it caught me in the small
of the back.

Fifteen-all.

My next serve to Pattie was a fault, which I followed up with an
ordinary "donkey" drop, towards which she rushed in the impetuous
fashion characteristic of the genuine rabbit, with the result that
it bounced scathless over her head.

Thirty-fifteen.

I then got a fast ball over to Wilbrooke, but returning it was child's
play to him, and he drove it like lightning down the centre-line
before I had time to call "Leave it to you, partner."

Thirty-all.

Again I served Pattie a fault. At the second attempt the ball performed
Blondin tricks on the wire of the net, and for one of those "moments
big as years" I feared we had lost the game, the service to Wilbrooke
being a mere formality; but fortunately the ball fell the other
side of the net, and my third delivery Pattie tipped to the
wicket-keeper.

Forty-thirty.

I now determined to send two--if necessary--fast ones to Wilbrooke
on the chance that one might shoot and be unplayable. But my
first ball went into the net, and the _locale_ of the second can
only be dimly surmised, for it went over the fence into the open
country.

Deuce.

It was at this point that I began to realize that so long as I did
not serve a double-fault to Pattie, Wilbrooke could never win
the game, and when we had played nine more deuces I communicated
the intelligence to Joan. Meanwhile, the other sets had all finished,
and the players came up to see why we were still hard at it.

At the twenty-fourth deuce the Tournament secretary remarked: "Last
game, I suppose? Hurry up, we can't get on." I explained to him
that this was only the first game of the set, and that similar
prolongations were likely to recur when my partner served in the
third game and I again in the fifth.

The news spread rapidly, and for a time we were the most unpopular
quartet in the Club; but by the time we had reached our eighty-third
deuce, and luncheon (the gift of Lady Boggles) was served, hunger
and anger began to abate simultaneously, and the situation was
discussed with humour to the exclusion of all other topics.

At the end of the morning's play I was certainly feeling a trifle
done up, but it says much for the recuperative properties of chicken
galantine and junket that after the interval I felt quite invigorated
and good for service _ad infinitum_.

Efforts were made to induce us to toss for the set, but neither of
us would consent to this, Wilbrooke maintaining that under normal
conditions I could not possibly win the game, and I arguing that
under existing conditions--with which I was more intimately
concerned--I could not possibly lose it, and therefore to toss would
be a mockery.

Thus there was no alternative but to play on.

I suggested to Joan that as her presence on the court was not
strictly essential she should join in a friendly set with some of
the other unemployed.

But she would not hear of it. She wanted to be in at the finish,
if there was ever going to be a finish, she said; and so we
continued.

When we were summoned to tea (kindly provided gratis by Miss Vera
Boogles) we had amassed 265 deuces, and though my right arm ached
and my service was a trifle wobbly I was still scoring the vantage
point (and losing it at once) with the utmost regularity.

But the temporary cessation of hostilities, associated with about
half-a-pound of Swiss roll and three Chelsea buns, served to restore
me, and after tea we went at it again until half-past seven, when,
with the score at 394 deuces, the net got tired and collapsed, and
we adjourned.

We have since met on every available evening in our endeavours to
bring the game to a conclusion; but the score is still deuce, and
at that it will probably remain unless one of the following
contingencies arises:--
(1) Pattie may improve so much with the constant practice that she
will be able to return my service; in which case it will settle
the game, for wherever we put the ball Wilbrooke is bound to get
hold of it and drive or smash it so that we can't return it

.

(2) I may serve Pattie a double-fault. But I am now in splendid
training; my right biceps is like a cricket-ball, and I feel that
I could serve all day without tiring.

Besides, the quality of my service is improving, which counteracts,
in a measure, the possible improvement in Pattie's game.

(3) We may get a bright sunshiny evening, when the sun will be
straight in Wilbrooke's eyes; in which case, with my improved service,
I may possibly get a fast ball over which he will be unable to
see.

Anyway, it is now certain that I belong to the Bulldog Breed.

* * * * *
Sir ERNEST SHACKLETON as reported in _The Evening News_:--
"The last articles which we took on board were two gramophones with
a large number of records and a case of hyacinth blubs."
The last-named are often mistaken for spring onions by those who come
too near with their lachrymal nerves

.

* * * * *
Illustration: A SONG FOR THE HOLIDAYS.

"WHERE MY CARAVAN HAS RESTED

."
* * * * *

OUR BOOKING-OFFICE.

(_By Mr. Punch's Staff of Learned Clerks._)
As in the enervating luxury of peace, so in the stern stringency
of war we have always a use, and a good use too, for the humourist.
But he must be a jester of the right sort; not bitter nor flippant,
not over boisterous nor too "intellectual." Humour for humour's
sake is what we want, and in these anxious hours something to make
us laugh quietly and unhysterically, if only by way of temporary
relief. Mr. IAN HAY hits the mark about eight times in every
ten in _A Knight on Wheels_ (HODDER AND STOUGHTON), which is not
at all a bad proportion for three hundred and nineteen pages. He
has some delightful ideas, which, happily, he does not overwork: a
case in point is the brief but rapid career of _Uncle Joseph_, who
employs the most criminal methods in order to attain the most
charitable ends.

The story is a simple one--youth, laughter and love; and the motor
car plays an important but not a tiresome part in it. The author's
attitude towards women is slightly cynical but very lighthearted, and
clearly he loves them all the time: indeed, I think Mr. HAY, while
alive to existing faults, loves everything and everybody.
In return most people will be prepared to love him. And he deserves
to be loved for the sake of a book which has a happy beginning, a
happy middle and a happy end, together with lots of incidental
laughter.

* * * * *
"There is a teacup storm in the Close, I hear. The Dean altered the
time of closing the Minster for summer cleaning or some such
trifle, and did not consult the Chapter, which had already made its
holiday arrangements." This sentence, chosen at random from
_Quisquiliae_, the diary of _Henry Savile_, will do well enough
to support my contention that _Dr.

Ashford and His Neighbours_ (MURRAY) is going to be a great boon to
the cathedral cities of our Midland shires. Under the form of a
narrative of social life in Sunningwell, Dr. WARRE CORNISH has
elected to arrange his views on religion, art, literature,
politics and the questions of the day, sometimes putting them into
the mouths of his characters and sometimes into the note-book of the
afore-mentioned _Henry Savile_, a leisured cripple whose disquisitions
on letters and on people are, if a trifle rambling, at any rate
delightfully critical and much more interesting and profound than
certain others which flow periodically from the windows of cloistered
retreats. _Mr. Henry Savile_ quotes from the Classics perhaps a
little too freely for the taste of a decadent age, and his friends,
_Dr.

Ashford, Lady Grace_, the bishop's wife, _Olive_, her niece, and
_Philip Daly_, nephew of an archdeacon and parliamentary
candidate for Sunningwell, would be a little more amusing if they
were treated in a more Trollopian manner, and did not so faithfully
discuss the burning controversies of the time. But, after all, the
great excitement in _Dr. Ashford and His Neighbours_ (and I really
cannot advise any resident in--shall we say Mercia?--to be without
it) is the chance it affords for such questions as: Who is the
Dean? Does the author really mean Canon X?

Are we living in Sunningwell, or is it L----?

Even I myself, in this metropolitan backwater, have made one or
two ingenious guesses, but wild taxicabs would not drag them from
me.

* * * * *
At this time of day to attempt criticism upon a new novel by MISS
RHODA BROUGHTON seems almost impertinent. The tens of thousands
to whom she has given such pleasure before now would probably be
willing to read anything that was put before them with the guarantee
of her name.

Fortunately in the case of _Concerning a Vow_ (STANLEY PAUL) this
confidence would be by no means misplaced.

I can say at once, with my hand upon my reviewer's heart, that in
freshness and vivacity and power of sprightly character-drawing
here is a story that need fear comparison with none of its most
popular predecessors. The vow of the title was that exacted by
_Meg Champneys_ on her death-bed from her sister _Sally_, binding
the latter not to marry _Edward Branley_.

_Edward_, in some fashion that was never made quite clear to me, had
previously jilted both the sisters. But this all happened before
the beginning of the book. In it poor _Edward_ is made so pitiable
and heart-broken a figure that I found it hard to credit his previous
infidelities.
However, most of the other characters detested him, and said that
nothing was too bad for him; and as they themselves were delightful
and quite human people I am ready to suppose that they had their
reasons. Of course _Edward_ and _Sally_ were really in love all
the time, and of course too they find resistance to this impossible;
though I must own that their method of circumventing the vow reminded
me dangerously of the young man who used a cigarette-holder because
he had been told to keep away from tobacco.

I speak flippantly; but as a matter of fact the story of _Edward_
and _Sally_ is not free from tragedy, very simply and movingly
told.

If _Concerning a Vow_ does not add to Miss BROUGHTON'S popularity
it will only be because this is impossible; it certainly will do
nothing to lessen it

.

* * * * *
Illustration: _Barber_ (_to victim._) "WHAT IS YOUR OPINION OF THE
AEROPLANE AS A MILITARY ASSET?"

* * * * *

I think that Mr. W. R. TITTERTON is a little late in the day; his
book, _Me as a Model_ (PALMER), recalls happy memories of that past
and already romantic period when _Trilby_ was the talk of the
hour and Paris the centre of all Bohemian licence.

Mr. TITTERTON has the DU MAURIER manner, but his jocular
skittishness, aided by asterisks, exclamation marks and suspensive
dots, has curiously little behind it.

It is not enough to-day to paint the gay impropriety of models and
the devil-may-care penury of lighthearted artists.

_Trilby_ began the movement, _Louise_ ended it, and Mr. TITTERTON
is behind his day. I am glad, however, to learn that he was so
splendid a model.

The students at JULIEN'S fall back aghast before his magnificent
figure, and now, in every gallery in Europe, sculptures and paintings
of Mr. TITTERTON are to be seen by the vulgar crowd, very often for
no charge at all; and that, of course, is delightful for Europe.
And, according to his title, that is doubtless the final impression
that the author wishes to convey.

I intend on my next trip abroad to search for Mr. TITTERTON in all
the galleries. My only means of discovery are the pictures of the
author with which his book is filled, and here, if the illustrator
(a very clever fellow) is to be trusted, I am frankly puzzled by
the attitude at JULIEN'S towards their model. There is very
little in these illustrations to justify it.

* * * * *

If I am not mistaken, _The Jam Queen_ (METHUEN) marks the first
incursion of Miss NETTA SYRETT into humorous fiction. In that, or
any, case, she has written a story which deserves a considerable
success.
_The Jam Queen_ is to a large extent what would be called in drama
a one-part affair.

There are plenty of other characters, many of them drawn with
much unforced skill, but the personality of the protagonist, the Jam
Queen herself, overshadows the rest. _Mrs. Quilter_ is an abiding
joy. There have been plutocratic elderly women, uneducated but
agreeable, in a hundred novels before this; but I recall few that
have been treated so honestly or with so much genuine sympathy.

Mind you, Miss SYRETT is no sentimentalist. Ill-directed philanthropy,
Girtonian super-culture, the simple life with its complexities
of square-cut gowns and bare feet--all these come beneath the
lash of a satire that is delicate but unsparing. Yet with it all
she has, as every good satirist should have, a quick appreciation
of the good qualities of her victims.
Even _Frederick_, the pious, as contrasted with the flippant,
nephew of aunt _Quilter--Frederick_, with his futile institute for
people who want none of it, his blind pedantry, and his actual
dishonesty in what he considers a worthy cause--even he is punished
no further than his actual deserving.

Perhaps in telling you that _Mrs. Quilter_ has two nephews, an
idle and an industrious one, I have told you enough of the scheme.
It is, after all, no great matter. _Mrs. Quilter_ must be the reason
for your reading the book, and your reward.
He laughed heartily at the mere idea that
the attentions of Graham Parker's son might be construed as a
compliment to a Monroe, and sarcastically rebuked Lydia when, on a
Sunday afternoon, she somewhat stealthily made preparations for tea.
Martie and Rod were walking, and Martie, before she went, had said
something vague about coming back at half-past four.

Lydia, abashed, gave up her plan for tea. But she did what she could
for Martie, by inveigling her father into a walk. Martie and Rod
came into an empty house, for Sally was out, no one knew where, and
Mrs. Monroe had gone to church where vespers were sung at four
o'clock through the winter.

Martie's colour was high from fast walking in the cold wind, her
eyes shone like sapphires, and her loosened hair, under an old
velvet tam-o'-shanter cap, made a gold aureole about her face.
Rodney, watching her mount the little hill to the graveyard with a
winter sunset before her, had called her "Brunhilde," and he had
been talking of grand opera as they walked home.

Enchanted at finding the house deserted, she very simply took him
into the kitchen. The kettle was fortunately singing over a sleeping
fire; Rodney sliced bread and toasted it, while Martie, trying to
appear quite at her ease, but conscious of awkward knees and elbows
just the same, whisked from pantry to kitchen busily, disappearing
into the dining room long enough to lay the tea cups and plates at
one end of the big table.

Only a few moments before the little feast was ready, Lydia came
rather anxiously into the kitchen. She greeted Rodney smilingly,
seizing the first opportunity for an aside to say to Martie:

"Pa's home, Mart. And he doesn't like your having Rod out here. I
walked him up to the Tates', but no one was home except Lizzie.
Shame! He saw Rodney's cap in the hall--he's in the dining room."
Aloud she said cheerfully: "I think this is dreadful--making you
work so hard, Rod. Come--tea's nearly ready. You and I'll wait for
it in the dining room, like the gentleman and lady we are!"

"Oh, I'm having a grand time!" Rodney laughed. But he allowed
himself to be led away. A few minutes later Martie, with despair in
her heart, carried the loaded tray into the dining room.

Her father, in one of his bad moods, was sitting by the empty
fireplace. The room, in the early autumn twilight, was cold. Len had
come in and expected his share of the unfamiliar luxury of tea, and
more than his share of the hot toast.

Rodney, unaffected by the atmosphere, gaily busied himself with the
tray. Lydia came gently in with an armful of light wood which she
laid in the fireplace.

"There is no necessity for a fire," Malcolm said. "I wouldn't light
that, my dear."

"I thought--just to take the chill off," Lydia stammered.

Her father shook his head. Lydia subsided.

"We shall be having supper shortly, I suppose?" he asked patiently,
looking at a large gold watch. "It's after half-past five now."

"But, Pa," Lydia laughed a little constrainedly, "we never have
dinner until half-past six!"

"Oh, on week days--certainly," he agreed stiffly. "On Sundays,
unless I am entirely wrong, we sit down before six."

"Len," Martie murmured, "why don't you go make yourself some toast?"

"Don't have to!" Len laughed with his mouth full.

"Here--I'll go out and make some more!" Rodney said buoyantly,
catching up a plate. Lydia instantly intervened; this would not do.
Pa would be furious. Obviously Martie could not go, because in her
absence Pa, Rodney, and Len would either be silent, or say what was
better unsaid. Lydia herself went out for a fresh supply of toast.

Martie was grateful, but in misery. Lydia was always slow. The
endless minutes wore away, she and Rodney playing with their empty
plates, Len also waiting hungrily, her father watching them
sombrely. If Len hadn't come in and been so greedy, Martie thought
in confused anger, tea would have been safely over by this time; if
Pa were not there glowering she might have chattered at her ease
with Rodney, no tea hour would have been too long. As it was, she
was self-conscious and constrained. The clock struck six. Really it
WAS late.

The toast came in; Sally came in demurely at her mother's side. She
had rushed out of the shadows to join her mother at the gate, much
to Mrs. Monroe's surprise. Conversation, subdued but general,
ensued. Martie walked boldly with Rodney to the gate, at twenty
minutes past six, and they stood there, laughing and talking, for
another ten minutes.

When she went in, it was to face unpleasantness. Her mother, with
her bonnet strings dangling, was helping Lydia hastily to remove
signs of the recent tea party. Sally was in the kitchen; Len reading
opposite his father.

"Come here a minute, Martie," her father called as I the girl
hesitated in the hallway. Martie came in and eyed him. "I would like
to know what circumstances led to young Parker's being here this
afternoon?" he asked.

"Why--we were walking, and I--I suppose I asked him, Pa."

"You SUPPOSE you asked him?"

"Well--I DID ask him."

"Oh, you DID ask him; that's different. You had spoken to your
mother about it?"

"No." Martie swallowed. "No," she said again nervously. There was a
silence while her father eyed her coldly.

"Then you ask whom you like to the house, do you? Is that the idea?
You upset your mother's and your sister's arrangement entirely at
your own pleasure?" he suggested presently.

"I didn't think it was so much to ask a person to have a cup of
tea!" Martie stammered, with a desperate attempt at self-defense.
She felt tears pressing against her eyes. Lydia would have been
meek, Sally would have been meek, but Martie's anger was her nearest
weapon. It angered her father in turn.

"Well, will you kindly remember in future that your ideas of what to
ask, and what not to ask, are not the ideas by which this house is
governed?" Malcolm asked magnificently.

"Yes, sir." Martie stirred as if to turn and go.

"One moment," Malcolm said discontentedly. "You thoroughly
understand me, do you?"

"Yes, sir." Martie's eyes met Len's discreetly raised over the edge
of his book and full of reproachful interest. She went into the
kitchen.

The spell of a nervous silence which had held the dining room was
broken. Mrs. Monroe and Lydia talked in low tones as they went to
and fro; Len shifted his position; Sally coming in with a plate of
sliced bread hummed contentedly. Martie appeared in her usual place
at supper, not too subdued to win a laugh even from her father with
some vivacious imitation of Miss Tate rallying the children for
Sunday School. Happiness was bubbling like a spring in her heart.

After dinner, the dishes being piled in the sink to greet Belle on
Monday morning, she went to the piano and crashed into "Just a Song
at Twilight," and "Oh, Promise Me," and "The Two Grenadiers." These
and many more songs were contained in a large, heavy album entitled
"Favourite Songs for the Home." Martie had a good voice; not better
than Sally's or Lydia's, but Sally and Lydia rarely sang. Martie had
sung to her own noisy accompaniment since she was a child; she loved
the sound of her own voice. She had a hunger for accomplishment,
rattled off the few French phrases she knew with an unusually pure
accent, and caught an odd pleasing word or an accurate pronunciation
eagerly on the few occasions when lecturers or actors in Monroe gave
her an opportunity.

To-night her father, in his library, heard the sweet, true tones of
her voice in "Lesbia" and "Believe Me," and remembered his mother
singing those same old songs. But when a silence followed he
remembered only faulty Martie, awkwardly making Rodney Parker
welcome at the most inconvenient time her evil genius could have
suggested, and he presently went into the sitting room with the
familiar scowl on his face.

On the next Sunday Rodney hired a Roman-nosed, rusty white horse at
Beetman's, and for two hours he and Martie drove slowly about. They
drove up past the Poor House to the Cemetery, and into the Cemetery
itself, where black-clad forms were moving slowly among the graves.
The day was cold, with a bleak wind blowing; the headstones looked
bare and forlorn.

At half-past three, driving down the Pittsville road, back toward
Monroe, Rodney said:

"Why don't you come and have tea at our house, Martie?"

Martie's heart rose on a great spring.

"Why--would your mother--" She stopped short, not knowing quite how
to voice her hesitation. Had she expressed exactly what was in her
mind she might have said: "First, won't your mother and sisters snub
me? And secondly, is it quite correct, from a conventional
standpoint, for me to accept your casual invitation?"

"Sure. Mother'll be delighted--come on!" Rodney urged.

"I'd love to!" Martie agreed.

"You know, the beauty about you, Martie, is that you're such a good
pal," Rodney said enthusiastically as he drove on. "I've always
wanted a pal. You and I like the same things; we're both a little
different from the common run, perhaps--I don't want to throw any
flowers at us, but that's true--and it's wonderful to me that living
here in this hole all your life you're so up-to-date--so darned
intelligent!"

This was nectar to Martie's soul. But she had never been indulged so
recklessly in personalities before, and she did not quite know how
to meet them. She wanted to say the right thing, to respond
absolutely to his mood; a smile, half-deprecating, half-charmed,
fluttered on her lips when Rodney talked in this fashion, but even
to herself her words seemed ill-chosen and clumsy. A more
experienced woman, with all of Martie's love and longing surging in
her heart, would have vouchsafed him just that casual touch of hand
on hand, that slight, apparently involuntary swerve of shoulder
against shoulder that would have brought the boy's arms about her,
his lips to hers.

It was her business in life to make him love her; the only business
for which her mother and father had ever predestined her. But she
knew nothing of it, except that no "nice" girl allowed a boy to put
his arm about her or kiss her unless they were engaged. She knew
that girls got into "trouble" by being careless on these matters,
but what that trouble was, or what led to it, she did not know. She
and Sally innocently believed that some mysterious cloud enveloped
even the most staid and upright girl at the touch of a man's arm, so
that of subsequent events she lost all consciousness. A girl might
attract a man by words and smiles to the point of wishing to marry
her, but she must never permit the slightest liberties, she must
indeed assume, to the very day of her marriage, that the desire for
marriage lived in the heart of the man alone.

Martie never dreamed that the youth and sex within her had as
definite a claim on her senses as hunger had in the hour before
dinner time, or sleep had when she nodded over her solitaire at
night. But she drank in enchantment with Rodney's voice, his
laughter, his nearness, and the night was too short for her dreams
or the days for her happiness.

They left the Roman-nosed horse and the surrey at Beetman's livery
stable, a damp and odorous enclosure smelling of wet straw, and with
the rear quarters of nervous bay horses stirring in the stalls. The
various men, smoking and spitting there in the Sunday afternoon
leisure, knew Martie and nodded to her; knew who her companion was.

Martie and Rodney walked down South California Street, into the
town's nicest quarter, and passed the old-fashioned wooden houses,
set far back in bare gardens: the Wests' with its wooden palings;
the Clifford Frosts', with a hooded baby carriage near the side
door; and the senior Frosts', a dark red house shut in by a dark red
fence. The Barkers' house was the last in the row, rambling, ugly,
decorated with knobs and triangles of wood, with many porches, with
coloured glass frames on its narrow windows, yet imposing withal,
because of its great size and the great trees about it. Martie had
not been there since her childhood, in the days before Malcolm
Monroe's attitude on the sewer and street-lighting questions had
antagonized his neighbours, in the days when Mrs. Frost and Mrs.
Parker still exchanged occasional calls with Martie's mother.

The girl found strangely thrilling Rodney's familiarity here. He
crossed the porch, opened the unlocked front door, and led Martie
through a large, over-furnished hall and a large, stately drawing
room. The rugs, lamps, chairs, and tables all belonged to entirely
different periods, some were Mission oak, some cherry upholstered in
rich brocade; there was a little mahogany, some maple, even a single
handsome square chair of teakwood from the Orient. On the walls
there were large crayon portraits made from photographs of the
girls, and there were cushions everywhere, some of fringed leather,
some of satin painted or embroidered, some of cigar ribbons of clear
yellow silk, some with college pennants flaunting across them.

Beyond this room was another large one, looking out on the lawn and
the shabby willows at the side of the house. Into this room the more
favoured one had been casting off its abandoned fineries for many
years. There were more rugs, pillows, lamps, and chairs in here, but
it was all more shabby, and the effect was pleasanter and softer.
Ida's tea table stood by the hearth, with innovations such as a
silver tea-ball, and a porcelain cracker jar decorated with a rich
design in the minutely cut and shellacked details of postage stamps.
A fire winked sleepily behind the polished steel bars of the grate,
the western window was full of potted begonias and ferns, the air
was close and pleasantly scented with the odour of a good cigar.

Judge Parker, a genial man looking more than his fifty-five years,
sat alone, smoking this cigar, and Martie, greeting him prettily,
was relieved to find that she must not at once face the ladies of
the house. Rather uncertainly she took off her hat, but did not
remove the becoming blue sweater. She sat erect in a low,
comfortable armchair whose inviting curves made her rigid attitude
unnatural and difficult, and talked to the Judge. The old man liked
all fresh young girls, and laughing with her, he vaguely wondered in
his hospitable heart why Monroe's girls were not more often at the
house.

Ida and May, tall, colourless young women, presently came down. They
noticed Martie's shoe-lacings and the frill of muddy petticoat, the
ungloved hands and the absurdity of her having removed her hat, and
told Rodney about these things later. At the time they only made her
uncomfortable in quiet little feminine ways; not hearing her when
she spoke, asking her questions whose answers must surely embarrass
her.

Tea came in. Martie smiled at Carrie David, who brought it. She
liked Carrie, who was the Hawkes' cousin, but did not quite think
she should speak to her here. Carrie, who was a big, gray-haired
woman of fifty, was in the room only a moment after all.

Judge Parker, amiably under the impression that young people were
happier alone, went away to walk down Main Street, glancing at the
sky and greeting his townspeople in his usual genial fashion. May
poured the tea, holding Rodney in conversation the while. Ida talked
to Martie in a vivacious, smiling, insincere way, difficult to
follow.

Martie listened sympathetically, more than half believing in the
bright picture of social triumphs and San Francisco admirers that
was presented her, even though she knew that Ida was twenty-six, and
had never had a Monroe admirer. Dr. Ben had once had a passing fancy
for May's company; May was older than Ida, and, though like her
physically, was warmer and more human in type. But even this had
never been a recognized affair; it had died in infancy, and the
Parker girls were beginning to be called old maids.

Rodney walked with Martie to the gate when she left, but no farther,
and as she went on her way, uncomfortable thoughts were uppermost in
her mind. Martie had never driven with a young man before, and so
had no precedent to guide her, but she wondered if Rodney should not
have gone with her to her own gate. Perhaps she had stayed too long-
-another miserable possibility. And how "snippy" Ida and May had
been!

Still, Monroe had seen her driving with Rodney, and she had had tea
at the Parkers'! So much was gain. She had almost reached the shabby
green gate that led into the sunken garden when Sally, flying up
behind her in the dusk, slipped a hand through her arm. Martie,
turning with a start and a laugh, saw Joe Hawkes, ten feet away,
smiling at her.

"Hello, Joe!" she said, a little puzzled. Not that it was not quite
natural for Sally to stop and speak to Joe, if she wanted to; Joe
had been a familiar figure in their lives since they were children.
But--

But Sally was laughing and panting in a manner new and
incomprehensible. She caught Martie by both hands. All three, young
and not understanding themselves or life, stood laughing a little
vaguely in the sharp winter dusk. Joe was a mighty blond giant, only
Martie's age, and younger, except in inches and in sinews, than his
years. He had a sweet, simple face, rough, yellow hair, and hairy,
red, clumsy hands. A greater contrast to gentle little Sally, with
her timid brown eyes and the bloodless quiet of manner that was like
her mother and like Lydia, could hardly have been imagined.

"Where've you been?" Martie asked.

"We've been to church!" dimpled Sally with a glance at Joe.

The pronoun startled Martie.

"We were up in the organ loft," Joe contributed with his half-
laughing, half-nervous grin.

Still bewildered, Martie followed her sister into the dark garden,
after a good-night nod to Joe, and went into the house. Their father
reluctantly accepted the girls' separate accounts of the afternoon:
Sally had been in church, Martie had driven about with Rod and had
gone to tea at his house. Lydia fluttered with questions. Who was
there? What was said? Malcolm asked Martie where Rodney had left
her.

"At the gate, Pa," the girl responded promptly.

All through the evening her eyes kept wandering in disapproval
toward Sally. Joe Hawkes!--it was monstrous. That stupid, common
lout of a boy--nearly two years her junior, too.

They were undressing, alone in their room, when she spoke of the
matter.

"Sally," said she, "you didn't really go sit in the choir with Joe
Hawkes, did you?"

"Well--yes, in a way," Sally admitted, adding indulgently, "he's
SUCH an idiot!"

"How do you mean?" Martie asked sharply. For Sally to flush and
dimple and give herself the airs of a happy woman over the calf-like
attentions of this clumsy boy of nineteen was more than absurd, it
was painful. "Sally--you couldn't! Why, you oughtn't even to be
FRIENDS with Joe Hawkes!" she stammered. "He gets--I suppose he gets
twenty dollars a month."

"On, no; more than that!" Sally said, brushing her fine, silky,
lifeless hair. "He gets twenty-five from the express company, and
when he meets the trains for Beetman he gets half he makes."

Martie stood astounded at her manner. That one of the Monroe girls
should be talking thus of Joe Hawkes! What mattered it to Sarah
Price Monroe how much Joe Hawkes made, or how? Joe Hawkes--Grace's
insignificant younger brother! Sally saw her consternation.

"Now listen, Mart, and don't have a fit," she said, laughing. "I'm
not any crazier over Joe than you are. I know what Pa would say. I'm
not likely to marry any one on thirty dollars a month, anyway. But
listen, Joe has always liked me terribly--"

"I never knew it!" Martie exclaimed.

"No; well, neither did I. But last year when he broke his leg I used
to go in and see him with Grace, and one day she left the room for a
while, and he sort of--broke out--"

"The GALL!" ejaculated Martie.

"Oh, no, Mart--he didn't mean it that way. Really he didn't. He just
wanted--to hold my hand, you know--and that. And he never thinks of
money, or getting married. And, Mart, he's so GRATEFUL, you know,
for just a moment's meeting, or if I smile at him, going out of
church--"

"I should think he might be!" Martie interpolated in fine scorn.

"Yes, I know how you feel, Martie," Sally went on eagerly, "and
that's true, of course. I feel that way myself. But you don't know
how miserable he makes himself about it. And does it seem wrong to
you, Mart, for me just to be kind to him? I tell him--I was telling
him this afternoon--that some day he'll meet some nice sweet girl
younger than he, and that he'll be making more money then--you know-
-"

Her voice faltered. She looked wistfully at her sister.

"But I can't see why you let a big dummy like that talk to you at
all!" Martie said impatiently after a short silence. "What do you
care what he thinks? He's got a lot of nerve to DARE to talk to you
that way. I--well, I think Pa would be wild!"

"Oh, of course he would," Sally agreed in a troubled voice. "And I
know how you feel, Martie, with Joe's aunt working for the Parkers,
and all," she added. "I'll--I'll stop it. Truly I will. I'm only
doing it to be considerate to Joe, anyway!"

"You needn't do anything on my account," Martie said gruffly. "But I
think you ought to stop it on your own. Joe is only a kid, he
doesn't know beans--much less enough to really fall in love!"

She lay awake for a long time that night, in troubled thought. Cold
autumn moonlight poured into the room; a restless wind whined about
the house. The cuckoo clock struck eleven--struck twelve.

At all events she HAD gone driving with Rodney; she HAD had tea at
the Parkers'--


CHAPTER IV


"I honestly think that some of us ought to go down to-night and see
Grandma Kelly," said Lydia at luncheon a week later. November had
come in bright and sunny, but with late dawns and early twilights.
Rodney Parker's college friend having delayed his promised visit,
the agitating question of the Friday Fortnightly had been
temporarily laid to rest, but Martie saw him nearly every day, and
family and friends alike began to change in their attitude to
Martie.

"I'll go," she and Sally said together--Martie, because she was in a
particularly amiable mood; Sally, perhaps because old Mrs. Kelly was
Joe Hawkes's grandmother.

"Well, I wish you would, girls," their mother said in her gentle,
complaining voice. "She's a dear old lady--a perfect saint about
getting to church in all weathers! And while Pa doesn't care much
about having you so intimate with the Hawkeses, he was saying this
morning that Grandma Kelly is different. She was my nurse when all
four of you were born, and she certainly was interested and kind."

"We can go down about seven," Lydia said, "and not stay too long.
But I suppose 'most every one in Monroe will run in to wish her many
happy returns. Tom David's wife will come in from Westlake with
Grandma's great-grandchildren, I guess, and all the others will be
there."

"That houseful alone would kill me, let alone having the whole tribe
stream in, if _I_ were seventy-eight!" Martie observed. "But I'd
just as soon go. We'll see how we feel after dinner!"

And after dinner, the night being fresh and sweet, and the meal
early concluded because Malcolm was delayed in Pittsville and did
not return for dinner, the three Monroes pinned on their hats,
powdered their noses, and buttoned on their winter coats. Any
excitement added to her present ecstatic mood was enough to give
Martie the bloom of a wild rose, and Sally had her own reasons for
radiance. Lydia alone, walking between them, was actuated by cool
motives of duty and convention and sighed as she thought of the heat
and hubbub of the Hawkes's house, and the hour that must elapse
before they were back in the cool night again.

The Hawkeses had always lived in one house in Monroe. It was a
large, square, cheap house near the bridge, with a bare yard kept
shabby by picking chickens, and a fence of struggling pickets.
Behind the house, which had not been painted in the memory of man,
was a yawning barn which had never been painted at all. In the yard
were various odds and ends of broken machinery and old harness; a
wagon-seat, on which Grandma sometimes sat shelling beans or peeling
potatoes in the summer afternoons; old brooms, old saucepans, and
lengths of rope, clotted with mud. Fuchsia and rose-bushes
languished in a tipsy wire enclosure near the front door.

To-night, although the yard presented a rather dismal appearance in
the early winter dark, the house was bursting with hospitality and
good cheer. From every one of the bare high windows raw gushes of
light tunnelled the gloom outside, and although the cold outside had
frosted all the glass, dim forms could be seen moving about, and
voices and laughter could be heard.

Richter was now a captain. The good German's eyes were filled as he
said good-by.

"You will come, too, my friend, when the country needs you," he
said.
"Now" (and he shrugged his shoulders), "now have we many with no
cares to go. I have not even a father--" And he turned to Judge
Whipple, who was standing by, holding out a bony hand.

"God bless you, Carl," said the Judge And Carl could scarce
believe his ears. He got aboard the boat, her decks already blue
with troops, and as she backed out with her whistle screaming,
the last objects he saw were the gaunt old man and the broad-shouldered
young man side by side on the edge of the landing.

Stephen's chest heaved, and as he walked back to the office with the
Judge, he could not trust himself to speak. Back to the silent
office where the shelves mocked them. The Judge closed the
ground-glass door behind him, and Stephen sat until five
o'clock over a book. No, it was not Whittlesey, but Hardee's
"Tactics." He shut it with a slam, and went to Verandah Hall to
drill recruits on a dusty floor,--narrow-chested citizens in suspenders,
who knew not the first motion in right about face. For Stephen was
an adjutant in the Home Guards--what was left of them.

One we know of regarded the going of the troops and the coming of the
wounded with an equanimity truly philosophical.

When the regiments passed Carvel & Company on their way riverward to
embark, Mr. Hopper did not often take the trouble to rise from his
chair, nor was he ever known to go to the door to bid them Godspeed.
This was all very well, because they were Union regiments. But
Mr. Hopper did not contribute a horse, nor even a saddle-blanket,
to the young men who went away secretly in the night, without
fathers or mothers or sisters to wave at them. Mr. Hopper had better
use for his money.

One scorching afternoon in July Colonel Carvel came into the office,
too hurried to remark the pain in honest Ephum's face as he watched
his master.

The sure signs of a harassed man were on the Colonel. Since May he
had neglected his business affairs for others which he deemed
public, and which were so mysterious that even Mr. Hopper could not
get wind of them. These matters had taken the Colonel out of
town. But now the necessity of a pass made that awkward, and he
went no farther than Glencoe, where he spent an occasional Sunday.
Today Mr.

Hopper rose from his chair when Mr. Carvel entered,--a most unprecedented
action. The Colonel cleared his throat. Sitting down at his desk,
he drummed upon it uneasily.

"Mr. Hopper!" he said at length.

Eliphalet crossed the room quickly, and something that was very
near a smile was on his face. He sat down close to Mr. Carvel's chair
with a semi-confidential air,--one wholly new, had the Colonel given
it a thought. He did not, but began to finger some printed slips
of paper which had indorsements on their backs. His fine lips were
tightly closed, as if in pain.

"Mr. Hopper," he said, "these Eastern notes are due this week, are
they not?"
"Yes, sir."
The Colonel glanced up swiftly.

"There is no use mincing matters, Hopper. You know as well as I that
there is no money to pay them," said he, with a certain pompous
attempt at severity which characterized his kind nature.

"You have served me well. You have brought this business up to a
modern footing, and made it as prosperous as any in the town. I am
sorry, sir, that those contemptible Yankees should have forced us
to the use of arms, and cut short many promising business careers
such as yours, sir.

But we have to face the music. We have to suffer for our
principles.

"These notes cannot be met, Mr. Hopper." And the good gentleman
looked out of the window. He was thinking of a day, before the
Mexican War, when his young wife had sat in the very chair filled
by Mr. Hopper now. "These notes cannot be met," he repeated, and
his voice was near to breaking.

The flies droning in the hot office made the only sound. Outside the
partition, among the bales, was silence.

"Colonel," said Mr. Hopper, with a remarkable ease, "I cal'late
these notes can be met."
The Colonel jumped as if he had heard a shot, and one of the notes
fell to the floor. Eliphalet picked it up tenderly, and held
it.

"What do you mean, sir?" Mr. Carvel cried. "There isn't a bank in
town that will lend me money. I--I haven't a friend--a friend I may
ask who can spare it, sir."

Mr. Hopper lifted up his hand. It was a fat hand. Suavity was come
upon it like a new glove and changed the man. He was no longer
cringing. Now he had poise, such poise as we in these days are
accustomed to see in leather and mahogany offices. The Colonel glared
at him uncomfortably.

"I will take up those notes myself, sir."
"You!" cried the Colonel, incredulously, "You?"

We must do Eliphalet justice. There was not a deal of hypocrisy in
his nature, and now he did not attempt the part of Samaritan.
He did not beam upon the Colonel and remind him of the day on
which, homeless and friendless, he had been frightened into his
store by a drove of mules.
No. But his day,--the day toward which he had striven unknown and
unnoticed for so many years--the day when he would laugh at the
pride of those who had ignored and insulted him, was dawning
at last. When we are thoughtless of our words, we do not reckon with
that spark in little bosoms that may burst into flame and burn us.
Not that Colonel Carvel had ever been aught but courteous and
kind to all.

His station in life had been his offence to Eliphalet, who strove
now to hide an exultation that made him tremble.

"What do you mean, sir?" demanded the Colonel, again.

"I cal'late that I can gather together enough to meet the notes,
Colonel.
Just a little friendly transaction." Here followed an interval of
sheer astonishment to Mr. Carvel.

"You have this money?" he said at length. Mr. Hopper nodded.

"And you will take my note for the amount?"
"Yes, sir."
The Colonel pulled his goatee, and sat back in his chair, trying
to face the new light in which he saw his manager.

He knew well enough that the man was not doing this out of
charity, or even gratitude. He reviewed his whole career, from
that first morning when he had carried bales to the shipping room,
to his replacement of Mr. Hood, and there was nothing with which
to accuse him. He remembered the warnings of Captain Lige and
Virginia. He could not in honor ask a cent from the Captain now. He
would not ask his sister-in-law, Mrs. Colfax, to let him touch
the money he had so ably invested for her; that little which
Virginia's mother had left the girl was sacred.

Night after night Mr. Carvel had lain awake with the agony of
those Eastern debts. Not to pay was to tarnish the name of a
Southern gentleman. He could not sell the business. His house would
bring nothing in these times. He rose and began to pace the floor,
tugging at his chin.
Twice he paused to stare at Mr. Hopper, who sat calmly on, and the
third time stopped abruptly before him.

"See here," he cried. "Where the devil did you get this money, sir?"

Mr. Hopper did not rise.

"I haven't been extravagant, Colonel, since I've worked for you,"
he said. "It don't cost me much to live. I've been fortunate
in investments."
The furrows in the Colonel's brow deepened.

"You offer to lend me five times more than I have ever paid you,
Mr.
Hopper. Tell me how you have made this money before I accept it."
Eliphalet had never been able to meet that eye since he had known
it. He did not meet it now. But he went to his desk, and drew
a long sheet of paper from a pigeonhole.

"These be some of my investments," he answered, with just a tinge
of surliness. "I cal'late they'll stand inspection. I ain't forcing
you to take the money, sir," he flared up, all at once. "I'd
like to save the business."
Mr. Carvel was disarmed. He went unsteadily to his desk, and none
save God knew the shock that his pride received that day.

To rescue a name which had stood untarnished since he had brought
it into the world, he drew forth some blank notes, and filled them
out.

But before he signed them he spoke:

"You are a business man, Mr.

Hopper," said he, "And as a business man you must know that these
notes will not legally hold.

It is martial law. The courts are abolished, and all transactions
here in St. Louis are invalid."
Eliphalet was about to speak.

"One moment, sir," cried the Colonel, standing up and towering
to his full height.

"Law or no law, you shall have the money and interest, or your
security, which is this business.

I need not tell you, sir, that my word is sacred, and binding forever
upon me and mine."

"I'm not afraid, Colonel," answered Mr. Hopper, with a feeble attempt
at geniality.

He was, in truth, awed at last.

"You need not be, sir!" said the Colonel, with equal force. "If
you were --this instant you should leave this place."

He sat down, and continued more calmly: "It will not be long
before a Southern Army marches into St.
Louis, and the Yankee Government submits."

He leaned forward. "Do you reckon we can hold the business together
until then, Mr. Hopper?"

God forbid that we should smile at the Colonel's simple faith. And
if Eliphalet Hopper had done so, his history would have ended
here.

"Leave that to me, Colonel," he said soberly.

Then came the reaction. The good Colonel sighed as he signed, away
that business which had been an honor to the, city where it was
founded, I thank heaven that we are not concerned with the details
of their talk that day.

Why should we wish to know the rate of interest on those notes, or
the time? It was war-time.

Mr. Hopper filled out his check, and presently departed. It was the
signal for the little force which remained to leave. Outside,
in the store; Ephum paced uneasily, wondering why his master did
not come out.
Presently he crept to the door of the office, pushed it open, and
beheld Mr.

Carvel with his head bowed, down in his hands.

"Marse Comyn!" he cried, "Marse Comyn!"
The Colonel looked up. His face was haggard.

"Marse Comyn, you know what I done promise young MISS long time
ago, befo'--befo' she done left us?"
"Yes, Ephum."
He saw the faithful old negro but dimly. Faintly he heard the pleading
voice.

"Marse Comyn, won' you give Ephum a pass down, river, ter fotch
Cap'n Lige?"
"Ephum," said the Colonel, sadly, "I had a letter from the Captain
yesterday. He is at Cairo. His boat is a Federal transport, and he
is in Yankee pay."
Ephum took a step forward, appealingly, "But de Cap'n's yo' friend,
Marse Comyn.

He ain't never fo'get what you done fo' him, Marse Comyn. He ain't
in de army, suh."
"And I am the Captain's friend, Ephum," answered the Colonel,
quietly.

"But I will not ask aid from any man employed by the Yankee
Government.
No--not from my own brother, who is in a Pennsylvania regiments."
Ephum shuffled out, and his heart was lead as he closed the store
that night.

Mr. Hopper has boarded a Fifth Street car, which jangles on with
many halts until it comes to Bremen, a German settlement in the north
of the city. At Bremen great droves of mules fill the street,
and crowd the entrances of the sale stables there. Whips are
cracking like pistol shots, Gentlemen with the yellow cavalry
stripe of the United States Army are pushing to and fro among the
drivers and the owners, and fingering the frightened animals. A
herd breaks from the confusion and is driven like a whirlwind down
the street, dividing at the Market House.

They are going to board the Government transport--to die on the
battlefields of Kentucky and Missouri.

Mr. Hopper alights from the car with complacency. He stands for a
while on a corner, against the hot building, surveying the busy
scene, unnoticed. Mules! Was it not a prophecy,--that drove which
sent him into Mr. Carvel's store?

Presently a man with a gnawed yellow mustache and a shifty eye walks
out of one of the offices, and perceives our friend.

"Howdy, Mr. Hopper?" says he.

Eliphalet extends a hand to be squeezed and returned. "Got them
vouchers?" he asks. He is less careful of his English here.

"Wal, I jest reckon," is the answer: The fellow was interrupted by
the appearance of a smart young man in a smart uniform, who wore
an air of genteel importance. He could not have been more than two
and twenty, and his face and manners were those of a clerk. The
tan of field service was lacking on his cheek, and he was black
under the eyes.

"Hullo, Ford," he said, jocularly.

"Howdy, Cap," retorted the other. "Wal, suh, that last lot was an
extry, fo' sure.

As clean a lot as ever I seed. Not a lump on 'em.

Gov'ment ain't cheated much on them there at one-eighty a head, I
reckon."

Mr.

Ford said this with such an air of conviction and such a sober face
that the Captain smiled.

And at the same time he glanced down nervously at the new line of
buttons on his chest.

"I guess I know a mule from a Newfoundland dog by this time," said
he.

"Wal, I jest reckon," asserted Mr. Ford, with a loud laugh. "Cap'n
Wentworth, allow me to make you acquainted with Mr. Hopper. Mr.
Hopper, Cap'n Wentworth."
The Captain squeezed Mr. Hoppers hand with fervor. "You interested
in mules, Mr.

Hopper?" asked the military man.

"I don't cal'late to be," said.

Mr. Hopper. Let us hope that our worthy has not been presented
as being wholly without a sense of humor.

He grinned as he looked upon this lamb in the uniform of Mars, and
added, "I'm just naturally patriotic, I guess.

Cap'n, 'll you have a drink?"
"And a segar," added Mr. Ford.

"Just one," says the Captain. "It's d--d tiresome lookin' at mules
all day in the sun."
Well for Mr. Davitt that his mission work does not extend
to Bremen, that the good man's charity keeps him at the improvised
hospital down town.
Mr. Hopper has resigned the superintendency of his Sunday School, it
is true, but he is still a pillar of the church.

The young officer leans against the bar, and listens to stories by
Mr.

Ford, which it behooves no church members to hear. He smokes Mr.
Hopper's cigar and drinks his whiskey. And Eliphalet understands
that the good Lord put some fools into the world in order to
give the smart people a chance to practise their talents. Mr. Hopper
neither drinks nor smokes, but he uses the spittoon with more
freedom in this atmosphere.

When at length the Captain has marched out, with a conscious but manly
air, Mr. Hopper turns to Ford-- "Don't lose no time in presenting
them vouchers at headquarters," says he. "Money is worth something
now. And there's grumbling about this Department in the Eastern
papers, If we have an investigation, we'll whistle. How much
to-day?"
"Three thousand," says Mr. Ford. He tosses off a pony of Bourbon,
but his face is not a delight to look upon, "Hopper, you'll be a
d--d rich man some day."
"I cal'late to."

"I do the dirty work.

And because I ain't got no capital, I only get four per cent."
"Don't one-twenty a day suit you?"
"You get blasted near a thousand. And you've got horse contracts,
and blanket contracts besides. I know you. What's to prevent my goin'
south when the vouchers is cashed?" he cried. "Ain't it possible?"

"I presume likely," said Mr. Hopper, quietly. "Then your mother'll
have to move out of her little place."

CHAPTER II
NEWS FROM CLARENCE
The epithet aristocrat may become odious and fatal on the banks
of the Mississippi as it was on the banks of the Seine.

Let no man deceive himself! These are fearful times. Thousands of
our population, by the sudden stoppage of business, are thrown out
of employment. When gaunt famine intrudes upon their household, it
is but natural that they should inquire the cause. Hunger began the
French Revolution.

Virginia did not read this editorial, because it appeared in
that abhorred organ of the Mudsills, the 'Missouri Democrat.' The
wheels of fortune were turning rapidly that first hot summer of the
war time. Let us be thankful that our flesh and blood are incapable
of the fury of the guillotine. But when we think calmly of
those days, can we escape without a little pity for the aristocrats?

Do you think that many of them did not know hunger and want
long before that cruel war was over?

How bravely they met the grim spectre which crept so insidiously
into their homes!
"Virginia, child." said Mrs. Colfax, peevishly, one morning as they
sat at breakfast, "why do you persist it wearing that old gown? It
has gotten on my nerves, my dear. You really must have something
new made, even if there are no men here to dress for."
"Aunt Lillian, you must not say such things. I do not think that I
ever dressed to please men."
"Tut, tut; my dear, we all do. I did, even after married your uncle.
It is natural. We must not go shabby in such times as these, or be
out of fashion, Did you know that Prince Napoleon was actually
coming here for a visit this autumn? We must be ready for him. I
am having a fitting at Miss Elder's to-day."
Virginia was learning patience. She did not reply as she poured out
her aunt's coffee.
"Jinny," said that lady, "come with me to Elder's, and I will give
you some gowns. If Comyn had been as careful of his own money as
of mine, you could dress decently."
"I think I do dress decently, Aunt Lillian," answered the girl. "I
do not need the gowns. Give me the money you intend to pay for them,
and I can use it for a better purpose."
Mrs. Colfax arranged her lace pettishly.
"I am sick and tired of this superiority, Jinny." And in the same
breath.
"What would you do with it?"
Virginia lowered her voice. "Hodges goes through the lines to-morrow
night. I should send it to Clarence." "But you have no idea where
Clarence is." 
"Hodges can find him."
"Pshaw!" exclaimed her aunt, "I would not trust him. How do you
know that he will get through the Dutch pickets to Price's army?
Wasn't Souther captured last week, and that rash letter of Puss
Russell's to Jack Brinsmade published in the Democrat?" She laughed
at the recollection, and Virginia was fain to laugh too. "Puss
hasn't been around much since.
I hope that will cure her of saying what she thinks of people."
"It won't," said Virginia.
"I'll save my money until Price drives the Yankees from the state,
and Clarence marches into the city at the head of a regiment," Mrs.
Colfax went on, "It won't be long now." 
Virginia's eyes flashed.
"Oh, you can't have read the papers. And don't you remember the
letter Maude had from George? They need the bare necessities of
life, Aunt Lillian. And half of Price's men have no arms at all."

"Jackson," said Mrs. Colfax, "bring me a newspaper. Is there any
news to-day?"
"No," answered Virginia, quickly. "All we know is that Lyon has
left Springfield to meet our troops, and that a great battle is
coming, Perhaps--perhaps it is being fought to-day."
Mrs. Colfax burst into tears, "Oh, Jinny," she cried, "how can you
be so cruel!"
That very evening a man, tall and lean, but with the shrewd and
kindly eye of a scout, came into the sitting-room with the Colonel
and handed a letter to Mrs. Colfax. In the hall he slipped into
Virginia's hand another, in a "Jefferson Davis" envelope, and she
thrust it in her gown --the girl was on fire as he whispered in her
ear that he had seen Clarence, and that he was well. In two days
an answer might be left at Mr. Russell's house. But she must be
careful what she wrote, as the Yankee scouts were active.
Clarence, indeed, had proven himself a man. Glory and uniform became
him well, but danger and deprivation better. The words he had
written, careless and frank and boyish, made Virginia's heart leap
with pride.
Mrs. Colfax's letter began with the adventure below the Arsenal,
when the frail skiff had sunk near the island, He told how he had
heard the captain of his escort sing out to him in the darkness,
and how he had floated down the current instead, until, chilled and
weary, he had contrived to seize the branches of a huge tree floating
by. And how by a miracle the moon had risen. When the great Memphis
packet bore down upon him, he had, been seen from her guards, and
rescued and made much of; and set ashore at the next landing, for
fear her captain would get into trouble. In the morning he had
walked into the country, first providing himself with butternuts
and rawhide boots and a bowie-knife. Virginia would never have
recognized her dashing captain of dragoons in this guise.
The letter was long for Clarence, and written under great difficulties
from date to date. For nearly a month he had tramped over mountains
and across river bottoms, waiting for news of an organized force
of resistance in Missouri. Begging his way from cabin to cabin, and
living on greasy bacon and corn pone, at length he crossed the swift
Gasconade (so named by the French settlers because of its brawling
ways) where the bridge of the Pacific railroad had been blown up
by the Governor's orders.Upstairs were several unused rooms full of old furniture and piles
of magazines, and back of the long, narrow sitting room were a
little dining room with Crimson Rambler roses plastered against its
one window, and a large kitchen in which old Mis' Penny reigned
supreme.

Here in the living room were lamps, shabby chairs, an air-tight
stove, shells, empty birds' nests, specimens of ore, blown eggs,
snakeskins, moccasins, wampum, spongy dry bees' nests, Indian
baskets and rugs, ropes and pottery, an enormous Spanish hat of
yellow straw with a gaudy band, and everywhere, in disorderly
cascades and tumbled heaps, were books and pamphlets and magazines.

Dr. Ben welcomed them eagerly and sent Martie promptly to the
kitchen to interview Mis' Penny on the subject of tea. The girls
were quite at home here, for the old doctor was Rose Ransome's
mother's cousin, and through their childhood the little gabled house
had been the favourite object of their walks. Sally, alone with her
host, began to help him in his hopeless attempt to get his library
in order.

"The point is this, Sally," said Dr. Ben suddenly, after a few
innocuous comments on the weather and the health of the Monroe
family had been exchanged. "Have you and Joe Hawkes come to care for
each other?"

Sally flushed scarlet. She had been thinking hard--for Sally, who
was not given to thought--in the hours since the party for Grandma
Kelly. Now she began readily, with a great air of frankness.

"I'll tell you, Dr. Ben. I know you feel as if I was trying to hide
something from Ma and Pa, and it's worried me a good deal, too. But
the truth is, I've known Joe all my life, and he's only a boy, of
course--ever so much younger than I am--and he has just gotten this
notion into his head. Of course, it's perfectly ridiculous--because
naturally I am not going to throw my life away in any such fashion
as that! But Joe thinks now that he will never smile again--"

Thus Sally, kneeling among the books, her earnest, pretty, young
face turned toward the doctor, her eyes widely opened, as the
extraordinary jumble of words poured forth. The unpleasant sensation
of their last meeting, the confusing feeling that she was not saying
what Dr. Ben wanted her to say, beset her. She felt a sudden,
dreadful inclination toward tears, although with no clear sense of a
reason for crying.

"I suppose all boys go through their silly stages like measles,"
said Sally rapidly. "And it's only my misfortune and Joe's that his
first love affair had to be me. One reason why I haven't mentioned
it at home is--"

"Then you don't care for Joe?" the old man asked with his serious
smile.

"Oh, Dr. Ben! Of course, I like Joe enormously, he's a dear sweet
boy," Sally answered smoothly. "But you know as well as I do how my
father feels toward the village people in Monroe, and while the
Hawkeses are just as nice as they can be in their way--" again
Sally's flow of eloquence was strangely shaken; she felt as a child
might, caught up in the arm of a much larger person and rushed along
helplessly with only an occasional heartening touch of her feet to
the ground--"after all, that isn't quite our way, is it?" she asked.
If only, thought the nervous little girl who was Sally, if only she
knew what Dr. Ben wanted her to say!

"Why can't ye be honest with me, Sally?" said the doctor. "Ye love
Joe, don't ye?"

Sally's head dropped, the colour rose in her cheeks, and the tears
came. She nodded, and through all her body ran a delicious thrill at
the acknowledged passion.

"Ye've found each other out, in spite of them all!" said the old man
musingly. "And what does his age or yours, or his place or yours,
matter beside that? They've tried to fill you with lies, and you've
found that the lies don't hold water. Well--"

He straightened up suddenly, and began to march about the room.
Sally, kneeling still over the books, tears drying on her cheeks,
watched him.

"Sally," said the doctor, "God made you and Joe Hawkes and your love
for each other. I don't know who made the social laws by which women
govern these little towns, but I suspect it was the devil. You've
been brought up to feel that if you marry a man Mrs. Cy Frost
doesn't ask to her house, you'll be unhappy ever after. But I ask
you, Sally--I ask you as a man old enough to be your father--if you
had your home, your husband, your health, your garden, and your
children, wouldn't you be a far happier woman than--than Lydia say,
or Florence Frost, or all the other girls who sit about this town
waiting for a man with position enough--position, BAH!--to marry?"

Sally's face was glowing.

"Oh, Dr. Ben, _I_ don't care anything about position!" she said, all
her honest innocence in her face.

"Then why do you act as if you did?" he said, well pleased.

"And would you advise me to marry Joe?" she asked radiantly.

"Joe--Tom--Billy, whomever you please!" he answered impatiently.
"But don't be afraid because he doesn't wear silk socks, Sally, or
smoke a monogrammed cigarette. Why, my child, that little polish,
that little fineness, is the woman's gift to her man! These Frosts
and Parkers: it was the coarse strength of their grandfathers that
got them across the plains; it was the women who packed the books in
the horsehair trunks, that read the Bibles and cleaned and sewed and
prayed in the old home way. You don't suppose those old miners and
grocers, who came later to be the city fathers, ever had as much
education as Joe Hawkes, or half as much!"

"I wish my father felt as you do, Doc' Ben," Sally said presently,
the brightness dying from her face. "But Pa will never, never--And
even if there were no other reason, why Joe hasn't a steady job--"

"That brings me to what I really want to say to you to-day, Sally,"
the old man interrupted her briskly. He opened a desk drawer and
took from it a small, old-fashioned photograph. Sally saw a young
woman's form, disguised under the scallops, ruffles, and pleats of
the early seventies, a bright face under a cascade of ringlets, and
a little oval bonnet set coquettishly awry. "D'ye know who that is?"
asked Dr. Ben.

"I--well, yes; I suppose?" murmured Sally sympathetically.

"Yes, it's my wife," he answered. "Mary--Our boy would be thirty.
They went away together--poor girl, poor girl! We wanted a big
family, Sally; we hoped for a houseful of children. And I had her
for only fifteen months--only fifteen months to remember for thirty
years!"

Sally was deeply impressed. She thought it strangely flattering in
Dr. Ben to take her into his confidence in this way, and that she
would tell Martie about it as they walked home.

"No," he said musingly. "I never had a child! And Sally, if I had it
all to do over again, I'd marry again. I'd have sons. That's the
citizen's duty. Some day we'll recognize it, and then you bearers of
children will come into your own. There'll be recognition for every
one of them, we'll be the first nation to make our poor women proud
and glad when a child is coming. It's got to be, Sally."

Sally was listening politely, but she was not interested. She had
heard all this before, many times. Dr. Ben's extraordinary views
upon the value of the family were familiar to every one in Monroe.
But her attention was suddenly aroused by the mention of her own
name.

"Now, supposing that you and Joe take it into your heads to get
married some day," the doctor was saying, "how about children?"

Sally's ready colour flooded her face. She made no attempt to answer
him.

"Would ye have them?" the old man asked impatiently.

"Why--why, Dr. Ben, I don't know!" Sally said in great confusion.
"I--I suppose people DO."

"You suppose people do?" he asked scornfully. "Don't ye KNOW they
do?"

"Well, I don't suppose any girl thinks very much of such things
until she's married," Sally said firmly. "Mama doesn't like us to
discuss--"

"Doesn't your mother ever talk to you about such things?" the old
man demanded.

"Certainly not!" Sally answered with spirit.

"What DOES she talk to you about?" he asked amazedly. "It's your
business in life, after all. She's not taught ye any other. What
does she expect ye to do--learn it all after it's too late to
change?"

"All what?" Sally said, a little frightened, even a little sick. He
stopped his march, and looked at her with something like pity.

"All the needs of your soul and body," he said kindly, "and your
children's souls and bodies. Well! that's neither here nor there.
But the fact is this, Sally: I've no children of my own to raise.
And as ye very well know, I've got my own theories about putting
motherhood on a different basis, a business basis. I want you to let
me pay you--as the State ought to pay you--three hundred a year for
every child you bear. I want to demonstrate to my own satisfaction,
before I try to convince any Government, that if the child-bearing
woman were put on a plane of economic value, her barren, parasite
sister would speedily learn--"

Sally had turned pale. Now she rose in girlish dignity.

"I hope you'll forgive me, Dr. Ben, for saying that I won't listen
to ONE word more. I know you've been thinking about these things so
long that you forget how OUTRAGEOUS they sound! Motherhood is a
sacred privilege, and to reduce it to--"

"So is wifehood, Sally!" the old man interposed soothingly.

"Well," she flashed back, "nobody's PAID for wifehood!"

"Oh, yes, my dear. You can sue a man for not supporting you. It's
done every day!"

"Then--then a man ought to pay the three hundred a year!" countered
Sally.

"Well, I'm with you there. But the world has got to see that before
you can force him." The doctor sighed. "So you won't let me stand
grandfather to your children, Sally?" "Oh, if you WERE their
grandfather'" she answered. "Then you could do as you liked!"

"There you are, the parasite!" he said, smiling whimsically. "You're
your mother's daughter, Sally. Give you the least blood-claim on a
man's money, and you'll push it as far as you can. But offer to pay
you for doing the work God meant you to do and you're cut to the
soul. Well--"

He was still holding forth eloquently on the subject of children and
nations when Martie came back, and Sally, with a scarlet face, was
evidently lost in thoughts of her own.

As the girls walked home, Sally did not repeat to Martie her
conversation with the old doctor, nor for many weeks afterward. But
Martie did not notice her sister's indignant silence, for they met
Rodney Parker coming out of the Bank, and he walked with them to the
bridge, and asked Martie to go with him to see the Poulson Star
Stock Company in a Return Engagement Extraordinary on the following
night.

Martie was conscious of passing a milestone in her emotional life on
the evening of this day, when she said to herself that she loved
Rodney Parker. She admitted it with a sort of splendid shame, as she
went about her usual household occupations, passing from the hot
pleasantness of the kitchen to the cool, stale odours of the dining
room; running upstairs to light the bathroom-and hall-gas for her
father and brother, and sometimes stepping for a moment into the
darkness of the yard to be alone with her enchanted thoughts.

All the young Monroes regarded their father's temperamental
shortcomings with stoicism, so that it was in no sense resentfully
that she faced the inevitable preliminaries that night.

"Pa," said she cheerfully over the dessert, "you don't mind if I go
to the show with Rodney to-morrow, do you?"

"This is the first I've heard of any show," Malcolm said stiffly,
glancing at his wife. Mrs. Monroe patiently told him what she knew
of it. "Why, no, I suppose there is no reason you shouldn't go," he
presently said discontentedly.

"Oh, thank you, Pa!" Martie said, with a soaring heart. He looked at
her dispassionately.

"Your sisters and your brother are going, I suppose?" Malcolm asked,
glancing about the circle. Martie told herself she might have known
he was not done with the subject so easily.

"I'm not--because I haven't the price!" grinned Leonard. His mother
and Lydia laughed.

"I don't suppose Martie proposes going alone with young Parker?"
Malcolm asked in well-assumed amazement.

"Why, Pa--I don't see why NOT" Mrs. Monroe protested weakly.

Her husband was magnificent in his surprise. He looked about in a
sort of royal astonishment.

"Don't you, my dear?" he asked politely. "Then permit me to say that
_I_ DO."

Martie sat dumb with despair.

"Certainly Martha may go, if Leonard and one of her sisters go; not
otherwise," said Malcolm. He retired to his library, and Martie had
to ease her boiling heart by piling the dinner dishes viciously, and
question no more.

However, she consoled herself, there was something rather dignified
in this arrangement, after all; Len was presentable, and she was
always the happier for being with Sally. She washed her only gloves,
pressed her suit, and spent every alternate minute during the next
day anxiously inspecting her chin where an ugly pimple threatened to
form. The family was again at dinner when Len broached a change of
plan.

"Can I go up to Wilson's to-night, Pa?" he asked. Martie flashed him
a glance.

"I suppose so, for a little while," Malcolm said tolerantly. The
girls looked at each other.

"But I thought you were going to the Opera House with us?" Martie
exclaimed.

"Well, now you know I ain't," Len answered airily.

"I am not, Len," corrected his mother. Martie gave him a look of
hate.

"Len says he promised to go to Wilson's," Lydia said placatingly.
"So I thought perhaps Sally and I would go with you--I'm sorry,
Martie!"

For Martie's breast was heaving dangerously.

"Pa, didn't you say Len was to go with us?" she asked with desperate
calm.

"I said SOME ONE was to go," Malcolm said, disapproving of her
vehemence. "I confess I cannot see why it must be Len!"

"Because--because when a man asks a girl to go out with him he
doesn't ask the whole FAMILY!" Martie muttered in a fury. Her lip
trembled, and she got to her feet. "It doesn't matter in the least,"
she said in a low, shaking voice, "because I am not going myself!"

Flashing from the room, she ran upstairs. She flung herself across
her bed, and cried stormily for ten minutes. Then she grew calmer,
and lay there crying quietly, and shaken by only an occasional long
sob. It was during this stage that Lydia came into the room, and
sitting down beside Martie's knees, patted her hand soothingly.
Lydia's weak acceptance of the younger sister's distaste for her
company gave Martie a sort of shamed heart-sickness.

"Don't!" said she huskily, jerking her arm away.

But Lydia was not to be rebuffed, and Martie was but nineteen, after
all, and longing for the happiness she had denied. An hour later,
all the prettier for her tears, she met Rodney at the hall door, the
boy making no sign of disappointment when Lydia and Sally joined
them.

"But say, Martie," he said at once, "I've got only the two seats!"

"Oh, that's all right!" Lydia said quickly and cautiously. "We don't
have to SIT together!"

Martie's mood brightened and she flushed like a rose when the boy
said eagerly:

"Say, listen, Martie. My sister Ida's going to-night, and one or two
others, and Mrs. Cliff Frost is going to chaperon us afterward; ask
your mother if that's all right."

The girl wasted no time on her mother, but crossed to the library
door.

"Pa," said she without preamble, "Mrs. Cliff Frost is chaperoning
some of them after the theatre tonight. Can I go?"

"Go where? Shut that door," her father said, half turning.

"Oh--I don't know; to the hotel, I suppose."

"Yes," her father said in a dry voice. "Yes," he added unwillingly.
"Go ahead."

So the evening was a great success; one of the memorable times.
Martie and Rodney walked ahead of her sisters down town, the boy
gallantly securing the girls' tickets before he and Martie went up
the aisle to their own seats. All Monroe was in the Opera House.
Martie bowed and smiled radiantly. Rodney's sister and Mrs. Frost
and a strange man presently returned her smile.

"Rod--wouldn't you rather be with your own family?"

"Well--what do you think?"

The enchantment of it, the warmth and stimulus of his admiration,
his absorbed companionship, how they changed the world for Martie!
There was a witchery in the air, the blood ran quick in her veins.
The dirty big hall, with its high windows, was fairyland; the
whispering crowd, Rodney's nearness, and the consciousness of her
own youth and beauty, her flushed cheeks and loosened bronze hair,
acted upon Martie like strong wine. She grew lovely beneath his very
eyes; she was nineteen, and she loved!

They talked incessantly, elaborating the simple things they said
with a by-play of eyes and hands, making the insignificant words
rich with lowered tones, with smiles and the meeting of eyes. He
told Martie of his college days; borrowing episodes at random from
the lives of other men, men whom he admired. Martie believed it all,
believed that he had written the Junior Farce, that he had been
president of his class, that the various college societies had
disputed for his membership. In return, she spun her own romances,
flinging a veil of attractive eccentricity over her father's
character, generously giving Lydia an anonymous admirer, and
painting the dreary old mansion of North Main Street as a sort of
enchanted prison with her pretty restless self as captive therein.
The two exchanged brief French phrases, each believing the other to
have a fair command of the language, and Martie even quoted poetry,
to which Rodney listened in intense silence, his eyes fixed upon
hers.

Suddenly the house was darkened and the curtain rose. The play was
"The Sword of the King," a drama that seemed to Martie well suited
to her own exalted mood. She thought the whole company wonderful,
the leading lady especially gifted. She learned with awe that Rodney
had known Wallace Bannister, the leading man, more or less
intimately for years. An aunt of his lived in Pittsville and the two
had met as boys and later had been classmates for the brief period
Bannister had remained at the Leland Stanford University. Martie
wrapped her beauty-starved young soul in the perfect past, when men
wore ruffles and buckles and capes, and were all gallantry and
courage, and when women were beautiful and desired. Between the acts
the delicious exchange of confidences between herself and Rodney
went on; they nibbled Bonestell's chocolates from a striped paper
bag as they talked, and when the final curtain fell on a ringing
line there were real tears of pleasure in Martie's eyes.

"Oh, Rodney--this is LIVING!" she whispered, as they filed slowly
out.

Sally and Lydia had considerately disappeared. Mrs. Clifford Frost
was waiting for them at the door, and Martie, with quick tact, fell
into conversation with the kindly matron, walking at her side down
the crowded street, and leaving Rodney to follow with the others.
Little Ruth Frost had had some trouble fearfully resembling
diphtheria, and Martie's first interested question was enough to
enlist the mother's attention. The girl did not really notice the
others in the party.

They crossed muddy Main Street, passed Wilkins's Furniture and
Coffin Parlours, and went into the shabby French restaurant known as
Mussoo's. The little eating house, with its cheap, white-painted
shop window, looking directly upon the sidewalk, its pyramid of
oyster shells cascading from a box set by the entrance, its jangling
bell that the opening door set to clanging, its dingy cash register,
damp tablecloths, and bottles of red catsup, was not a place to
which Monroe residents pointed with pride. Martie would ordinarily
have passed it as one unaware of its existence.

But it seemed a thoroughly daring and exciting thing to come here
to-night; quite another thing from going to the hotel for vanilla
ice cream and chocolate--even supposing the hotel had kept its
dining room open for a change, after the six o'clock supper--or to
Bonestell's for banana specials. This--this was living! Martie
established herself comfortably in the corner, slipped off her coat,
smiled lazily at Rodney's obvious manipulation of the party so that
he should be next her, played with her hot, damp, blackened knife
and fork, and was in paradise.

Ida Parker was in the party, and Florence Frost. The men were
Clifford Frost, a pleasant young man getting stout and bald at
forty; Billy Frost, a gentle little lad of fifteen who was lame;
Rodney, and a rosy-cheeked, black-moustached Dr. Ellis from San
Francisco, whose occasional rather simple and stupid remarks were
received with great enthusiasm by Ida and Florence.

In this group Martie shone. She had her own gift for ready nonsense,
and she was the radiant element that blended the varied types into a
happy whole. She skilfully ignored Rodney; Billy, Mary, Cliff, and
even Dr. Ellis were drawn into her fun. Rodney glowed. "Isn't she
great?" he said to Mary Frost in an aside.

A large bowl of small crackers was set before them, damp squares of
strong butter on small nicked plates, finally a bowl of pink,
odorous shrimps. These were all gone when, after a long wait, the
fried oysters came smoking hot, slipped straight from the pan to the
plates. Martie drank coffee, as Mary did; the others had thick
goblets of red wine. With the hot, warming food, their gaiety waxed
higher; everybody felt that the party was a great success.

The bell on the door reverberated, and a man came in alone, and
looked about undecidedly for a seat.

"Hello!" said Rodney. "There's Wallace Bannister!"

The young actor joined them. And this, to Martie, was one of the
most thrilling moments of her life. He quite openly wedged his way
in to sit on the other side of her; he said that he could see they
didn't need the gaslight when Miss Monroe was along. Rodney said she
was Brunhilde, and Bannister's comment was that she could save wig
bills with that hair! Florence said eagerly that she loved
Brunhilde--let's see, what opera did that come in? It was the Ring,
anyway. The spirits of the group rose every second.

Ah, this was living--thought Martie. Oysters and wine and a real
actor, a man who knew the world, who chattered of Portland, Los
Angeles, and San Francisco as if they had been Monroe and
Pittsville. It was intoxicating to hear him exchanging comments with
Rodney; no, he hadn't finished "coll." "I'm a rolling stone, Miss
Monroe; we actor-fellows always are!" He was "signed up" now; he
gave them a glimpse of a long, typewritten contract. Martie ventured
a question as to the leading lady.

"She's a nice woman," said Wallace Bannister generously. "I like to
play against Mabel. Jesse Cluett, her husband, is in the play; and
his kid, too, her stepson--Lloyd--he's seventeen. Ever try the
profession, Miss Monroe?"

Martie flushed a pleased disclaimer. But the tiny seed was sown,
nevertheless. She liked the question; she was even vaguely glad that
Mrs. Cluett was forty and a married woman.

Wallace Bannister was older than Rodney, thirty or thirty-two,
although even off the stage he looked much younger. He had dipped
into college work in a dull season, amusing himself idly in the
elementary classes of French and English where his knowledge in
these branches gave him immediate prominence--and drifting away in a
road company after only a few months of fraternity and campus
popularity. His mother and father were both dead; the latter had
been a theatrical manager in a small way, sending little stock
companies up and down the coast for one-night stands.

Bannister was tall, well-built, and handsome. His cheeks had a fresh
fullness, and his black hair was as shining as wet coal. He was
eager and magnetic; musical, literary, or religious, according to
the company in which he found himself. Martie's thrilled interest
firing him to-night, he exerted himself: told stories in Chinese
dialect, in brogue, and with an excellent Scotch burr; he went to
the rickety piano, and from the loose keys, usually set in motion by
a nickel in the slot, he evoked brilliant songs, looking over his
shoulder with his sentimental bold eyes at the company as he sang.
And Martie said to herself, "Ah--this IS life!"

Rodney took her home, the clock in the square booming the half hour
after midnight as they went by. And at the side door he told her to
look up at the Dipper throbbing in the cool sky overhead. Martie
knew what was coming, but she looked innocently up, and went to
sleep for the first time in her life with a man's kiss still
tingling on her smiling lips.

The cold November weather might have been rosy June; the dull
routine of the Monroe home a life rich and full for Martie now. She
sang like a lark, feeding the chickens in the foggy mornings; she
dimpled at her own reflection in the mirror; she walked down town as
if treading the clouds. Anything interested her, everything
interested her. Mrs. Harry Locker, born Preble, said that Martie
just seemed inspired, the way she talked when old lady Preble died.
Miss Fanny, in the Library, began to entertain serious hopes that
the girl would take the Cutter system to heart, and make a clever
understudy at the old desk. Sally, watching, dreamed and yearned of
Martie's distinction, Martie's happiness; Lydia prayed. Malcolm
Monroe, as became a man of dignity, ignored the whole affair, but
Len, realizing that various advantages accrued, befriended his
sister, and talked to Rodney familiarly, as man to man.

"I can't stand that fresh kid!" said Rodney of Len. Martie shrugged
without speaking. She owed Len no allegiance. Had it suited Rodney
to admire Len, Martie would have been a loyal sister. As it was, she
would not risk a difference with Rodney for any one like Len. She
was embarked now upon a vital matter of business. Had a few hundreds
of dollars been involved, Malcolm Monroe would have been at her
elbow, advising, commending. As it was, her happiness, her life, her
children, her whole future might be jeopardized or secured with no
sign from him. Interference from her mother or sisters would have
been considered indelicate. So Martie stood alone.

Immediately after the theatre party, the question of a series of
dances again arose, and Martie somewhat hesitatingly repeated her
offer of the Monroe house for the first. Rodney's friend, Alvah
Brigham, was to come to the Parker family for Thanksgiving; the
dance was to be on Friday night, and a large picnic to Brewster's
Woods on Saturday. They would take a lunch, build a fire for their
coffee, and have the old school-day programme of singing and games.

For the dance, the two big parlours and the back room must be
cleared; that was simple enough. Angela Baxter would be at the piano
for the music; sufficient, if not extraordinary, and costing only
two dollars. The supper would be sandwiches, cake, coffee, and
lemonade: Monroe's invariable supper. Rodney thought ices necessary,
and suggested at least a salad. Martie and Sally considered the
salad.

"Lord, I wish we could have a punch," Rodney complained. The girls
laughed.

"Oh, Rod--Pa would explode!"

"Darn it," the boy mused, "I don't see WHY. He's not a teetotaler."
"Well, I know," Martie conceded. "But that's different, of course!
No--we can't have punch. I don't know how to make it, anyway--" She
was hardly following her own words. Under them lay the wonderful
consciousness that Rodney Parker was here at the house, sitting on
the porch steps on a warm November morning, as much at home as
Leonard himself. The sun was looking down into the dark garden, damp
paths were drying in sudden warmth after a rain.

In such an hour and such a mood, Martie felt absolutely confident
that the dance would be a great success. More; it seemed to her in
the heartening morning sunlight that it would be the first of many
such innocent festivities, and that before it was over--before it
was over, she and Rodney might have something wonderful to tell the
girls and boys of Monroe.

But in the long winter afternoons her confidence waned a little, and
at night, dreaming over her cards, she began to have serious
misgivings. Then the old house seemed cold and inhospitable and the
burden of carrying a social affair to success fell like a dreadful
weight on the girl's soul. Mama, Lydia, and Sally would cooperate to
the best of their power, of course; Pa and Len might be expected to
make themselves as annoying as possible.

Supper, decorations, even the question of gowns paled before the
task of making a list of guests. Sally and Martie early realized
that they must inevitably hurt the feelings and disappoint the trust
of more than one old friend. Mrs. Monroe and Lydia grew absolutely
sick over the necessity.

"Ma, this is just for the younger set," Martie argued. "And if
people like Miss Fanny and the Johnsons expect to come to it, why,
it's ridiculous, that's all!"

"I know, dear, but it's the first party we have given in YEARS" her
mother said plaintively, "and one hates to--"

"What I've DONE" said Martie in a worried tone, "is write down all
the POSSIBLE boys in Monroe, even counting Len and Billy Frost, and
Rod, and Alvah Brigham. Then I wrote down all the girls I'd like to
ask if I COULD, and there were about fourteen too many. So now I'm
scratching off all the girls I CAN--"

"I do think you ought to ask Grace Hawkes!" Lydia said firmly and
reproachfully.

"Well, I can't!" Martie answered quickly. "So it doesn't matter what
you think! I beg your pardon, Lyd," she added penitently, laying her
hand on Lydia's arm. "But you know Rodney's sisters would die if
Grace came!"

"Well, I think it's a mistake to slight Grace," Lydia persisted.

Martie studied her pencilled list gloomily for a few seconds.

"Sometimes I wish we weren't having it!" she said moodily.

"Oh, Martie, when we've always said we'd give ANYTHING to entertain
as other people do!" Sally exclaimed. "I DO think that's
unreasonable!"

Martie made no answer. She was looking at a memorandum which read:
"Invitations--cream--Angela--stamps--illusion--slippers."

As the days went by the thought of the dance grew more and more
troublesome. The details of the affair were too strange to be
entered into with any confidence, any rush of enthusiasm and
spontaneity. Every hour brought her fresh cause for worry.

Nothing went well. The thought of her dress worried her. She had
conceived the idea of a black gown ornamented with cretonne roses,
carefully applied. She and Sally cut out the flowers, and applied
them with buttonhole stitch, sewing until their fingers were sore,
their faces flushed, and their hair in frowsy disorder. It was slow
work. Miss Pepper, the seamstress, engaged for one day only to do
the important work on both Sally's and Martie's gown, kept
postponing, as she always did postpone, the day, finally appointing
the Wednesday before Thanksgiving Day. Pa's cousin, a certain Mrs.
Potts, wrote from Portland that she was coming down for the holiday,
and Sally and Martie could have wept at the thought of the
complication of having her exacting presence in the house. Worse
than this Pa, who was to have gone to San Francisco on business on
Friday morning--whose decision to do so had indeed been one of
Martie's reasons for selecting this date for the affair--suddenly
changed his plan. He need not go until December, he said.

Leonard, who at first had been faintly interested in the
proceedings, later annoyed his sisters by intimating that he would
not be present at the dance. Martie and Sally did not want him for
any social qualities he possessed, but he was a male; he would at
least help to offset the alarming plurality of females.

Acceptances came promptly from the young women of Monroe, even from
Ida and May Parker. Florence Frost regretted; she was smitten even
now with the incurable illness that would end her empty life a few
years later. Such men as Martie and Sally had been able to list as
eligible--the new young doctor from the Rogers building, little
Billy Frost, the Patterson boys, home from college for Thanksgiving,
Reddy Johnson, and Carl Polhemus--answered not at all, as is the
custom with young men. Sally and Martie did not like the Patterson
boys; George was fat and stupid; Arthur at eighteen sophisticated
and blase, with dissipated eyes; both were supercilious, and the
girls did not really believe that they would come. Still, there was
not much to lose in asking them.

There had been a debate over Reddy Johnson's name; but Reddy was a
wonderful dancer. So he was asked, and Martie went so far as to say
that had Joe Hawkes possessed an evening suit, he and Grace might
have been asked, too. As it was, Sally and Martie hoped they would
not meet Grace until the affair was over.

They fumed and fussed over the list until they knew it by heart.
They wondered who would come first, how soon they should begin
dancing, how soon serve supper. Mrs. Monroe thought supper should be
served at half-past ten. Martie groaned. Oh, they couldn't serve
supper until almost midnight, she protested.

Dinner was at noon on Thanksgiving Day, and the Monroes, sated and
overwarm, were sitting about the fire when Rodney Parker and his
friend, Alvah Brigham, came to take Martie and Sally walking. The
girls were sewing at the endless roses; but they jumped up in a
flutter, and ran for hats and sweaters. They did not exchange a
word, nor lose a second, while they were upstairs, running down
again immediately to end the uncomfortable silence that held the
group about the fire.

It was a cold, bleak day, and the pure air was delicious to Martie's
hot cheeks after the close house. She had immediately taken
possession of Alvah; Sally and Rodney followed. They took the old
bridge road, which the girls loved for the memory of bygone days,
when they had played at dolls' housekeeping along the banks of the
little Sonora, climbed the low oaks, and waded in the bright shallow
water. Even through to-day's excitement Martie had time for a memory
of those long-ago summer afternoons, and she said to herself with a
vague touch of pain that it would of course be impossible to have
with any man the serene communion of those days with Sally.

Mr. Brigham was a pale, rather fat young man with hair already
thinning. He did not have much to say, but he was always ready to
laugh, and Martie saw that he had cause for laughter. She rattled on
recklessly, anxious only to avoid silence; hardly conscious of what
she said. The effect of the cool, fresh air was lost upon Martie to-
day; she was fired to fever-pitch by Rodney's nearness.

He had not ever said anything exactly loverlike, she said to
herself, with a sort of breathless discontent, when she was setting
the table for a cold supper that night. But he had brought his
friend to them after all! She must not be exacting. She had so much-
-

"I beg your pardon, Cousin Allie?" she stammered. Her obnoxious
relative, a stout, moustached woman of fifty, warming her skirts at
the fire, was smiling at her unkindly.

"You always was a great one to moon, Martha!" said Mrs. Potts, "I's
asking you what you see in that young feller to make such a to-do
about?"

"Then you don't like him?" Martie countered, laughing. Mrs. Potts
bridled. Her favourite attitude toward life was a bland but
suspicious superiority; she liked to be taken seriously.

"I didn't say I didn't like him," she answered, accurately, a little
nettled. "No, my dear, I didn't say that. No. I wouldn't say that of
any young man!" she added thoughtfully.

Smiling a dark smile, she looked into the fire. Martie, rather
uncomfortable, went on with her task.

"He's seemed to admire our Mart in a brotherly sort of way since the
very beginning," Lydia explained, anxious as usual to say the kind
thing, and succeeding as usual in saying the one thing that could
hurt and annoy. "He's quite a boy for the girls, but we think our
Martie is too sensible to take him seriously, yet awhile!" And Lydia
gave her sister a smile full of sweet significance.

"HOPE she is!" Mrs. Potts said heavily. "For if that young feller
means business I miss MY guess!"

"Oh, for pity's sake--can't a man ask a girl to go walking without
all this fuss!" Martie burst out angrily. "I NEVER heard so much--
crazy--silly--talk--about--nothing!"

The last words were only an ashamed mumble as she disappeared
kitchenward.

"H'm!" said Mrs. Potts, eying Lydia over her glasses. "Kinder touchy
about him just the same. Well! what's he to that young feller used
to come see you, Lydia? Ain't the Frosts and the Parkers kin?"

"I really think she's the most detestable old woman that ever was!"
Martie said, when the three girls were going to bed that night.
Lydia, loitering in her sister's room for a few minutes, made no
denial.

"Well, by this time to-morrow night the party will be nearly over!"
yawned Sally.

Martie looked at the clock. A quarter past eleven. What would be
happening at quarter past eleven to-morrow night?

The girls awakened early, and were early astir. A rush of
preparation filled the morning, so soothing in its effect upon
nerves and muscles that Martie became wild with hope. The parlours
looked prettier than the girls had ever seen them; the pungent
sweetness of chrysanthemums and evergreen stealing into the clean,
well-aired spaces, and bowls of delicious violets sending out
currents of pure perfume. Martie swept, straightened, washed gas
globes, shook rugs. She gathered the flowers herself, straightening
the shoulders that were beginning to ache as she arranged them with
wet, cool fingers. Sally was counting napkins, washing china and
glass. Belle dragged through the breakfast dishes. Lydia was capably
mixing the filling for sandwiches. Outside, the morning was still;
fog dripped from the trees. Sometimes the sudden sputtering chuckle
of disputing chickens broke the quiet; a fish cart rattled by
unseen, the blare of the horn sending Mrs. Monroe with a large empty
platter to the gate.

At two o'clock Lydia and Martie walked down town for the last
shopping. Martie was aware, under the drumming excitement in her
blood, that she was already tired. But to buy bottled cherries for
the lemonade, olives for the sandwiches, and flat pink and white
mint candies was exhilarating, and Reddy Johnson's cheery "See you
to-night, Martie!" made her blue eyes dance with pleasure. After
all, a dance was no such terrible matter!

They were in Mason and White's, seated at a counter, in consultation
over a purchase of hairpins, when two gloved hands were suddenly
pressed over Martie's eyes, and a joyous voice said "Hello!" The
next instant Rose's eyes were laughing into hers.

"Rose Ransome!" Martie and Lydia said together. The two younger
girls began to chatter eagerly.

Why, when had she gotten home? Only this morning. And oh, it did
seem so good to be home! And how was everybody? And how was college?
Oh, fine! And was she still at the same house? Oh, yes! And so poor
old Mrs. Preble was dead? Uncle Ben had felt so badly--

"Say, Rose, we're having a sort of party to-night," Martie said
awkwardly, and with a certain hesitation. Details followed. Rose, as
pretty as a bird in her little checked suit and feathered hat,
listened with bright interest. "Why can't you come?" Martie finished
eagerly. "The more the merrier!"

"Well--no." Rose hesitated prettily. "My first evening at home, you
know--I think I hadn't better. I'd love to, Martie. And about the
picnic to-morrow; that I CAN do! What'll I bring?"

"Rose is a sweet little thing," Lydia said, when the sisters were
walking home again. "I'm sorry she can't come to-night; she has a
way of making things GO."

Martie did not answer. She was mentally, for the hundredth time,
putting on the black gown with the pink roses stitched all about the
flounce, and piling up her bronze hair.

The short afternoon waned, fog closing in the village again with the
dark. Martie and Sally came down to supper with thin little crepe
wrappers over their crisp skirts and best stockings and slippers.
Both girls had spent the late afternoon in bathing, taking last
stitches, laughing and romping over the upper floor, but the blazing
colour in their faces now was as much from nervous fatigue as from
excitement. Neither was hungry, nor talkative, and Mrs. Potts and
their father monopolized the conversation.

Len was sulky because he had played his usual game badly this
evening, and chance failing him had favoured the girls. He had asked
to be excused from the party, to their deep but unexpressed
indignation, and had almost won his father's consent to a request to
go down town a while, when a casual inquiry from Malcolm as to what
he intended to do down town inspired Len to a reminiscent chuckle
and an artless observation that gee! he might get a chance to sit
outside of the hotel and watch Colonel Frost's new automobile for
him, if the Colonel, as was usual, came down to the monthly meeting
of the Republican Club.

For a few seconds Malcolm did not sense the full indignity of his
son's position as groom for Cyrus Frost. When he did, Leonard had a
bad quarter of an hour, and was directed to get into his Sunday
suit, make himself as useful and agreeable to his sisters as was
possible, and let his father hear no more of this nonsense about old
Frost and his automobile.

Chuckling over this turn of events, the girls went upstairs to
finish dressing. Sally, in an old pink gown, freshly pressed, was
pretty; but Martie, turning flushed and self-conscious from the dim
old mirror, was quite lovely. The black gown made her too-generous
figure seem almost slender; the cretonne roses glowed richly against
the black, and Martie's creamy skin and burnished hair were all the
more brilliant for the contrast. Her heart rose buoyantly as she
realized the success of the gown, and she ran downstairs with sudden
gay confidence in herself and her party.

Her father and mother, with Mrs. Potts, had considerately
disappeared. Malcolm had gone down town; the ladies, wrapped in
shawls, were gossiping in Mrs. Potts's vaultlike chamber. Lydia was
moving about in the downstairs rooms.

"Oh, Martie, Rose telephoned," Lydia said as her sister came in,
"and she says that Mr. Rice and her mother say she must come up to-
night, if it's only for a little while. She's going to bring her
violin."

"Oh, that's good," Martie answered absently, sitting down to play
"The Two Grenadiers" with great spirit. "There's some one now, Lyd!"
she added in a half panic, as the doorbell rang. Lydia, her colour
rising suddenly, went to the door, raising her hand above as she
passed under the gaslight to turn the lights to their full
brilliancy. The first arrival was Angela Baxter, with her music roll
under her arm. She kissed Lydia, and went upstairs with Sally.

Then there were other feet on the porch: in came the German girls
and Laura Carter, hooded in knitted fragile scarfs, and wrapped in
pale blue and pink circular capes edged narrowly with fluffy
eiderdown. Elmer King, hoarsely respectful, and young Potter Street
followed. Martie, taking the girls upstairs, called back to them
that she would send Len down. While they were all in Lydia's room,
laying off wraps and powdering noses, Maude Alien came up, and
"Dutch" Harrison's older sister Kate, and Amy Scott, and Martie was
so funny and kept them all in such roars of laughter that Sally was
conscious of a shameless wish that this was what Monroe called a
"hen party," with no men asked. Then they could have games, Proverbs
and even Hide-the-Thimble, and every one would feel happy and at
home.

When they went down Robert Archer, a quiet mild young man who was in
the real estate business, had come; and he and Elmer and Potter were
sitting silently in the parlour. Martie and Sally and the other
girls went in, and every one tried to talk gaily and naturally as
the young men stood up, but there seemed to be no reason why they
should not all sit down, and, once seated, it seemed hard to talk.
What Martie said was met with a nervous glimmer of laughter and a
few throaty monosyllables.

Sally wanted to suggest games, but did not dare. Martie, and indeed
every one else, would have been glad to play Proverbs and Twenty
Questions, but she did not quite like to begin anything so childish
at a real dance. She looked at the clock: just nine. The evening was
yet young.

Suddenly Angela Baxter stopped murmuring to Lydia, and began to
rattle a quick two step from the piano. Robert Archer, sitting next
to Martie, asked her at once to dance, and Potter Street asked
Sally, but both girls, glancing self-consciously at their guests,
declined, and the young men subsided. So nobody danced the first
dance, and after it there was another lull. Then Martie cheerfully
asked Angela for a waltz, and said bravely:

"Come on, some of you, DO dance this! I can't because I'm hostess."

At this there was some subdued laughter, and immediately the four
young men found partners, and two of the girls danced together. Then
little Billy Frost came in, and after him, as fresh and sweet as her
name, came Rose with the Monroe's only dentist, Bruce Tate. Dr. Tate
was a rather heavy young man, flirtatious and conceited.

Rose put her violin on the piano, and explained that she had met
Rodney Parker that afternoon, "hadn't seen him for YEARS!" and that
he had talked her into coming. No--she wouldn't play until later
laughed Rose; now she wanted to dance.

The hours that followed seemed to Martie like years. She never
forgot them. She urged her guests into every dance with almost
physical force; she felt for the girls who did not dance a nervous
pity. Ida and May came in: neither danced, nor was urged to dance.
They went home at ten o'clock. It was immediately afterward that
Rodney came with his friend. Martie met them in the hall, ready for
the intimate word, the smile that should make all this tiresome
business of lights and piano and sandwiches worth while. Rodney was
a little flushed and noisy, Alvah red-faced, breathing and speaking
a little thickly. They said they were thirsty.

"Lemonade?" Martie suggested confidently.

Rodney glanced quickly at his friend. "Oh, Gawd!" said Mr. Brigham
simply.

Then they were in the hot parlour, and Martie was introducing them
to a circle that smiled and said "Pleased to meet choo," over and
over. Alvah would not dance, remarking that he hated dancing. And
Rodney--Rodney had eyes for no one but Rose. Martie saw it, every
one saw it.

Rose was at her best to-night. She knew college songs that Rodney
and Alvah knew, she dimpled and coquetted with the pretty confidence
of a kitten. She stood up, dainty and sweet in her pink gown, and
played her violin, with the gaslight shining down into her brown
eyes, and her lace sleeve slipping back and forth over her white arm
as the bow whipped to and fro.

Rodney did not leave her side, except for a dance with Martie and
one with Sally. After a while he and Rose went out to sit on the
stairs. Alvah grew noisy and familiar, and Martie did not know quite
how to meet his hilarity, although she tried. She was afraid the
echoes of his wild laugh would greet her father's ears, if he had
come in and was upstairs, and that Pa might do something awful.

The evening wore on. Lydia looked tired, and Sally was absolutely
mute, listening politely to Robert Archer's slow, uninteresting
narration of the purchase of the Hospital site. Martie felt as if
she had been in this dreadful gaslight forever; she watched the
clock.

At eleven they all went out to the dining room, and here the first
real evidences of pleasure might be seen on the faces of the guests.
Now Lydia, too, was in her favourite element, superintending coffee
cups, while Sally, alert again, cut the layer cakes. The table
looked charming and the sandwiches and coffee, cream and olives,
were swiftly put in circulation. Under the heartening rattle of
cutlery and china every one talked, the air was scented with coffee,
the room so warm that two windows by general consent were opened to
the cool night.

Martie took her share of the duties of hospitality as if in an
oppressive dream. Rodney sat beside her, and Rose on his other side.
To an outsider Martie might have seemed her chattering self, but she
knew--and Sally knew--that the knife was in her heart. She said
good-night to Rodney brightly, and kissed Rose. Rodney was to take
Rose home because, as she explained to Martie in an aside, it was
almost on his way, and it seemed a shame to take Dr. Tate so far.

"I've been scolding Rod terribly; those boys had highballs or
something before they came here," Rose said, puckering her lips and
shaking her head as she carefully pinned a scarf over her pretty
hair. "So silly! That's what we were talking about on the stairs."

She tripped away on Rodney's arm. Alvah, complaining of a splitting
head, went off alone. Somehow the others filtered away; Angela
Baxter, who was to spend the night with Lydia, piled the last of the
dishes with Lydia in the kitchen. Sally, silent and yawning, sank
into an armchair by the dying fire. Martie, watching the lanterns,
and hearing the voices die away after the last slamming of the gate,
stood on the dark porch staring into the night. The trees scarcely
showed against a heavy sky, a restless wind tossed their uppermost
branches; a few drops of rain fell on a little gust of air. The
night was damp and heavy; it pressed upon the village almost like a
soft, smothering weight. Martie felt as if she could hear the world
breathe.

With miserable, dry eyes, she looked up at the enveloping blackness;
drops of rain on her burning face, a chill shaking her whole body in
the thin gown. Martie wanted to live no longer; she longed to press
somehow into that great silent space, to cool her burning head and
throbbing heart in those immeasurable distances on distances of
dark. She did not want to go back into the dreadful house, where the
chairs were pushed about, and the table a wreck of wilted flowers
and crumbs, where the air was still laden with the odour of coffee
and cigarettes. She did not want to reclaim her own shamed and
helpless little entity after this moment of escape.

Her own pain and mortification--ah, she could have borne those. But
to have Lydia and Sally and Len and all Monroe sorry for her ...

Martie did not sleep that night. She tossed in a restless agony of
remembering, and the pitiable party seemed a life-failure, as she
lay thinking of it in the dark, a colossal blunder never to be
obliterated. They were unlucky--the Monroes. They never could do
things like other people.

Early in the cold dawn she heard the quiet slop and spatter of rain.
Thank God there could be no picnic to-day! Exhausted, she slept.


CHAPTER VI


Whatever Lydia, her mother, and Sally agreed between themselves the
next day they never told, but there was a conspiracy immediately on
foot. Little was said of the party, and nothing of Rodney Parker,
for many days. And if Martie in her fever of hurt pride was not
openly grateful, at least they knew her benefited by the silence.
Rose had no such compunction.

On the afternoon of the long rainy Saturday that was to have been
filled with a picnic, Rose telephoned. She just wanted to see how
every one was--and say what a lovely time she'd had! Ida Parker had
just telephoned, and Rose was going up there at about four o'clock
to stay for dinner, just informally, of course. She would go back to
Berkeley to-morrow night, but she hoped to see the girls in the
meantime.

Silently, heavily, Martie went on wiping the "company" dishes,
carrying them into the pantry shelves where they had been piled
untouched for years, and where they would stand again unused for a
long, long time. Sally was tired, and complained of a headache.
Lydia was irritatingly cheerful and philosophical. Len had
disappeared, as was usual on Saturday, and Mrs. Monroe and Mrs.
Potts were talking in low tones over the sitting-room fire. Outside,
the rain fell and fell and fell.

Martie thought of Rose, laughing, pink-cheeked, discarding her neat
little raincoat with Rodney's help at four o'clock, at the Parkers'
house, and bringing her fresh laughter into their fire. She thought
of her at six--at seven--and during the silent two hours when she
brooded over her cards.

Coming out of church the next morning, Rose rejoiced over the clear
bath of sunlight that followed the rain. "Rod is going to take me
driving," she told Martie. "I like him ever so much; don't you,
Martie?"

Alice Clark, coming in for a chat with Lydia late that afternoon,
added the information that when little Rose Ransome left the city at
four o'clock, Rod Parker and that fat friend of his went, too.
Escorting Rose--and he and Rose would have tea in the city before he
took her to Berkeley--Martie thought.

That was the beginning, and now scarcely a day passed without its
new sting. The girl was not conscious of any instinct for bravery;
she did not want to be brave, she wanted to draw back from the rack-
-to escape, rather than to endure. A first glimpse of happiness had
awakened fineness in her nature; she had been generous, sweet,
ambitious, only a few weeks ago. She had given new thought to her
appearance, had carried her big frame more erectly. All her bigness,
all her capacity for loving and giving she would have poured at
Rodney's feet; his home, his people, his hopes, and plans--these
would have been hers.

Repulsed, this gold of youth turned to brass; through long idle days
and wakeful nights Martie paid the cruel price for a few hours of
laughter and dreaming. She was not given another moment of hope.

Not that she did not meet Rodney, for in Monroe they must often
meet. And when they met he greeted her, and they laughed and chatted
gaily. But she was not Brunhilde now, and if Sally or Lydia or any
one else was with her she knew he was not sorry.

In the middle of December Rose's mother, the neat little widow who
was like an older Rose, told Sally that Rose was not going back to
college after Christmas. Quietly, without comment, Sally told this
to Martie when they were going to bed that night.

Martie walked to the window, and stood looking out for a long time.
When she came back to Sally her face was pale, her breast moving
stormily, and her eyes glittering.

"They're engaged, I suppose?" Martie said.

Sally did not speak. But her eyes answered.

"Sally," said her sister, in a voice thick with pain, as she sat
down on the bed, "am I to blame? Could I have done differently? Why
does this come to Rose, who has everything NOW, and pass me by? I--I
don't want to be like--like Lyd, Sally; I want to live! What can I
do? Oh, my GOD," said Martie, rising suddenly and beginning to walk
to and fro, with her magnificent mane of hair rolling and tumbling
about her shoulders as she moved, "what shall I do? There is a
world, out there, and people working and living and succeeding in
it--and here I am, in Monroe--dying, dying, DYING of longing! Sally
..." and with tears wet on her cheeks, and her mouth trembling, she
came close to her sister. "Sally," whispered Martie unsteadily, "I
care for--him. I wanted nothing better. I thought--I thought that by
this time next year we might--we might be going to have a baby--
Rodney and I."

She flung back her head, and went again to the window. Sally burst
into bitter crying.

"Oh, Martie--Martie--I know! I know! My darling, splendid, glorious
sister--so much more clever than any one else, and so much BETTER! I
think it'll break my heart!"

And in each other's arms, nineteen and twenty-one wept together at
the bitterness of life.

The days wore by, and Rose came smiling home for Christmas, and
early in the new year Martie and Sally were asked to a pink luncheon
at the Ransome cottage, finding at each chair two little tissue-
paper heart-shaped frames initialled "R. P." and "R. R." with kodak
prints of Rose and Rodney inside. The Monroe girls gave Rose a
"linen shower" in return, and the whole town shared the pleasure of
the happy pair.

Martie had enough to think of now. Not even the thoughts of the
prospective bride could dwell more persistently on her own affairs
than did Martie's thoughts. Rose, welcome at the Parkers', envied
and admired even by Ida and May and Florence; Rose, prettily buying
her wedding finery and dashing off apt little notes of thanks for
her engagement cups and her various "showers"; Rose, fluttering with
confidences and laughter to the admiring Rodney, with the diamond
glittering on her hand; these and a thousand other Roses haunted
Martie. Lydia and her mother admired and marvelled with the rest.
Lydia it was who first brought home the news that the young Parkers
were to be married at Easter, Sally learned from Rose's own lips
that they were to spend a week in Del Monte as honeymoon.

The Monroe girls still wandered down town on weekday mornings,
loitering into the post-office, idling an hour away in the Library,
drifting home to mutton stew or Hamburg steak when the clock in the
town hall struck twelve. Sometimes Martie watched the big eastern
trains thunder by, looking with her wistful young blue eyes at the
card-playing men and the flushed, bored young women with their heads
resting on the backs of their upholstered seats. Sometimes she
stopped at the little magazine stand outside of Carlson's cigar
store; her eye caught by a photograph on the cover of a weekly:
"Broadway at Forty-Second," or "Night Lights from the Singer
Building," or the water-front silhouette that touches like the sight
of a beloved face even some hearts that know it not. She wanted to
do something, now that it was certain that she would not marry.
Slowly, and late, Martie's soul was awakening.

She asked her father if she might go to work. Certainly she might,
her father said lifelessly. Well, what should she do?--the girl
persisted.

"Ah, that's quite another thing!" Malcolm said, with his favourite
air of detecting an inconsistency. "You want to work? Well and good,
go ahead and do it! But don't expect me to tell you what to do. Your
mother may have some idea. Your grandmother--and she was the
loveliest woman I ever knew!--was content to be merely a lady,
something I wish my daughters knew a little more about. Her
beautiful home, her children and servants, her friends and her
church--that was her work! She didn't want to push coarsely out into
the world. However, if you do, go ahead! I confess I am tired of
seeing the dark, ugly expression you've worn lately, Martie. Go your
own way!"

Armed with this ungracious permission, Martie went down to see Miss
Fanny, talked with Grace, and even, meeting him on a lonely walk,
climbed into the old phaeton beside Dr. Ben, and asked his advice.
Nothing definite resulted, yet Martie was the happier for the new
interest. Old Father Martin talked to her of her plans one day, and
presently put her in communication with a certain widow, Mrs.
O'Brien, of San Francisco, who wanted an intelligent young woman to
go with her to New York to help with the care and education of two
little O'Briens.

This possibility fired Martie and Sally to fever-heat, and they
hoped and prayed eagerly while it was under discussion. New York at
last! said Martie, who felt that she had been waiting endless years
for New York. But Mrs. O'Brien, it seemed, wanted some one who would
be able to begin French and German and music lessons for little Jane
and Cora, and the question of Martie's fitness was settled.

Still she was happier, and when Easter came, and the Monroe girls
were bidden to Rose's wedding, it was with a new and charming
gravity in face and manner that Martie went.

The ceremony took place in the comfortable parlours of the Ransome
house; the pretty home wedding possible because Rodney was not a
Catholic. Just like Rose's luck--instead of being married in the
bare, big church, thought Martie, at whose age the religious side of
the question did not appear important. Dr. His face, thinned by the
summer in town, was of the sternness of the Puritan. Stephen's
features were sharply marked for his age. The will to conquer was
there. Yet justice was in the mouth, and greatness of heart.
Conscience was graven on the broad forehead. The eyes were the
blue gray of the flint, kindly yet imperishable. The face was not
handsome.

Struggling, then yielding to the impulse, Virginia let herself be
led on into the years. Sanity was the word that best described him.
She saw him trusted of men, honored of women, feared by the false.
She saw him in high places, simple, reserved, poised evenly as he was
now.

"Why do you go in this afternoon?" she asked abruptly.

He started at the change in her tone.

"I wish that I might stay," he said regretfully. "But I cannot,
Miss Carvel."
He gave no reason. And she was too proud to ask it. Never before
had she stooped to urge young men to stay.

The difficulty had always been to get them to go. It was natural,
perhaps, that her vanity was wounded.

But it hurt her to think that she had made the overture, had tried
to conquer whatever it was that set her against him, and had
failed through him.

"You must find the city attractive.

Perhaps," she added, with a little laugh, "perhaps it is Bellefontaine
Road."

"No," he answered, smiling.

"Then" (with a touch of derision), "then it is because you cannot
miss an afternoon's work. You are that kind."
"I was not always that kind," he answered. "I did not work at
Harvard.
But now I have to or--or starve," he said.

For the second time his complete simplicity had disarmed her.

He had not appealed to her sympathy, nor had he hinted at the
luxury in which he was brought up. She would have liked to question
Stephen on this former life.
But she changed the subject suddenly.

"What did you really think of Mr. Lincoln?" she asked.

"I thought him the ugliest man I ever saw, and the handsomest as
well."
"But you admired him?"
"Yes," said Stephen, gravely.

"You believe with him that this government cannot exist half slave
and half free. Then a day will come, Mr. Brice, when you and I shall
be foreigners one to the other."

"You have forgotten," he said eagerly, "you have forgotten the rest
of the quotation. 'I do not expect the Union to be dissolved--I do
not expect the house to fall--but cease to be divided.' It will
become all one thing or all the other."
Virginia laughed. "That seemed to me very equivocal," said she. "Your
rail-sputter is well named."
"Will you read the rest of that speech?" he asked
"Judge Whipple is very clever.

He has made a convert of you," she answered.

"The Judge has had nothing to do with it," cried Stephen. "He is not
given to discussion with me, and until I went to Springfield had
never mentioned Lincoln's name to me."

Glancing at her, he surprised a sparkle of amusement in her eyes.
Then she laughed openly.

"Why do you suppose that you were sent to Springfield?"

she asked.

"With an important communication for Mr. Lincoln," he answered.

"And that most important communication was--your self. There, now, I
have told you," said Virginia.

"Was myself? I don't understand."
Virginia puckered her lips.

"Then you haven't the sense I thought you had," she replied
impatiently.

"Do you know what was in that note? No? Well, a year ago last June
this Black Republican lawyer whom you are all talking of made a
speech before a convention in Illinois. Judge Whipple has been crazy
on the subject ever since--he talks of Lincoln in his sleep; he
went to Springfield and spent two days with him, and now he can't
rest until you have seen and known and heard him.

So he writes a note to Lincoln and asks him to take you to the
debate--"
She paused again to laugh at his amazement.

"But he told me to go to Springfield!" he exclaimed.

"He told you to find Lincoln. He knew that you would obey his
orders, I suppose."

"But I didn't know--" Stephen began, trying to come pass within an
instant the memory of his year's experience with Mr.

Whipple.

"You didn't know that he thought anything about you," said
Virginia.

"That is his way, Mr. Brice. He has more private charities on his
list than any man in the city except Mr. Brinsmade. Very few know
it. He thinks a great deal of you. But there," she added, suddenly
blushing crimson, "I am sorry I told you."

"Why?" he asked.

She did not answer, but sat tapping the seat with her fingers. And
when she ventured to look at him, he had fallen into thought.

"I think it must be time for dinner," said Virginia, "if you really
wish to catch the train."

The coldness in her voice, rather than her words, aroused him.
He rose, took one lingering look at the river, and followed her
to the house.

At dinner, when not talking about his mare, the Colonel was trying to
persuade Stephen to remain. Virginia did not join in this, and her
father thought the young man's refusal sprang from her lack of
cordiality.
Colonel Carvel himself drove to the station.

When he returned, he found his daughter sitting idly on the porch.

"I like that young man, if he is a Yankee," he declared.

"I don't," said Virginia, promptly.

"My dear," said her father, voicing the hospitality of the
Carvels, "I am surprised at you. One should never show one's
feelings toward a guest. As mistress of this house it was your
duty to press him to stay."
"He did not want to stay."

"Do you know why he went, my dear," asked the Colonel.

"No," said Virginia.

"I asked him," said the Colonel.

"Pa! I did not think it of you!" she cried. And then, "What
was it?" she demanded.

"He said that his mother was alone in town, and needed him."
Virginia got up without a word, and went into Judge Whipple's room.
And there the Colonel found her some hours later, reading aloud
from a scrap-book certain speeches of Mr. Lincoln's which Judge Whipple
had cut from newspapers. And the Judge, lying back with his eyes
half closed, was listening in pure delight.

Little did he guess at Virginia's penance!

THE CRISIS

By Winston Churchill

Volume 4.

CHAPTER VII
AN EXCURSION
I am going ahead two years.

Two years during which a nation struggled in agony with sickness,
and even the great strength with which she was endowed at birth was
not equal to the task of throwing it off. In 1620 a Dutch ship had
brought from Guinea to his Majesty's Colony of Virginia the germs
of that disease for which the Nation's blood was to be let so
freely. During these years signs of dissolution, of death, were not
wanting.

In the city by the Father of Waters where the races met, men
and women were born into the world, who were to die in ancient
Cuba, who were to be left fatherless in the struggle soon to come,
who were to live to see new monsters rise to gnaw at the vitals
of the Republic, and to hear again the cynical laugh of Europe.

But they were also to see their country a power in the world,
perchance the greatest power. While Europe had wrangled, the child
of the West had grown into manhood and taken a seat among the highest,
to share with them the responsibilities of manhood.

Meanwhile, Stephen Brice had been given permission to practise law in
the sovereign state of Missouri. Stephen understood Judge Whipple
better.

It cannot be said that he was intimate with that rather formidable
personage, although the Judge, being a man of habits, had formed
that of taking tea at least once a week with Mrs. Brice. Stephen had
learned to love the Judge, and he had never ceased to be grateful
to him for a knowledge of that man who had had the most influence
upon his life, --Abraham Lincoln.

For the seed, sowed in wisdom and self-denial, was bearing fruit.

The sound of gathering conventions was in the land, and the Freeport
Heresy was not for gotten.

We shall not mention the number of clients thronging to Mr. Whipple's
office to consult Mr. Brice. These things are humiliating. Some of
Stephen's income came from articles in the newspapers of that day.
What funny newspapers they were, the size of a blanket! No startling
headlines such as we see now, but a continued novel among the
advertisements on the front page and verses from some gifted lady
of the town, signed Electra.

And often a story of pure love, but more frequently of ghosts or
other eerie phenomena taken from a magazine, or an anecdote
of a cat or a chicken.

There were letters from citizens who had the mania of print, bulletins
of different ages from all parts of the Union, clippings out of
day-before-yesterday's newspaper of Chicago or Cincinnati to
three-weeks letters from San Francisco, come by the pony post to
Lexington and then down the swift Missouri.

Of course, there was news by telegraph, but that was precious as
fine gold,--not to be lightly read and cast aside.

In the autumn of '59, through the kindness of Mr. Brinsmade, Stephen
had gone on a steamboat up the river to a great convention in Iowa.
On this excursion was much of St. Louis's bluest blood. He widened
his circle of acquaintances, and spent much of his time walking the
guards between Miss Anne Brinsmade and Miss Puss Russell. Perhaps it
is unfair to these young ladies to repeat what they said about
Stephen in the privacy of their staterooms, gentle Anne remonstrating
that they should not gossip, and listening eagerly the while, and
laughing at Miss Puss, whose mimicry of Stephen's severe ways
brought tears to her eyes.

Mr. Clarence Colfax was likewise on the boat, and passing Stephen on
the guards, bowed distantly.

But once, on the return trip, when Stephen had a writing pad on his
knee, the young Southerner came up to him in his frankest manner
and with an expression of the gray eyes which was not to be
withstood.

"Making a case, Brice?" he said.

"I hear you are the kind that cannot be idle even on a holiday."
"Not as bad as all that," replied Stephen, smiling at him.

"Reckon you keep a diary, then," said Clarence, leaning against the
rail.

He made a remarkably graceful figure, Stephen thought. He was tall,
and his movements had what might be called a commanding
indolence. Stephen, while he smiled, could not but admire the tone
and gesture with which Colfax bade a passing negro to get him a
handkerchief from his cabin. The alacrity of the black to do
the errand was amusing enough. Stephen well knew it had not
been such if he wanted a handkerchief.

Stephen said it was not a diary. Mr. Colfax was too well bred to
inquire further; so he never found out that Mr.

Brice was writing an account of the Convention and the speechmaking
for the Missouri Democrat.

"Brice," said the Southerner, "I want to apologize for things I've
done to you and said about you.

I hated you for a long time after you beat me out of Hester, and--"
he hesitated.

Stephen looked up. For the first time he actually liked Colfax. He had
been long enough among Colfax's people to understand how difficult
it was for him to say the thing he wished.

"You may remember a night at my uncle's, Colonel Carvel's, on the
occasion of my cousin's birthday?"
"Yes," said Stephen, in surprise.

"Well," blurted Clarence, boyishly, "I was rude to you in my uncle's
house, and I have since been sorry."

"He held out his hand, and Stephen took it warmly.

"I was younger then, Mr. Colfax," he said, "and I didn't understand
your point of view as well as I do now. Not that I have changed
my ideas," he added quickly, "but the notion of the girl's going
South angered me. I was bidding against the dealer rather than
against you. Had I then known Miss Carvel--" he stopped abruptly.

The winning expression died from the face of the other.

He turned away, and leaning across the rail, stared at the high
bluffs, red-bronzed by the autumn sun. A score of miles beyond
that precipice was a long low building of stone, surrounded by
spreading trees,--the school for young ladies, celebrated throughout
the West, where our mothers and grandmothers were taught,--Monticello.

Hither Miss Virginia Carvel had gone, some thirty days since, for her
second winter.

Perhaps Stephen guessed the thought in the mind of his companion, for
he stared also. The music in the cabin came to an abrupt pause,
and only the tumbling of waters through the planks of the great
wheels broke the silence. They were both startled by laughter at their
shoulders.

There stood Miss Russell, the picture of merriment, her arm locked
in Anne Brinsmade's.

"It is the hour when all devout worshippers turn towards the East,"
she said. "The goddess is enshrined at Monticello."
Both young men, as they got to their feet, were crimson. Whereupon
Miss Russell laughed again. Anne, however, blushed for them. But
this was not the first time Miss Russell had gone too far. Young Mr.
Colfax, with the excess of manner which was his at such times,
excused himself and left abruptly.

This to the further embarrassment of Stephen and Anne, and the keener
enjoyment of Miss Russell.

"Was I not right, Mr. Brice?" she demanded. "Why, you are even writing
verses to her!"

"I scarcely know Miss Carvel," he said, recovering. "And as for
writing verse--"

"You never did such a thing in your life! I can well believe
it."
Miss Russell made a face in the direction Colfax had taken.

"He always acts like that when you mention her," she said.

"But you are so cruel, Puss," said Anne.

"You can't blame him."
"Hairpins!" said Miss Russell.

"Isn't she to marry him?" said Stephen, in his natural voice.

He remembered his pronouns too late.

"That has been the way of the world ever since Adam and Eve,"
remarked Puss.

"I suppose you meant to ask: Mr. Brice, whether Clarence is to marry
Virginia Carvel."
Anne nudged her.

"My dear, what will Mr. Brice think of us?"
"Listen, Mr. Brice," Puss continued, undaunted. "I shall tell you
some gossip. Virginia was sent to Monticello, and went with her
father to Kentucky and Pennsylvania this summer, that she might be
away from Clarence. Colfax." 
"Oh, Puss!" cried Anne.
Miss Russell paid not the slightest heed.
"Colonel Carvel is right," she went on. "I should do the same thing.
They are first cousins, and the Colonel doesn't like that. I am
fond of Clarence. But he isn't good for anything in the world except
horse racing and--and fighting. He wanted to help drive the Black
Republican emigrants out of Kansas, and his mother had to put a
collar and chain on him. He wanted to go filibustering with Walker,
and she had to get down on her knees. And yet," she cried, "if you
Yankees push us as far as war, Mr.
Brice, just look out for him." 
"But--" Anne interposed.
"Oh, I know what you are going to say,--that Clarence has money."
"Puss!" cried Anne, outraged. "How dare you!"
Miss Russell slipped an arm around her waist.
"Come, Anne," she said, "we mustn't interrupt the Senator any longer.
He is preparing his maiden speech."
That was the way in which Stephen got his nickname. It is scarcely
necessary to add that he wrote no more until he reached his little
room in the house on Olive Street.
They had passed Alton, and the black cloud that hung in the still
autumn air over the city was in sight. It was dusk when the 'Jackson'
pushed her nose into the levee, and the song of the negro stevedores
rose from below as they pulled the gang-plank on to the landing-stage.
Stephen stood apart on the hurricane deck, gazing at the dark line
of sooty warehouses.
How many young men with their way to make have felt the same as he
did after some pleasant excursion. The presence of a tall form
beside him shook him from his revery, and he looked up to recognize
the benevolent face of Mr. Brinsmade.
"Mrs. Brice may be anxious, Stephen, at the late hour," said he.
"My carriage is here, and it will give me great pleasure to convey
you to your door."
Dear Mr. Brinsmade! He is in heaven now, and knows at last the good
he wrought upon earth. Of the many thoughtful charities which Stephen
received from him, this one sticks firmest in his remembrance: A
stranger, tired and lonely, and apart from the gay young men and
women who stepped from the boat, he had been sought out by this
gentleman, to whom had been given the divine gift of forgetting
none.
"Oh, Puss," cried Anne, that evening, for Miss Russell had come to
spend the night, "how could you have talked to him so? He scarcely
spoke on the way up in the carriage. You have offended him."
"Why should I set him upon a pedestal?" said Puss, with a thread
in her mouth; "why should you all set him upon a pedestal? He is
only a Yankee," said Puss, tossing her head, "and not so very
wonderful."
"I did not say he was wonderful," replied Anne, with dignity.
"But you girls think him so. Emily and Eugenie and Maude. He had
better marry Belle Cluyme. A great man, he may give some decision
to that family. Anne!" 
"Yes." 
"Shall I tell you a secret?"
"Yes," said Anne. She was human, and she was feminine.
"Then--Virginia Carvel is in love with him."
"With Mr. Brice!" cried astonished Anne. "She hates him!"
"She thinks she hates him," said Miss Russell, calmly.
Anne looked up at her companion admiringly. Her two heroines were
Puss and Virginia. Both had the same kind of daring, but in Puss
the trait had developed into a somewhat disagreeable outspokenness
which made many people dislike her. Her judgments were usually well
founded, and her prophecies had so often come to pass that Anne
often believed in them for no other reason.
"How do you know?" said Anne, incredulously.
"Do you remember that September, a year ago, when we were all out
at Glencoe, and Judge Whipple was ill, and Virginia sent us all
away and nursed him herself?" 
"Yes," said Anne.
"And did you know that Mr. Brice had gone out, with letters, when
the Judge was better?" 
"Yes," said Anne, breathless.
"It was a Saturday afternoon that he left, although they had begged
him to stay over Sunday. Virginia had written for me to come back,
and I arrived in the evening. I asked Easter where Jinny was, and
I found her --" 
"You found her--?" said Anne.
Sitting alone in the summer-house over the river. Easter said she
had been there for two hours. And I have never known Jinny to be
such miserable company as she was that night."
"Did she mention Stephen?" asked Anne.

"No."
"But you did," said Anne, with conviction.Wallace began to
advise Martie not to eat the rich things that made her sick; Martie
counselled him about his new suit, and listened, uneasy and ashamed,
to a brief, penitential reference to "crazy" things he had done, as
a "kid." He promised her never to drink again and incidentally told
her that his real name was Edward Tenney. Suddenly they found the
plural pronoun: we must do that; that doesn't interest us; Pa must
not suspect our affair.

"The Cluetts are going to be in Pittsville," said Wallace one day.
"I want you to meet them. You'll like Mabel; she's got two little
kids. She and Jesse have been married only six years. And they'll
like you, too; I've told 'em you're my girl!"

"Am I?" said Martie huskily. They were alone in Sally's little
house, and for answer he put his arms about her. "Do you love me,
Wallace?" she asked.

The question, the raised blue eyes, fired him to sudden passion.
They kissed each other blindly, with shut eyes. After that, whenever
they might, they kissed, and sometimes Martie, ignorant and
innocent, wondered why the memory of his hot lips worried her a
little.

There was nothing wrong in kissing! Martie still said to herself
that of course they would not marry; yet when she was with Wallace
she loved the evidences of her power over him, and seemed unable, as
he was unable, to keep from the constant question: "Do you love me?"

In late June the Cluetts--pretty faded Mabel, her two enormous
babies, her stepson Lloyd, and Jesse, the husband and father--all
came to Pittsville for a few days' leisure before rehearsals began.
Lloyd was a "light juvenile," off as well as on the stage. Jesse
played father, judge, guardian, prime minister, and old family
doctor in turn. Mabel, rouged and befrilled, still made an
attractive foil for Wallace as the hero. Martie liked them all;
their chatter of the fairyland of the stage, their trunks plastered
with labels, their fine voices, their general air of being
incompetent children adrift in a puzzling world. Deep laughter
stirred within her when they spoke of business or of finance.

They talked frankly, in their three cheap rooms at the "Pittsville
White House," before Wallace's girl. Jesse was pompous; Lloyd
boyishly fretful; Mabel, patient, sympathetic, discouraged, and
sanguine by turns. Martie was enraptured by the babies: Bernadette,
a crimped heavy little brunette of five, and Leroy delicious at
three months in limp little flannel wrappers.

"I'll tell you what, Miss Monroe--I'm going to call you Martha--"
said Mabel, "I'm just about sick of California. I'm not a
Californian; little old New York for mine. I first seen the light of
day at the corner of Sixth Avenue and Sixteenth Street, and I wish
to the good Lord I was there now. You'll never get a fair deal in
Frisker, if any one should ride up on a bike and ask you, dear. We
were doing very good last fall when little Mister Man here decided
to join the party--after that I was simply no good! The box receipts
have fell off steadily since we put that awful girl in. Don't leave
that heavy child paralyze your limbs--she'll set there forever like
an immidge, if you go on telling her stories!"

"I am amused--genuinely amused at the circumstances under which you
find us, Miss Monroe," said Jesse Cluett with a dignified laugh.
"And my friends in the East would be equally surprised. Professional
pride brought me West, the pride of a man whose public demands one
or two favoured parts from him, year after year. My three or four
successes were a great gratification to me; not only the public, but
my fellow actors at the Lambs, assured me that my future was MADE.
'Made?--no,' I said. 'No. I have no wish to become a one-part man.'
To John Drew I said--I met him going into the Club-'H'ar you,
Jesse?' he said. ... Oh, yes; we are warm friends, old friends. I
played for two years with John Drew. Very brilliant actor--in some
ways. And that is only one instance of the enthusiastic appreciation
to which I am accustomed. ... Are we going to eat, my dear?" For
Mrs. Cluett, who in her hospitable enthusiasm over Martie had taken
a little spirit lamp from the washstand and placed a full kettle
over the flame, was now looking about her in a vague, distressed
sort of way.

"It's going out," said she blankly. Philosophically, Jesse put his
wide-brimmed hat over his loose curls and, straightening his
shoulders, walked mincingly out for alcohol with the younger men.
Mrs. Cluett spread a small, spotted fringed cloth on a trunk,
setting on it a cut and odorous lemon a trifle past its prime and a
sticky jar of jam. Martie continued to cuddle Leroy and tell
Bernadette a fairy tale. She found the crowded, tawdry bedroom
delightfully cosy, especially when the men came back with graham
crackers and cheese and spongy, greasy bakery doughnuts.

They all laughed when Wallace asked for the rat-trap's delight; and
when Lloyd dropped a cruller on the floor and thumped his heel to
show its weight; and when Wallace said: "Don't jam or jar Miss
Monroe, Jesse!" But when, in retort for this latest witticism,
Martie said: "Put your hand where it hurts, Wallace, and show Mama";
the laughter changed to actual shrieks of mirth; Jesse indulging in
a deep "ha-ha-ha!" and Mabel hammering her heels madly together and
sobbing put faintly that she should die--she should simply DIE!

Martie almost missed the five o'clock trolley, but Wallace pushed
her upon the moving platform at the last possible moment, and she
laughed and gasped blindly half the way home, accepting his help
with her disordered hair and hat. When she finally raised her face,
and somewhat shamefacedly eyed the one or two other occupants of the
car, she saw Rose sitting opposite, a neat and interested Rose in
her trousseau tailor-made.

Uncomfortable, Martie bowed, and Rose responded sweetly, presently
patting the seat beside her with an inviting glove. Somewhat
surprised at this unexpected graciousness, Martie and her escort
crossed the car.

"No, MRS.--not Miss!" Rose contradicted Wallace merrily, looking up
at him prettily. "I know I'm not very imposing, but I'm a really
truly old married lady!"

"This is Mrs. Rodney Parker, Wallace," Martie said. Instantly she
was pleasantly conscious that her easy use of this actor's name was
a surprise to Rose, and for the first time a definite pride in
possession seized her. He might not be perfection, but he was hers.

"Is that so!" Wallace exclaimed, with new interest in eyes and
voice. "Gosh--what fun we had that night! Do you remember the night
we had oysters, and sat in that little place gassing for two hours?
You know," said he, in a confidential aside to Rose, "Martie's a
wonder when she gets started!"

"Isn't she?" Rose responded politely. "That was before I met my
husband, I think," she added, "or rather re-met him, for years ago
Mr. Parker and I---"

But Wallace, amused by the discussion that had arisen between the
conductor and a Chinese who was getting on the car, interrupted
abruptly to call Martie's attention to the affair, and Rose's
reminiscence was lost. She said, with her good-byes, that Mr.
Bannister must come and dine with them.

"Gosh, I see myself!" ejaculated Wallace ungratefully, as he walked
with Martie to the gate. "I never could stand that ass Parker!"

"Don't you think she's very pretty, Wallace?"

"Oh, I don't know! I don't care much for those dolly women. I like
red hair and big women, myself. Listen, Martie. To-morrow---"

No more was said of Rose. Martie wondered why she liked to hear
Rodney Parker called an ass.

Malcolm Monroe came home for luncheon every day except Wednesday,
which made Wednesday for the women of the family the easy day of the
week. Their midday meal, never elaborate or formal, was less formal
and even simpler on this day; conversation was more free, and time
less considered.

For several days after Sally's extraordinary marriage Mrs. Monroe
had wept continually, and even her always mild and infrequent
attempts at conversation had been silenced. Later, she and Lydia had
long and mournful discussions of the event, punctuating them with
heavy sighs and uncomprehending shaking of their heads. That a
Monroe in her senses could stoop to a Hawkes was a fact that would
never cease to puzzle and amaze, and what the town was saying and
thinking in the matter was an agonized speculation to Mrs. Monroe
and Lydia. "Socially, of course," said Lydia, "we will never hold up
our heads again!"

But as the days went by and the divorce of the young Mulkeys, and
the new baby at Mrs. Hughie Wilson's, and the Annual Strawberry
Festival and Bazaar for the Church Debt came along to make the
gossip about Sally and Joe of secondary interest, Sally's mother and
sister revived. They came to take a bitter-sweet satisfaction in the
sympathy and interest that were shown on all sides.

Martie was not often at home in these days. "She fairly lives at the
Library, and she takes long walks, I imagine, Ma," Lydia said once.
"You know Martie misses---she's lonely. And then--there was, of
course, the feeling about Rodney. It's just Martie's queer way of
righting herself."

But on the hot Wednesday morning that brought in July Martie, with a
clear conscience, was baking gingerbread. She had improved in manner
and habit, of late, displaying an unwonted interest in the care of
herself and her person, and an unwonted energy in discharging
domestic duties.

She was buttering pans vigorously, and singing "The Two Grenadiers,"
when Lydia came into the kitchen.

"Martie, Pa just came in the gate. Isn't that maddening! We'll have
to give him something canned; he hates eggs. Can't you make some
drop cakes of that batter so they'll be done?"

"Sure I can!" Martie snatched a piece of paper to butter. "But what
brings him home?"

"Why, I haven't the faintest---" Lydia was beginning, when her
father's voice came in a shout from the dining room:

"Martie--Martie--MARTIE!"

Terror seized Martie, her mouth watered saltly, her knees touched,
and a chill shook her. The hot day turned bleak. She and Lydia
exchanged a sick look before Martie, trembling, crossed the pantry,
littered by Lydia's silver polish and rags, and went in to face the
furious old man on the hearthrug. Malcolm was quivering so violently
that his own fear seemed to be that he would lose his voice before
he had gained his information. Martie was vaguely conscious that her
mother, frightened and pale, was in the room, and that Len had come
to the hall doorway.

"Martie," said her father, breathing hard, "where were you yesterday
afternoon?"

"At Alice Clark's Five Hundred with Lyd---" the girl was beginning
innocently. He cut her short with an impatient shake of the head.

"I don't mean yesterday! Where were you on Monday?"

"Monday? Why, Mama and I walked down to Bonestell's."

"Yes, we did, Pa! Yes, we did!" quavered Mrs. Monroe. "Oh, Pa, WHAT
IS IT?"

"And then what did you do?" he pursued blackly, turning to his wife.

"Why--why, Martie said she was going to go over to Pittsville and
back, just for the ride--just to stay on the trolley, Pa!" explained
his wife.

"Martie," thundered her father, "when you went to Pittsville you saw
your sister, didn't you?"

Martie's head was held erect. She was badly frightened, but
conscious through all her fear that there was a certain satisfaction
in having the blow fall at last.

"Yes, sir," she gulped; she wet her lips. "Yes, sir," she said
again.

"You admit it?" said Malcolm, his eyes narrowing.

Lydia, pale and terrified, had come in from the kitchen. Now she
suddenly spoke.

"Oh, Pa, don't--don't blame Martie for that! You know what the girls
always were to each other--I don't mean to be impertinent, Pa--do
forgive me!--but Martie and Sally always---" "One moment, Lydia,"
said her father, with a repressive gesture, the veins blue on his
forehead. "JUST--ONE--MOMENT." And, panting, he turned again to
Martie. "Yes, and who else did you see in Pittsville?" he whispered,
his voice failing.

Martie, breathing fast, her bright eyes fixed upon him with a sort
of fascination, did not answer.

"I'll tell you who you saw," said Malcolm at white heat. "I'll tell
you! You met this young whippersnapper Jackanapes--what's his name--
this young one-night actor---"

"Do you mean Mr. Wallace Bannister?" Martis asked with a sort of
frightened scorn.

Lydia and her mother gasped audibly in the silence. Malcolm moved
his eyes slowly from his youngest daughter's face to his wife's, to
Lydia's, and back to Martie again. For two dreadful moments he
studied her, an ugly smile touching his harsh mouth.

"You don't deny it," he said, after the interval, in a shaking
voice. "You don't deny that you've been disobeying me and lying to
me for weeks? Now I tell you, my girl--there's been enough of this
sort of thing going on in this family. You couldn't get the man you
wanted, so, like your sister, you pick up---"

Martie laughed briefly and bitterly. The sound seemed to madden him.
For a moment he watched her, his head dropped forward like a
menacing animal.

"Understand me, Martie," he said. "I'll break that spirit in you--if
it takes the rest of my life! You'll laugh in a different way! My
God--am I to be the laughing-stock of this entire town? Is a girl
your age to---"

"Pa!" sobbed Mrs. Monroe. "Do what you think best, but don't--DON'T
excite yourself so!"

Her clutching fingers on his arm seemed to soothe in through all his
fury. He fell silent, still panting, and eying Martie belligerently.

"You--go to your room!" he commanded, pointing a shaking finger at
her. "Go upstairs with your sister, Lydia, and bring me the key of
her door. When I decide upon the measure that will bring this young
lady quickest to her senses, I'll let her know. Meanwhile---"

"Oh, Pa, you needn't lock Martie in," quivered Lydia, "she'll stay--
won't you, Martie?"

Martie, like a young animal at bay, stood facing them all for a
breathless moment. In that time the child that had been in her,
through all these years of slow development, died. Anger went out of
her eyes, and an infinite sadness filled them. A quick tremble of
her lips and a flutter at her nostrils were the only signs she gave
of the tears she felt rising. She flung one arm about her mother and
kissed the wet, faded cheek.

"Good-bye, Ma," she said quickly. In another instant she had crossed
to the entrance hall, blindly snatched an old soft felt hat from the
rack, caught up Len's overcoat, and slipped into it, and was gone.
Born in that moment of unreasoning terror, her free soul went with
her.

The streets were flooded with hot summer sunshine, the sky almost
white. Not a breeze stirred the thick foliage of the elm trees on
Main Street as Martie walked quickly down to the Bank.

It was Rodney Parker who gave her her money; the original seventeen
dollars and fifty cents had swelled to almost twenty-two dollars
now. Martie hardly saw the gallant youth who congratulated her upon
her becoming gipsy hat; mechanically she slipped her money into a
pocket, mechanically started for the road to Pittsville.

Five minutes later she boarded the half-past twelve o'clock trolley,
coming in excited and exultant upon Sally who was singing quietly
over a solitary luncheon. The girls laughed and cried together.

"The funny thing is, I am as free as air!" Martie exclaimed, her
cheeks glowing from the tea and the sympathy and the warm room. "But
I never knew it! If Pa had gotten on that trolley, I think I would
have fainted with shock. But what could he do? I am absolutely FREE,
Sally--with twenty-one dollars and eighty-one cents!"

"I wish you had a husband---" mused Sally.

"I'd rather have a job," Martie said with a quick, bright flush
nevertheless. "But I think I know how to get one. Mrs. Cluett is
going to be playing steadily now, and after this engagement they're
going to try very hard to get booked in New York. She's got to have
SOME ONE to look out for the children."

"But Martie---" Sally said timidly, "you'd only be a sort of
servant---"

"Well, that's the only thing I know anything about," Martie answered
simply. "It might lead to something---"

"Then you and Wallace aren't---?" Sally faltered. "There's nothing
serious---?"

Martie could not control the colour that swept up to the white
parting of her hair, but her mouth showed new firmness as she
answered gravely:

"Sally--I don't know. Of course, I like him--how could I help it?
We're awfully good chums; he's the best chum I ever had. But he
never--well, he never asked me. Sally"--Martie rested her elbows on
the table, and her chin on her hands--"Sally, would you marry him?"

"If I loved him I would," said Sally.

"Yes, but did you KNOW you loved Joe?" Martie asked. Sally was
silent.

"Well--not so much--before--as after we were married," she said
hesitatingly, after a pause.

Martie suddenly sprang up.

"Well, I'm going to see Mrs. Cluett!"

"I'll go, too," said Sally, "and we'll stop at the express office
and tell Joe!"

Mrs. Cluett was alone with her children when the callers went in,
and even Martie's sensitive heart could have asked no warmer
reception of her plan.

The little actress kissed Sally, and kissed Martie more than once,
brimming over with interest and sympathy.

"Dearie, it ain't much of a start for you, but it is a start!" said
Mabel warmly over the head of the nursing baby. "And you'll get your
living and your railroad fares out of it, anyway! It'll be an
ackshal godsend to Mr. Cluett and me, for the children have took to
you something very unusual. We'll have elegant times going around
together, and you'll never be sorry."

These cheering sentiments Jesse echoed when he came in with Lloyd a
few minutes later.

"Much depends upon our future contracts, Miss Monroe," said he, "but
I will go so far as to say this. Should you some time desire to try
the calling that Shakespeare honoured, the opportunity will not be
lacking!"

This threw Sally, Martie, and Mabel into transports. It now being
after three o'clock tea was proposed.

And now Martie busied herself happily as one belonging to the little
establishment. Sally had taken rapturous possession of Leroy. Mabel
lighted the alcohol lamp. Martie, delayed by the affectionate
Bernadette, shook out the spotted cloth, and cut the stale cake.

They were all absorbed and chattering when Wallace Bannister opened
the door. At sight of him Martie straightened up, the long knife in
one hand, Bernadette's sticky little fingers clinging to the other.
The news was flung at him excitedly. Martie had left home--she was
never going back--she had only twenty dollars and an old coat and
hat--she was going to stay with Mabel for the present---

"What's this sweet dream about staying with Mabel?" Wallace said,
bewildered, reproachful, definite. He came over to Martie and put
one arm about her. "Look here, folks," he said, almost indignantly,
"Martie's my girl, aren't you, Martie? We're going to be married
right now, this afternoon; and hereafter what I do, she does--and
where I go, she goes!"

The love in his eyes, the love in all their watching faces, Martie
never forgot. Like a great river of warmth and sunshine it lifted
her free of her dry, thirsty girlhood; she felt the tears of joy
pressing against her eyes. There was nothing critical, nothing
calculating, nothing repressing here; her lover wanted her, just as
she stood, penniless, homeless, without a dress except the blue
gingham she wore!

The glory of it lighted with magic that day and the days to come.
They laughed over the pretty gipsy hat, over Len's coat, over the
need of borrowing Mabel's brush and comb. With Joe and Sally, they
all dined together, and wandered about the village streets in the
summer moonlight; then Martie went to bed, too happy and excited to
sleep, in Bernadette's room, wearing a much-trimmed nightgown of
Mabel's. It had been decided that the marriage should take place in
San Francisco, Wallace sensibly suggesting that there would be less
embarrassing questioning there, and also that Martie's money might
be spent to better advantage in the city.

Martie's trunk came to Sally's house the next morning, unaccompanied
by message or note, and three days later Martie wrote her mother a
long letter from a theatrical boarding-house in Geary Street,
sending a copy of the marriage certificate of Martha Salisbury
Monroe to Edward Vincent Tenney in Saint Patrick's Church, San
Francisco, and observing with a touch of pride that "my husband" was
now rehearsing for an engagement of seven weeks at sixty dollars a
week. There was no answer.


BOOK II

CHAPTER I


For days it was her one triumphant thought. She was married! She was
splendidly and unexpectedly a wife. And her life partner was no mere
Monroe youth, and her home was not merely one of the old, familiar
Monroe cottages. She was the wife of a rising actor, and she lived
in the biggest city of the State!

Martie exulted innocently and in secret. She reviewed the simple
fact again and again. The two Monroe girls were married. A dimple
would deepen in her cheek, a slow smile tug at her lips, when she
thought of it. She told Wallace, in her simple childish way, that
she had never really expected to be married; she thought that she
would like to go back to Monroe for a visit, and let her old friends
see the plain gold ring on her big, white hand.

Everything in Martie's life, up to this point, had helped her to
believe that marriage was the final step in any woman's experience.
A girl was admired, was desired, and was married, if she was,
humanly speaking, a success. If she was not admired, if no one asked
her in marriage, she was a failure. This was the only test.

Martie's thoughts never went on to the years that followed marriage,
the experiences and lessons; these were all lost in the golden glow
that surrounded the step safely accomplished. That the years between
thirty and fifty are as long as the years between ten and thirty,
never occurred to her. With the long, dull drag of her mother's life
before her eyes, she never had thought that Rose's life, that
Sally's life, as married women, could ever be long and dull. They
were married--doubt and surmise and hope were over. Lydia and Miss
Fanny were not married. Therefore, Rose and Sally and Martie had an
obvious advantage over Lydia and Fanny.

It was a surprise to her to find life placidly proceeding here in
this strange apartment in Geary Street, as if all the world had not
stopped moving and commenced again. The persons she met called her
"Mrs. Bannister" with no visible thrill. Nobody seemed surprised
when she and the big actor quietly went into their room at night and
shut the door.

She had fancied that the mere excitement of the new life filled all
brides with a sort of proud complacency; that they felt superior to
other human beings, and secretly scorned the unwed. It was
astonishing to find herself still concerned with the tiny questions
of yesterday: the ruffle torn on the bureau, the little infection
that swelled and inflamed her chin, the quarter of a dollar her
Chinese laundryman swore he had never received. It was always
tremendously thrilling to have Wallace give her money: delightful
gold pieces such as even her mother seldom handled. She felt a naive
resentment that so many of them had to be spent for what she called
"uninteresting" things: lodging and food and car fares. They seemed
so more than sufficient, when she first touched them; they melted so
mysteriously away. She felt that there should be great saving on so
generous an allowance, but Wallace never saved, nor did any of his
friends and associates.

So that a sense of being baffled began to puzzle her. She was
married now; the great question of life had been answered in the
affirmative. But--but the future was vague and unsettled still. Even
married persons had their problems. Even the best of husbands
sometimes left a tiny something to be desired.

Husbands, in Martie's dreams, were ideal persons who laughed
indulgently at adored wives, produced money without question or
stint, and for twenty or fifty years, as the span of their lives
might decree, came home appreciatively to delicious dinners,
escorted their wives proudly to dinner or theatre, made presents,
paid compliments, and disposed of bills. That her mother had once
perhaps had some such idea of her father did not occur to her.

"Lissen, dear, did I wake you up?" said Mrs. Wallace Bannister,
coming quietly into the sitting room that connected her bedroom with
that of Mrs. Jesse Cluett, in the early hours of an August morning.

"No--o! This feller wakes me up," Mrs. Cluett said, yawning and
pale, but cheerful. She indicated the fat, serious baby in her arms.
"Honest, it's enough to kill a girl, playing every night and Sunday,
and trying to raise children!" she added, manipulating her flat
breast with ringed fingers to meet the little mouth.

"I wish I could either have the baby nights, or play your parts!"
laughed Martie, reaching lazily for manicure scissors and beginning
to clip her nails, as she sat in a loose, blue kimono opposite the
older woman.

"Dearie, you'll have your own soon enough!" Mabel answered
gratefully. "It won't be so hard long. They get so's they can take
care of themselves very quick. Look at Dette--goodness knows where
she's been ever since she got up. She must of drunk her milk and
eaten her san'wich, because here's the empty glass. She's playing
somewhere; she's all right."

"Oh, sure--she's all right!" Martie said, smiling lazily. And as
Leroy finished his meal she put out her arms. "Come to Aunt Martie,
Baby. Oh, you--cunnin'--little--scrap, you!"

"You'd ought to have one, Mart," said Mabel affectionately.

The wife of a month flushed brightly. With her loosened bronze braid
hanging over her shoulder, her blue eyes soft with happiness, and
her full figure only slightly disguised by the thin nightgown and
wrapper she wore, she looked the incarnation of potent youth and
beauty.

"I'd love it," she said, burying her hot cheeks in the little space
between Leroy's fluffy crown and the collar of his soggy little
double gown.

"I love 'em, too," Mabel agreed. "But they cert'ny do tie you down.
Dette was the same way--only I sort of forgot it."

"If this salary was going to keep up, I'd like a dozen of 'em!"
Martie smiled.

"Well, Wallace ought to do well," Mabel conceded. "But of course,
you can't be sure. My idea is to plunge in and HAVE them,
regardless. Things'll fit if they've GOT to."

"That's the NICEST way," Martie said timidly. She had married,
knowing nothing of wifehood and motherhood, except the one fact that
the matter of children must be left entirely to chance. But she did
not like to tell Mabel so.

She sat on in the pleasant morning sunshine, utterly happy, utterly
at ease. The baby went to sleep as the two women murmured together.
Outside the lace-curtained windows busy Geary Street had long been
astir. Wagons rattled up and down; cable-cars clanged. Sunlight had
already conquered the summer fog. It was nine o'clock.

Mabel was enjoying tea and toast, but Martie refused to join her. If
every hour had not been so blissful the young wife would have said
that the happiest time of the day was when she and Wallace wandered
out into the sunshine together for breakfast.

Presently she slipped away to take the bath that was a part of her
morning routine now, and to wake Wallace. With his tumbled hair, his
flushed face and his pale blue pajama jacket open at the throat
Martie thought him no more than a delightful, drowsy boy. She sat on
the edge of the bed beside him, teasing him to open his eyes.

"Ah--you darling!" Wallace was not too sleepy to appreciate her
cool, fresh kisses. "Oh, Lord, I'm a wreck! What time is it?"

"Nearly ten. You've had ten hours' sleep, darling. I don't know what
you WANT!" Martie answered--at the bureau now, with the glory of her
hair falling about her.

While they dressed they talked; delicious irrelevant chatter
punctuated with laughter and kisses. The new stock company was a
success, and Wallace working hard and happily. At ten the young
Bannisters went forth in search of breakfast, the best meal of the
day.

Martie loved the city: Market Street, Kearney Street, Union Square.
She loved the fresh breath of the morning in her face. She always
had her choice of flowers at the curb market about Lotta's fountain,
pinning a nodding bunch of roses, Shasta daisies, pansies, or
cafnations at the belt of her white shirtwaists. They went to the
Vienna Bakery or to Swain's for their leisurely meal, unless Wallace
was hungry enough to beg for the Poodle Dog, or they felt rich
enough for the Palace. Now and then they walked out of the familiar
neighbourhood and tried a strange restaurant or hotel--but not
often.

Usually Martie had Swain's famous toasted muffins for her breakfast,
daintily playing with coffee and fruit while Wallace disposed of
cereal, eggs and ham, and fried potatoes. She used to marvel that he
never grew fat on this hearty fare; sometimes he had sharp touches
of indigestion.

Over their meal they talked untiringly, marvelling anew at the
miracle of their finding each other. Martie learned her husband's
nature as if it had been a book. Sensitive here--evasive there; a
little coarse, perhaps, a little simple. However surprising his
differences it was for her to adapt herself. She was almost glad
when his unconscious demands required of her the smallest sacrifice;
getting so much, how glad she was to give!

After breakfast, when Wallace was not rehearsing and they were free
to amuse themselves, they prowled through the Chinese quarter, and
through the Italian colony. They rode on windy "dummies" out to the
beach, and went scattering peanut shells along the wet sands. They
visited the Park, the Mint, and the big baths, or crossed to Oakland
or Sausalito, where Martie learned to swim. Martie found Wallace
tireless in his appetite for excursions, and committed herself
cheerfully to his guidance. Catching a train, they rejoiced; missing
it, they were none the less happy.

Twice a week a matinee performance brought Wallace to the Granada
Theatre at one o'clock. On other days, rehearsals began at eleven
and ended at three or occasionally as late as four. The theatre life
charmed Martie like a fairy tale. She never grew tired of its
thrill.

It was gratifying in the first place to enter the door marked
"Stage" with a supplementary legend, NO ADMITTANCE, and pass the old
doorkeeper who knew and liked her. The dark passages beyond,
smelling of escaping gas and damp straw, of unaired rooms and
plumbing and fresh paint, were perfumed with romance to her, as were
the little dressing rooms with old photographs stuck in the loosened
wallpaper and dim initials scratched on the bare walls, and odd wigs
and scarfs and paint jars littering the shelves. Wallace making up
his face was an exalted being in the eyes of his wife.

When the play began, she took her station in the wings--silent,
unobtrusive, eager to keep out of everybody's way, eager not to miss
a word of the play. The man over her head, busy with his lights; the
one or two shirt-sleeved, elderly men who invariably stood
dispassionately watching the performance; the stage-hands; the
various members of the cast: for all these she had a smile, and
their answering smiles were Martie's delight.

"Take off ten pounds, Martie, and Bellew will give you a show some
time!" said Maybelle La Rue, who was Mabel Cluett in private life.
Martie gasped at the mere thought. She determined to diet.

A few months before, she had supposed that social intercourse was a
large factor in the actor's life, that midnight suppers were shared
by the cast, and that intimacy of an unconventional if harmless
nature reigned among them. Now, with some surprise, she learned that
this was not the case. The actors, leaving the play at different
moments, quietly got into their street clothes and disappeared; so
that Mabel and Wallace, usually holding the stage for the last few
moments by reason of their respective parts of maid and lover, often
left a theatre empty of performers except for themselves. Jesse
would frequently reach home enough earlier to be sound asleep when
his wife rushed in to seize her hungry and fretting baby. Little
Leroy spent the early evening in Martie's bed; one of the maids in
the house being paid in Mabel's old finery for coming to look at the
children now and then.

At intervals the Bannisters and the Cluetts did have little after-
theatre suppers, but Martie was heroically dieting, Mabel tired and
sleepy, and both gentlemen somewhat subject to indigestion. So
Martie and Wallace more often went alone, Martie drinking bouillon
and nibbling a cracker, and her husband devouring large orders of
coffee and scrambled eggs.

They had been married perhaps eight weeks when Wallace astonished
her by drinking too much. She had always fancied herself too broad-
minded to resent this in the usual wifely way, but the fact angered
her, and she suffered over the incident for days.

It was immediately after the termination of his successful
engagement, and he and the Cluetts were celebrating the inauguration
of a rest. With two or three other members of the cast, they went to
dine at the Cliff House, preceding the dinner with several cocktails
apiece. There was a long wait for the planked steak, during which
time more cocktails were ordered; Martie, who had merely tasted the
first one, looking on amiably as the others drank.

Presently Mabel began to laugh unrestrainedly, much to Martie's
half-comprehending embarrassment. The men, far from seeming to be
shocked by her hysteria, laughed violently themselves.

"Time f'r 'nother round cocktails!" Jesse said. Martie turned to her
husband.

"Wallace! Don't order any more. Not until we've had some solid food,
anyway. Can't you see that we don't need them?"

"What is it, dear?" Wallace moved his eyes heavily to look at her.
His face was flushed, and as he spoke he wet his lips with his
tongue. "Whatever you say, darling," he said earnestly. "You have
only to ask, and I will give you anything in my power. Let me know
what you wish---"

"I want you not to drink any more," Martie said distressedly.

"Why not, Martie--why not, li'l girl?" Wallace asked her
caressingly. He put his arm about her shoulders, breathing hotly in
her face. "Do you know that I am crazy about you?" he murmured.

"If you are," Martie answered, with an uncomfortable glance about
for watching eyes, "please, please---!"

"Martie," he said lovingly, "do you think I am drinking too much?"

"Well--well, I think you have had enough, Wallace," she stammered.

"Dearie, I will stop if you say so," he answered, "but you amuse me.
I am just as col' sober---" And, a fresh reinforcement of cocktails
having arrived, he drank one off as he spoke, setting down the
little empty glass with a long gasp.

After that the long evening was an agony to Martie. Mabel laughed
and screamed; wine was spilled; the food was wasted and wrecked.
Wallace's face grew hotter and hotter. Jesse became sodden and
sleepy; champagne packed in a bucket of ice was brought, and Martie
saw Wallace's gold pieces pay for it.

It was not an unusual scene. She had looked on at just such scenes,
taking place at the tables all about her, more than once in the last
few weeks. Even now, this was not the only group that had dined less
wisely than well. But the shame of it, the fear of what might happen
before Wallace was safely at home in bed, sickened Martie to the
soul.

She went to the dressing room with Mabel, who was sick. Presently
they were all out in a drizzling rain, stumbling their way up the
hill and blundering aboard a street car. Two nice, quiet women on
the opposite seat watched the group in shocked disgust; Martie felt
that she would never hold up her head again. Wallace fell when they
got off, and his hat rolled in the mud. Martie tried to help him,
somehow got him upstairs to his room, somehow got him into bed,
where he at once fell asleep, and snored.

It was just eleven o'clock. Martie washed her face, and brushed her
hair, and sat down, in a warm wrapper, staring gloomily at the
unconscious form on the bed. She could hear Mabel and Jesse laughing
and quarrelling in the room adjoining. Presently Mabel came in for
the baby, who usually slept in Martie's room during the earlier part
of the night, so that his possible crying would not disturb
Bernadette.

"Poor Wallace--he is all in, down and out!" Mabel said, settling
herself to nurse the baby. She looked flushed and excited still, but
was otherwise herself. "He certainly was lit up like a battleship,"
she added in an amused voice; "as for me, I'm ashamed of myself--I'm
always that way!"

Martie's indignant conviction was that Mabel might indeed be ashamed
of herself, and this airy expression of what should have been
penitence too deep for words, gave her a curious shock.

"They all do it," said Mabel, smiling after a long yawn, "and I
suppose it's better to have their wives with 'em, than to have 'em
go off by themselves!"

"They all SHOULDN'T do it!" Martie answered sombrely.

"Well, no; I suppose they shouldn't!" Mabel conceded amiably. She
carried the baby away, and Martie sat on, gazing sternly at the
unconscious Wallace.

Half an hour passed, another half hour. Martie had intended to do
some serious thinking, but she found herself sleepy.

After a while she crept in beside her husband, and went to sleep,
her heart still hot with anger.

But when the morning came she forgave him, as she was often to
forgive him. What else could she do? The sunlight was streaming into
their large, shabby bedroom, cable cars were rattling by, fog
whistles from the bay penetrated the soft winter air. Martie was
healthily hungry for breakfast, Wallace awakened good natured and
penitent.

"You were a darling to me last night, Mart," he said appreciatively.

Martie had not known he was awake. She turned from her mirror,
regarding him steadily between the curtains of her shining hair.

"And you're a darling not to rub it in," Wallace pursued.

"I WOULD rub it in," Martie said in a hurt voice, "if I thought it
would do any good!"

Wallace sat up, and pressed his hands against his forehead.

"Well, believe me--that was the last!" he said fervently. "Never
again!"

"Oh, dearest," Martie said, coming to sit beside him, "I hope you
mean that!" That he did mean it, they both believed.

Half an hour later, when they went out to breakfast, she was in her
happiest mood. The little cloud, in vanishing, had left the sky
clearer than before. But some little quality of blind admiration and
faith was gone from her wifeliness thereafter.

In December the stock company had a Re-engagement Extraordinary, and
Martie got her first part. It was not much of a part--three lines--
but she approached it with passionate seriousness, and when the
first rehearsal came, rattled off her three lines so glibly that the
entire jaded company and the director enjoyed a refreshing laugh. At
the costumier's, in a fascinating welter of tarnished and shabby
garments, she selected a suitable dress, and Wallace coached her,
made up her face, and prompted her with great pride. So the tiny
part went well, and one of the papers gave a praising line to
"Junoesque Miss Salisbury." These were happy days. Martie loved the
odorous, dark, crowded world behind the scenes, loved to be a part
of it. This was living indeed!

And Sally was expecting a baby! Martie laughed aloud from sheer
excitement and pleasure when the news came. It was almost like
having one herself; in one way even more satisfactory, because she
was too busy now to be interrupted. She spent the first money she
had ever earned in sending Sally a present for the baby; smiling
again whenever she pictured Sally was showing it to old friends in
Monroe: "From Martie; isn't it gorgeous?"

The weeks fled by. Wallace began to talk of moving to New York. It
was always their dream. Instinctively they wanted New York. Their
talk of it, their plans for it, were as enthusiastic as they were
ignorant, if Wallace could only get the chance to play on Broadway!
That seemed to both of them the goal of their ambition. Always
hopeful of another part, Martie began to read and study seriously.
She had much spare time, and she used it. From everybody and
everything about her she learned: a few German phrases from the
rheumatic old man whose wife kept the lodging house; Juliet's lines
and the lines of Lady Macbeth from Mabel's shabby books; and
something of millinery from the little Irishwoman who kept a shop on
the corner, with "Elise" written across its window. She learned all
of Wallace's parts, and usually Mabel's as well. Often she went to
the piano in the musty parlour of the Geary Street house and played
"The Two Grenadiers" and "Absent." She brimmed with energy; while
Wallace or Mabel wrangled with the old costumier, Martie was busily
folding and smoothing the garments of jesters and clowns and Dolly
Vardens. She had a curious instinct for trade terms; she could not
buy a yard of veiling without an eager little talk with the
saleswoman; the chance phrase of a conductor or the woman in the
French laundry amused and interested her.

Away from all the repressing influences of her childhood, healthy
and happy, she met the claims of the new state with a splendid and
unthinking passion. To yield herself generously and supremely was
the only natural thing; she had no dread and no regret. From the old
life she brought to this hour only an instinctive reticence, so that
Mabel never had the long talks and the short talks she had
anticipated with the bride, and never dared say a word to Martie
that might not have been as safely said to Bernadette.


CHAPTER II


On A hot Sunday in early March Martie came back from church to find
Wallace gone. She had had no breakfast, but had stopped on the way
home to get six enormous oranges in a paper bag. The heat had given
her a stupid headache, and she felt limp and tired. It was delicious
to undress, to climb into the smoothed bed, and to sink back against
the pillows.

A bulky newspaper, smelling of printer's ink, was on the chair
beside her bed, but Martie did not open it for a while. Serious
thoughts held her. Opening her orange, she said to herself, with a
little flutter at her heart, that it must be so. She was going to
have a baby!

Fear and pride shook her. It seemed a tremendous thing; not at all
like the other babies other women had been having since time began.
She could not believe it--of herself, Martie Monroe, who had been an
ignorant girl only a few months ago!

Yet she had been vaguely suspecting the state of affairs for more
than a week; when morning after morning found her languid and weary,
when Wallace's fork crushing an egg-yolk had given her a sudden
sensation of nausea. She felt so stupid, so tired all the time. She
could not sleep at night; she could hardly stay awake in the
daytime.

Her eyes were heavy now. She glanced indifferently at the newspaper,
smiled a contented little smile, and, murmuring, "I wonder--I
wonder--" and fell into delicious sleep.

She slept for a long time. Wallace, coming in at two o'clock,
awakened her. Afternoon sunlight was streaming into the room, which
was scented with the decaying sweetness of orange peel. Dazed and
stupid, yet dreamily content, Martie smiled upon him. He hated
Sunday rehearsals: she could see that he was in a bad mood, and his
obvious effort to think of her and to disguise his own feeling
touched her.

"Tired?" she asked affectionately. "Isn't it hot?"

"How are you?" Wallace questioned in turn. "You felt so rotten
yesterday."

He sat down beside her, and pushed the dark hair from his big
forehead, and she saw that his face was damp and pale.

"Fine!" she assured him, laying her hand over his.

They remained so for a full minute, Wallace staring gloomily at
nothing, Martie's eyes idly roving about the room. Then the man
reached for a section of the paper, glanced at it indifferently, and
flung it aside.

"There wasn't any rehearsal this morning," he observed after a
pause. He cleared his throat self-consciously before speaking and
Martie, glancing quickly at him, saw that he intended the statement
to have a significance.

"Where were you then?" she asked duly.

"I was--I was--" He hesitated, expelling a long breath suddenly.
"Something came up," he amended, "and I had to see about it."

"What came up?" Martie pursued, more anxious to set his mind at
rest, than curious.

"Well--it all goes back to some time ago, Mart; before I knew you,"
Wallace said, in a carefully matter-of-fact tone. But she could see
that he was troubled, and a faint stir of apprehension shook her own
heart.

"Money?" she guessed quickly.

"No," he said reassuringly, "nothing like that!"

He got up, and restlessly circled the room, drawing the shade that
was rattling gently at the window, flinging his coat across a chair.

Then he went back, and sat down by the bed again, locking his
dropped hands loosely between his knees, and looking steadily at the
worn old colourless carpet.

"You see this Golda--" he began.

"Golda who?" Martie echoed.

"This girl I've been talking to this morning," Wallace supplied
impatiently; "Golda White."

"Who is she?" Martie asked, bewildered, as his heavy voice stopped
on the name.

"Oh, she's a girl I used to know! I haven't seen her for eight or
ten years--since I left Portland, in fact."

"But who IS she, Wallie?" Martie had propped herself in pillows, she
was wide awake now, and her voice was firm and quick.

"Well, wait and I'll tell you, I'll tell you the whole thing. I
don't believe there's anything in it, but anyway, I'll tell you, and
you and I can sort of talk it over. You see I met this girl in
Portland, when I was a kid in my uncle's lumber office. I was about
twenty-two or three, and she was ten years older than that. But we
ran with the same crowd a lot, and I saw her all the time---"

"She was in the office?"

"Sure. She was Uncle Chester's steno. She was a queer sort of girl;
pretty, too. I was sore because my father made me work there, and I
wanted to join the navy or go to college, or go on the stage, and
she'd sit there making herself collars and things, and sort of
console me. She was engaged to a fellow in Los Angeles, or she said
she was.

"We liked each other all right, she'd tell me her troubles and I'd
tell her mine; she had a stepfather she hated, and sometimes she'd
cry and all that. The crowd began to jolly us about liking each
other, and I could see she didn't mind it much---"

"Perhaps she loved you, Wallie?" Martie suggested on a quick,
excited breath.

"You bet your life she loved me!" he affirmed positively.

"Poor girl!" said the wife in pitying anticipation of a tragedy.

"Don't call her 'poor girl!'" Wallace said, his face darkening.
"She'll look out for herself. There's a lot of talk," he added with
a sort of dull resentment, "about 'leading young girls astray,' and
'betraying innocence,' and all that, but I want to tell you right
now that nine times out of ten it's the girls that do the leading
astray! You ask any fellow---"

The expression on Martie's face did not alter by the flicker of an
eyelash. She had been looking steadily at him, and she still stared
steadily. But she felt her throat thicken, and the blood begin to
pump convulsively at her heart.

"But Wallace," she stammered eagerly, "she wasn't--she wasn't---"

"Sure she was!" he said coarsely; "she was as rotten as the rest of
them!"

"But--but---" Martie's lips felt dry, her voice failed her.

"I was only a kid, I tell you," said Wallace, uneasily watching her.
"Why, Mart," he added, dropping on his knees beside the bed, and
putting his arms about her, "all boys are like that! Every one knows
it. There isn't a man you know---And you're the only girl I ever
loved, Sweetheart, you know that. Men are different, that's all. A
boy growing up can't any more keep out of it---And I never lied to
you, Mart. I told you when we were engaged that I wished to God, for
your sake, that I'd never---"

"Yes, I know!" Martie whispered, shutting her eyes. He kissed her
suddenly colourless cheek, and she heard him move away.

"Well, to go on with the rest of this," Wallace resumed suddenly.
Martie opened tired eyes to watch him, but he did not meet her look.

"Golda and I went together for about a year," he said, "and finally
she got to talking as if we were going to be married. One day--it
was a rainy day in the office, and I had a cold, and she fixed me up
something hot to drink--she got to crying, and she said her
stepfather had ordered her out of the house. I didn't believe it
then, and I don't believe it now, but anyway, we talked it all over,
and she said she was going down to Los Angeles and hunt up this
other fellow. Well, that made me feel kind of sick, because we had
been going together for so long, and her talking about how things
would be when we were married and all that, and I said--you know the
way you do--'What's the matter with us getting married, right now?'"

Martie's face was fixed in a look of agonized attention: she made no
sound.

"She said we wouldn't have anything to live on," Wallace pursued,
not looking at his wife, "and that she wanted to take a rest when
she got married, and have a little fun. Well, I says, we can keep it
quiet for awhile. Well, we talked about it that day, and after that
we would kind of josh about it, and finally one day we walked over
to the bureau and got out a license, and the Justice of the Peace---
"

"Wallie--my God!" Martie breathed.

"Well, listen!" he urged her impatiently. "I put a wrong age on the
license and so did she, and she had told me a lot of lies about
herself, as I found out later, Martie---"

"So that it wasn't legal!"

"Well, listen. After that we went on with the crowd for a few weeks,
and we didn't tell anybody. And then this Dr. Prendergast turned up-
--"

"WHAT Dr. Prendergast!"

"I don't know who he was--a dentist anyway. And he had known Golda
before, somewhere, and he was crazy about her. His wife was getting
a divorce, it seems; anyway, he butted right in, and she let him. I
don't think she had awfully good sense, she would act sort of crazy
sometimes, as if she didn't know what she was doing. Well, I told
her I wouldn't stand for that, and we had some fights. But just then
my dad wrote and told me that he would finance me for a year at
Stanford, and I began to think I'd like to cut the whole bunch. So I
said to Golda: 'I'm done. I'm going to get out! You keep your mouth
shut, and I'll keep mine!' She says, 'Leon'--that was Prendergast--
'is going to marry me, and you'll talk before I do!' So---"

"But, Wallace---"

"But what, dearie?"

"But it wasn't left that way?"

"Now, listen, dearie. Of course it wasn't! She and Prendergast were
going to leave town, a few days later, but I was kind of worried
about it, and I finally told my uncle the whole story. Of course he
blew up! He sent for her, and she came right in, scared to death. He
told her that he'd give away the whole story to Prendergast, or else
he'd give her a check for five hundred dollars on her wedding day.
She fell for it, and we said good-bye. She swore it was only a sort
of joke anyway, and that the day we--we did it, she'd been filling
me up with whisky lemonades and all that, and that the whole thing
was off. And let me tell you that I was glad to beat it! I never saw
her again until this morning! I went on the stage, and changed my
name because the leading lady in that show happened to be Thelma
Tenney. About a month later my uncle wrote me that she had sent him
a newspaper notice of her marriage, and he had sent her the check.
I'll never forget reading that letter. I'd been worrying myself
black in the face, but that day I went on a bust, I can tell you!"

"That marriage would cancel the other?" Martie asked, with a dry
throat.

"Sure it would!" he said easily.

"But now--now---" she pursued fearfully.

"Now she's turned up," he said, a shadow falling on his heavy face
again. "She was at the theatre last night. God knows what she's been
doing all these years; she looks awful. She saw my picture in some
paper, and she came straight to the city. She found out where I
lived, and this morning, while you were at church, Mabel came in and
said a lady wanted to see me. I took her to breakfast. I didn't know
what to do with her--and we talked."

"And what does she say, Wallie--what does she want?"

"Oh, she wants anything she can get! She doesn't know that I'm
married. If she did, I suppose she might make herself unpleasant
along that line!"

"But she has no claim on you! She married another man!"

"She says now that she never was married to Prendergast!"

"But she WAS!" Martie said hotly. Her voice dropped vaguely. Her
eyes were fixed and glassy with growing apprehension. "Perhaps she
was lying about that," she whispered, as if to herself.

"She'd lie about anything!" Wallace supplied.

"But if she wasn't, Wallace, if she wasn't--then would that second
marriage cancel the first?" she asked feverishly.

"I should THINK so!" he answered. "Shouldn't you?"

"Shouldn't _I_?" she echoed, with her first flash of anger. "Why,
what do _I_ know about it? What do _I_ know about it? I don't know
anything! You come to me with this now--NOW!"

"Don't talk like that!" he pleaded. "I feel--I feel awfully about
it, Martie! I can't tell you how I feel! But the whole thing was so
long ago it had sort of gone out of my mind. Every fellow does
things that he's ashamed of, Mart--things that he's sorry for; but
you always think that you'll marry some day, and have kids, and that
the world will go on like it always has---"

The fire suddenly died out of Martie. In a deadly calm she sat back
against her pillows, and began to gather up her masses of loosened
hair.

"If she is right---" she began, and stopped.

"She's not right, I tell you!" Wallace said. "She hasn't got a leg
to stand on!"

"No," Martie conceded lifelessly, patiently. "But if she SHOULD be
right---"

"But I tell you she isn't, Mart!"

"Yes, I know you do." The deadly gentleness was again in her voice.
"I know you do!" she repeated mildly. "Only--only---" Her lip
trembled despite her desperate effort, she felt her throat thicken
and the tears come.

Instantly he was beside her again, and with her arms still raised
she felt him put his own arms about her, and felt his penitent
kisses through the veil of her hair. A sickness swept over her: they
were here in the sacred intimacy of their own room, the room to
which he had brought her as a bride only a few months before.

She freed herself with what dignity she could command. He asked her
a hundred times if she loved him, if she could forgive him. Her one
impulse was to silence him, to have him go away.

"I know--I know how you feel, Wallie! I'm sorry--for you and myself,
and the whole thing! I'm terribly sorry! I--I don't know what we can
do. I have to go away, of course; I can't stay here until we know;
and you'll have to investigate, and find out just what she claims.
I'll go to Sally, I suppose. People can think I've come up to help
when the baby comes--I don't care what they think!"

"I thought you might go to Oakland for awhile," he agreed,
gratefully; "but of course it'll be best to have you go to Sally--
it'll only be for a few days. Mart, I feel rotten about it!"

"I know you do, Wallace," she answered nervously.

"To spring this on you--it's just rotten!"

Martie was silent. Her mind was in a whirl.

"Will you go out?" she asked simply. "I want to dress."

"What do you want me to go out for?" he asked, amazed.

Again his wife was silent. Her cheeks were bright scarlet, her eyes
hard and dry. She looked at him steadily, and he got clumsily to his
feet.

"Sure I'll go out!" he said stupidly. "I'll do anything you want me
to. I feel like a skunk about this--it had sort of slipped my mind,
Mart! Every fellow lets himself in for something like this."

Trapped. It was the one thought she had when he was gone, and when
she had sprung feverishly from bed, and was quickly dressing.
Trapped, in this friendly, comfortable room, where she had been so
happy and so proud! She had been so innocently complacent over her
state as this man's wife, she had planned for their future so
courageously. Now she was--what? Now she was--what?

Just to escape somehow and instantly, that was the first wild
impulse. He was gone, but he was coming back: he must not find her
here. She must disappear, nobody must ever find her. Sally and her
father, Rose and Rodney must never know! Martie Monroe, married to a
man who was married before, disgraced, exiled, lost. Nobody knew
that she was going to have a baby, but Monroe would surmise that.

Oh, fool--fool--fool that she had been to marry him so! But it was
too late for that. She must face the situation now, and fret over
the past some other day.

She had felt the thought of a return to Monroe intolerable: but
quickly she changed her mind. Sally's home might be an immediate
retreat, she could rest there, and plan there. Her sister was
eagerly awaiting an answer to the letter in which she begged Martie
to come to her for the month of the baby's birth.

Martie, packing frantically, glanced at the clock. It was two
o'clock now, she could get the four o'clock boat. She would be in
peaceful Monroe at seven. And after that---?

After that she did not know. Should she ever return to Wallace,
under any circumstances? Should she tell Sally? Should she hide both
Wallace's revelations and the morning's earlier hopes of motherhood?

Child that she was, she could not decide. She had had no preparation
for these crises, she was sick with shock and terror. Married to a
man who was already married--and perhaps to have a baby!

But she never faltered in her instant determination to leave him. If
she was not his wife, at least she could face the unknown future far
more bravely than the dubious present. If she had been wrong, she
would not add more wrong.

With her bag packed, and her hat pinned on, she paused, and looked
about the room. The window curtain flapped uncertainly, a gritty
wind blew straight down Geary Street. The bed was unmade, the sweet
orange peels still scented the air.

Martie suddenly flung her gloves aside, and knelt down beside her
bed. She had an impulse to make her last act in this room a prayer.

Wallace, pale and quiet, opened the door, and as she rose from her
knees their eyes met. In a second they were in each other's arms,
and Martie was sobbing on his shoulder.

"Mart--my darling little girl! I'm so sorry!"

"I know you are--I know you are!"

"It's only for a few days, dearie--until I settle her once and for
all!"

"That's all!"

"And then you'll come back, and we'll go have Spanish omelette at
the Poodle Dog, won't we?"

"Oh, Wallie, darling, I hope--I hope we will!"

She gasped on a long breath, and dried her eyes.

"How much money have you got, dearie?"

"About--I don't know. About four dollars, I think."

"Well, here--" He was all the husband again, stuffing gold pieces
into her purse. "You're going down to the four boat? I'll take you
down. And wire me when you get there, Martie, so I won't worry. And
tell Sally I wish her luck, I'll certainly be glad to hear the
news." They were at the doorway; he put his arm about her. "You DO
love me, Mart?"

"Oh, Wallie---!" The tender moment, following upon her hour of
lonely agony, was almost too much. "We--we didn't think--this would
be the end of our happy time, did we?" she stammered. And as they
kissed again, both faces were wet with tears.

Sally met her; a Sally ample of figure and wonderful in complexion.
All the roses of spring were in Sally's smiling face; she laughed
and rejoiced at their meeting with a certain quality of ease and
poise for which Martie was puzzled to account, but which was new to
quiet, conventional Sally. Sally was in the serene mood that
immediately precedes motherhood; all the complex elements of her
life were temporarily lapped in a joyous peace. Of Martie's hidden
agony she suspected nothing.

She took Martie to the tiny house by the river; the plates and
spoons and pillow-slips looked strange to Martie, and for every one
of them Sally had an amused history. Martie felt, with a little
twinge of pain, that she would have liked a handsomer home for
Sally, would have liked a more imposing husband than the tired,
dirty, boyish-looking Joe, would have liked the first Monroe baby to
come to a prettier layette than these plain little slips and
flannels; but Sally saw everything rose-coloured. They had almost no
money, she told Martie, with a happy laugh. Already Sally, who had
been brought up in entire ignorance of the value of money, was
watching the pennies. Never had there been economy like this in Pa's
house!

Sally kept house on a microscopic scale that amused and a little
impressed Martie. Every apple, every onion, was used to the last
scrap. Every cold muffin was reheated, or bit of cold toast was
utilized. When Carrie David brought the young householders a roasted
chicken, it was an event. The fowl was sliced and stewed and minced
and made into soup before it went into the family annals to shine
forevermore as "the delicious chicken Cousin Carrie brought us
before the baby was born." Sally's cakes were made with one egg, her
custards reinforced with cornstarch, her cream was only "top milk."
Even her house was only half a house: the four rooms were matched by
four other rooms, with only a central wall between. But Sally had a
square yard, and a garden, and Martie came to love every inch of the
little place, so rich in happiness and love.

The days went on and on, and there was no word of Wallace. Martie's
heart was like lead in her breast. She talked with Sally, set
tables, washed dishes, she laughed and planned, and all the while
misgivings pressed close about her. Sometimes, kneeling in church in
the soft warm afternoons of early spring, she told herself that if
this one cup were taken from her lips, if she were only proved to be
indeed an honourable wife, she would bear with resignation whatever
life might bring. She would welcome poverty, welcome humiliations,
welcome the suffering and the burden of the baby's coming--but dear
Lord, dear Lord, she could not face the shame that menaced her now!

Sally saw the change in her, the new silence and gravity, and
wondered.

"Martie, dearest, something's worrying you?"

"Nothing much, dear. Wallace--Wallace doesn't write to me as often
as I should like!"

"You didn't quarrel with him, Mart?"

"Oh, no--he's the best husband in the world. We never quarrel."

"But it's not like you to fret so," Sally grieved. Presently she
ventured a daring question: "Has it ever occurred to you, Mart, that
perhaps---"

Martie laughed shakily.

"The way you and Grace wish babies on to people--it's the limit!"

Sally laughed, too, and if she was unconvinced, at least she said no
more. She encouraged Martie to take long walks, to help with the
housework, and finally, to attempt composition. Sitting at the clean
little kitchen table, in the warm evenings, Martie wrote an article
upon the subject of independence for women.

For a few days she laboured tirelessly with it: then she tired of
it, and flung it aside. Other things absorbed her attention.

First came the expected letter from Wallace. Martie's hand shook as
she took it from the postman. Now she would know--now she would
know! Whatever the news, the suspense was over.

Perhaps the hardest moment of the hard weeks was when she realized
that the tension was not snapped, after all. Wallace wrote
affectionately, but with maddening vagueness. He missed his girl, he
had a rotten cold, he was not working now. Golda was raising hell.
He did not believe half that she said, but he had written to his
uncle, who advised him to go to Portland, and investigate the matter
there. So unless Martie heard to the contrary he would probably go
north this week. Anyway, Martie had better stay where she was, and
not worry.

Not worry! It became a marvel to Martie that life could go on for
any one while her own future was so frightfully uncertain. She was
going to have a baby, and she was not married--that was the summary
of the situation. It was like something in a book, only worse than
any book that she had ever read. Sometimes she felt as if her brain
were being affected by the sheer horror of it. Sometimes, Sally
noticed, Martie fell into such deep brooding that she neither heard
nor saw what went on about her. Her mind was in a continual fever;
she was exhausted with fruitless hoping and unavailing endurance.

At the end of a hot, endless April day, into the darkness of Sally's
disordered bedroom, came life. A little hemstitched blanket had been
made ready for the baby; it seemed to Martie's frightened heart
nothing short of a miracle when Sally's crying daughter was actually
wrapped in it. Martie had travelled a long road since the placid
spring afternoon when they had made that blanket.

But the strain and fright were over now; Sally lay at peace, her
eyes shut in a white face. The tears dried on Martie's cheeks; Mrs.
Hawkes and Dr. Ben were even laughing as they consulted and worked
together. Martie took the baby down to the kitchen for her bath, and
it seemed strange to her that the dried peaches Sally had set on the
stove that morning were still placidly simmering in their saucepan.

For a day or two everything was unreal, the smoke of battle and the
shadow of death still hung over the little household. Gradually, the
air cleared. Joe and Martie ate the deluge of layer cakes and apple
pies--debated over details. Joe's mother came in to bathe the baby
and Sally did nothing but laugh and eat and sleep. She called her
first-born Elizabeth, for her mother; and sometimes the sisters
wondered if Ma and Lydia ever talked about the first baby, and ever
longed to see her first tiny charms.

The event shook Martie from her brooding, and brought her the first
real happiness she had known since the terrible morning of Golda's
appearance. She and Sally found the care of the baby only a delight,
and disputed for the privilege of bathing and dressing her.

One episode in the tiny Elizabeth's life was unusual, and long years
afterward Martie found a place for it in her own slowly-forming
theories. At the time the three young persons debated it amusedly
and carelessly before it came to be just an accepted, if
incomprehensible, fact.

Dr. Ben, whose modest bill for attendance upon Sally was promptly
paid, had sent the baby a check for seventy-five dollars. The card
with this check was merely pencilled: "For Miss Elizabeth's first
quarter, from Uncle Ben." At first Sally and Martie and Joe were
puzzled to understand it.

Then suddenly Sally remembered her talk with the doctor a year ago.
This was the "mother's pay" he had spoken about then.

"It does seem funny that we were only girls then, and that to speak
of such things really made me almost die of embarrassment," smiled
Sally, "and now, here we are, and we know all about it! But now, the
question is, what to do?"

Sally and Joe were at first for a polite refusal of the money. It
was so "queer," they said. It seemed too "odd." It was not as if Pa
had decided to do it, or as if Dr. Ben really was the child's uncle.
It was better not to chance possible complications--

Presently Joe dropped out of this debate. He said simply that it was
a deuce of a lot of money, and that there were lots of things that
the baby needed, but he didn't care either way. Sally then said that
it was settled, for if he didn't care the check should go back.

But here Martie found herself with an opinion. She said suddenly
that she thought Sally would be foolish to refuse. It was Dr. Ben's
money. If he endowed a library, or put a conservatory into the
Monroe Park, Sally would enjoy them to the full. Why shouldn't he do
this? His money and the way he spent it were his own affair.

"He's working out an experiment, Sally. I don't see why you
shouldn't let him. You may never have another baby, but if you do,
why six hundred a year is just that much better than three!"

There were several days of debate. It was inevitable that the check
lying on Sally's cheap little three-drawer bureau should suggest
things it would purchase. Martie summarily took it to the Bank one
day and brought home crackling bills in exchange. One of the first
things that was purchased was the perambulator in which 'Lizabeth
was proudly wheeled to call upon her benefactor.

Then the dreadful days began to go by again, and still there was no
letter from Wallace. June came in with enervating, dry heat, and
Martie wilted under it. There was no longer any doubt about her
condition. The hour was coming closer when Sally must know, when all
Monroe must know just how mad a venture her marriage had been.

One day she had a letter from Mabel, who begged her to come back to
the city. Jesse was sure he could get her an occasional engagement;
it was better than fretting herself to death there in that "jay"
town.

Martie sat thinking for a long time with this letter in her hand.
For the first time thoughts consciously hostile to Wallace swept
through her mind. She analyzed the motives that had urged her into
marriage; she had been taught to think of it as a woman's surest
refuge. If she had not been so taught, what might she have done for
herself in this year? Was it fair of him to take what she had to
give then, in quick and generous devotion, and to fail her so
utterly now, when the old physical supremacy was gone, and when she
must meet, in the future, not only her own needs but the needs of a
child? He had known more of life than she--her mother and father had
known more--why had nobody helped her?

That evening, when Sally and Joe had gone to the moving pictures,
leaving Martie to listen for 'Lizabeth's little snuffle of
awakening, should she unexpectedly awake, Martie cleared the dining-
room table and wrote to Wallace.

This was not one of her cheerful, courageous letters, filled with
affectionate solicitude for him, and brave hope for the future. She
wept over the pages, she reproached and blamed him. For the first
time she told him of the baby's coming. She was his wife, he must
help her get away, at least until she was well again. She was sick
of waiting and hoping; now he must answer her, he must advise her.

Her face was wet with tears; she went that night to mail it at the
corner. Afterward she lay long awake, wondering in her ignorant
girl's heart if such an unwifely tirade were sufficient cause for
divorce, wondering if he would ever love her again after reading it.

Wallace brought the answer himself, five days later. "Very weak. He
doesn't seem to improve much."
"I can't see why Mrs. Brice,--isn't that her name?--doesn't
take him to her house. Yankee women are such prudes."
Virginia began to rock slowly, and her foot tapped the porch.

"Mrs. Brice has begged the Judge to come to her. But he says he
has lived in those rooms, and that he will die there,--when
the time comes."
"How you worship that woman, Virginia!

You have become quite a Yankee yourself, I believe, spending whole
days with her, nursing that old man."

"The Judge is an old friend of my father's; I think he would wish it,"
replied the girl, in a lifeless voice.

Her speech did not reveal all the pain and resentment she felt.

She thought of the old man racked with pain and suffering in the
heat, lying patient on his narrow bed, the only light of life
remaining the presence of the two women.

They came day by day, and often Margaret Brice had taken the place
of the old negress who sat with him at night.

Worship Margaret Brice! Yes, it was worship; it had been worship
since the day she and her father had gone to the little whitewashed
hospital.

Providence had brought them together at the Judge's bedside. The
marvellous quiet power of the older woman had laid hold of the
girl in spite of all barriers.

Often when the Judge's pain was eased sufficiently for him to talk,
he would speak of Stephen.

The mother never spoke of her son, but a light would come into her
eyes at this praise of him which thrilled Virginia to see.

And when the good lady was gone, and the Judge had fallen into slumber,
it would still haunt her.

Was it out of consideration for her that Mrs. Brice would turn
the Judge from this topic which he seemed to love best? Virginia
could not admit to herself that she resented this. She had heard
Stephen's letters to the Judge. They came every week. Strong and
manly they were, with plenty of praises for the Southern defenders
of Vicksburg. Only yesterday Virginia had read one of these to Mr.
Whipple, her face burning.

Well that his face was turned to the window, and that Stephen's
mother was not there!

"He says very little about himself," Mr. Whipple complained. "Had it
not been for Brinsmade, we should never know that Sherman had his
eye on him, and had promoted him.

We should never have known of that exploit at Chickasaw Bluff. But
what a glorious victory was Grant's capture of Vicksburg, on the
Fourth of July!

I guess we'll make short work of the Rebels now."

No, the Judge had not changed much, even in illness.

He would never change. Virginia laid the letter down, and tears started
to her eyes as she repressed a retort. It was not the first time
this had happened.

At every Union victory Mr. Whipple would loose his tongue. How strange
that, with all his thought of others, he should fall short here!

One day, after unusual forbearance, Mrs. Brice had overtaken Virginia
on the stairway. Well she knew the girl's nature, and how difficult
she must have found repression. Margaret Brice had taken her hand.

"My dear," she had said, "you are a wonderful woman." That was
all. But Virginia had driven back to Belle. garde with a strange
elation in her heart.

Some things the Judge had forborne to mention, and for this Virginia
was thankful.

One was the piano. But she had overheard Shadrach telling old Nancy
how Mrs.

Brice had pleaded with him to move it, that he might have
more room and air. He had been obdurate. And Colonel Carvel's name
had never once passed his lips.

Many a night the girl had lain awake listening to the steamboats as
they toiled against the river's current, while horror held her.
Horror lest her father at that moment be in mortal agony amongst
the heaps left by the battle's surges; heaps in which, like
mounds of ashes, the fire was not yet dead. Fearful tales she
had heard in the prison hospitals of wounded men lying for days
in the Southern sun between the trenches at Vicksburg, or freezing
amidst the snow and sleet at Donelson.

Was her bitterness against the North not just? What a life had
been Colonel Carvel's! It had dawned brightly. One war had cost him
his wife.
Another, and he had lost his fortune, his home, his friends, all
that was dear to him. And that daughter, whom he loved best in all
the world, he was perchance to see no more.

Mrs. Colfax, yawning, had taken a book and gone to bed. Still
Virginia sat on the porch, while the frogs sang of rain, and the
lightning quivered across the eastern sky.

She heard the crunch of wheels in the gravel.

A bar of light, peopled by moths, slanted out of the doorway and
fell on a closed carriage.

A gentleman slowly ascended the steps. Virginia recognized him as Mr.

Brinsmade.

"Your cousin Clarence has come home, my dear," he said. "He was
among the captured at Vicksburg, and is paroled by General Grant."

Virginia gave a little cry and started forward. But he held her
hands.

"He has been wounded!"
"Yes," she exclaimed, "yes. Oh, tell me, Mr. Brinsmade, tell
me--all--"
"No, he is not dead, but he is very low. Mr. Russell has been kind
enough to come with me."

She hurried to call the servants. But they were all there in the
light, in African postures of terror,--Alfred, and Sambo, and
Mammy Easter, and Ned. They lifted the limp figure in gray, and
carried it into the hall chamber, his eyes closed, his face waxen
under a beard brown and shaggy.
Heavily, Virginia climbed the stairs to break the news to her
aunt.

There is little need to dwell on the dark days which followed--Clarence
hanging between life and death.

That his life was saved was due to Virginia and to Mammy Easter, and
in no particle to his mother. Mrs.
Colfax flew in the face of all the known laws of nursing, until
Virginia was driven to desperation, and held a council of war with
Dr.

Polk. Then her aunt grew jealous, talked of a conspiracy, and
threatened to send for Dr.

Brown--which Dr. Polk implored her to do. By spells she wept,
when they quietly pushed her from the room and locked the door.
She would creep in to him in the night during Mammy Easter's watches
and talk him into a raging fever. But Virginia slept lightly and
took the alarm.

More than one scene these two had in the small hours, while Ned
was riding post haste over the black road to town for the Doctor.

By the same trusty messenger did Virginia contrive to send a note to
Mrs.
Brice, begging her to explain her absence to Judge Whipple. By day
or night Virginia did not leave Bellegarde.

And once Dr. Polk, while walking in the garden, found the girl fast
asleep on a bench, her sewing on her lap. Would that a master had
painted his face as he looked down at her!

'Twas he who brought Virginia daily news of Judge Whipple. Bad news,
alas! for he seemed to miss her greatly. He had become more querulous
and exacting with patient Mrs.

Brice, and inquired for her continually.

She would not go. But often, when he got into his buggy the Doctor
found the seat filled with roses and fresh fruit. Well he knew
where to carry them.

What Virginia's feelings were at this time no one will ever
know. God had mercifully given her occupation, first with the Judge,
and later, when she needed it more, with Clarence. It was she
whom he recognized first of all, whose name was on his lips in
his waking moments. With the petulance of returning reason, he pushed
his mother away.

Unless Virginia was at his bedside when he awoke, his fever rose.
He put his hot hand into her cool one, and it rested there sometimes
for hours.

Then, and only then, did he seem contented.

The wonder was that her health did not fail. People who saw her
during that fearful summer, fresh and with color in her cheeks,
marvelled.
Great-hearted Puss Russell, who came frequently to inquire, was quieted
before her friend, and the frank and jesting tongue was silent in
that presence. Anne Brinsmade came with her father and wondered. A
miracle had changed Virginia.

Her poise, her gentleness, her dignity, were the effects which
people saw. Her force people felt. And this is why we cannot
of ourselves add one cubit to our stature. It is God who changes,
--who cleanses us of our levity with the fire of trial. Happy,
thrice happy, those whom He chasteneth. And yet how many are there
who could not bear the fire--who would cry out at the flame.

Little by little Clarence mended, until he came to sit out on the porch
in the cool of the afternoon. Then he would watch for hours the
tassels stirring over the green fields of corn and the river running
beyond, while the two women sat by.

At times, when Mrs. Colfax's headaches came on, and Virginia was
alone with him, he would talk of the war; sometimes of their
childhood, of the mad pranks they played here at Bellegarde, of their
friends.

Only when Virginia read to him the Northern account of the battles
would he emerge from a calm sadness into excitement; and he
clenched his fists and tried to rise when he heard of the capture
of Jackson and the fall of Port Hudson. Of love he spoke
not a word, and now that he was better he ceased to hold her hand.

But often when she looked up from her book, she would surprise his
dark eyes fixed upon her, and a look in them of but one interpretation.

She was troubled.

The Doctor came but every other day now, in the afternoon. It was his
custom to sit for a while on the porch chatting cheerily
with Virginia, his stout frame filling the rocking-chair. Dr. Polk's
indulgence was gossip--though always of a harmless nature: how
Mr. Cluyme always managed to squirm over to the side which was
in favor, and how Maude Catherwood's love-letter to a certain
dashing officer of the Confederate army had been captured and
ruthlessly published in the hateful Democrat.

It was the Doctor who gave Virginia news of the Judge, and sometimes
he would mention Mrs. Brice. Then Clarence would raise his head;
and once (she saw with trepidation) he had opened his lips to
speak.

One day the Doctor came, and Virginia looked into his face and divined
that he had something to tell her. He sat but a few moments, and
when he arose to go he took her hand.

"I have a favor to beg of you, Jinny," he said, "Judge has lost his
nurse.

Do you think Clarence could spare you for a little while every day?

I shouldn't ask it," Dr.

Polk continued, somewhat hurriedly for him, "but the Judge cannot
bear a stranger near him, and I am afraid to have him excited
while in this condition."

"Mrs. Brice is ill?" she cried. And Clarence, watching, saw her color
go.

"No," replied Dr. Polk, "but her son Stephen has come home from the
army.
He was transferred to Lauman's brigade, and then he was wounded." He
jangled the keys in his pocket and continued "It seems that he
had no business in the battle. Johnston in his retreat had driven
animals into all the ponds and shot them, and in the hot
weather the water was soon poisoned. Mr. Brice was scarcely well
enough to stand when they made the charge, and he is now in a dreadful
condition He is a fine fellow," added the Doctor, with a sigh,
"General Sherman sent a special physician to the boat with him.

He is--" Subconsciously the Doctor's arm sought Virginia's
back, as though he felt her swaying.

But he was looking at Clarence, who had jerked himself forward in his
chair, his thin hands convulsively clutching at the arms of it.

He did not appear to see Virginia.

"Stephen Brice, did you say?" he cried, "will he die?"
In his astonishment the Doctor passed his palm across his brow, and
for a moment he did not answer.

Virginia had taken a step from him, and was standing motionless, almost
rigid, her eyes on his face.

"Die?" he said, repeating the word mechanically; "my God, I hope
not. The danger is over, and he is resting easily. If he were not,"
he said quickly and forcibly, "I should not be here."
The Doctor's mare passed more than one fleet--footed trotter on the
road.
to town that day. And the Doctor's black servant heard his master
utter the word "fool" twice, and with great emphasis.

For a long time Virginia stood on the end of the porch, until the
heaving of the buggy harness died on the soft road, She felt
Clarence gaze upon her before she turned to face him.

"Virginia!" He had called her so of late. "Yes, dear."
"Virginia, sit here a moment; I have something to tell you."
She came and took the chair beside him, her heart beating, her breast
rising and falling. She looked into his eyes, and her own lashes
fell before the hopelessness there But he put out his fingers
wasted by illness, and she took them in her own.

He began slowly, as if every word cost him pain.

"Virginia, we were children together here. I cannot remember the
time when I did not love you, when I did not think of you as my
wife.

All I did when we played together was to try to win your applause.
That was my nature I could not help it. Do you remember the day
I climbed out on the rotten branch of the big pear tree yonder to get
you that pear--when I fell on the roof of Alfred's cabin? I did
not feel the pain. It was because you kissed it and cried over me.
You are crying now," he said tenderly.

"Don't, Jinny. It isn't to make you sad that I am saying this.

"I have had a great deal of time to think lately, Jinny, I was not
brought up seriously,--to be a man.

I have been thinking of that day just before you were eighteen,
when you rode out here. How well I remember it.
It was a purple day. The grapes were purple, and a purple haze
was over there across the river. You had been cruel to me. You
were grown a woman then, and I was still nothing but a boy.

Do you remember the doe coming out of the forest, and how she ran
screaming when I tried to kiss you?
You told me I was good for nothing. Please don't interrupt me. It
was true what you said, that I was wild and utterly useless, I had
never served or pleased any but myself,--and you.

I had never studied or worked, You were right when you told
me I must learn something,--do something,--become of some account
in the world. I am just as useless to day."
"Clarence, after what you have done for the South?"
He smiled with peculiar bitterness.

"What have I done for her?" he added. "Crossed the river and burned
houses.

I could not build them again. Floated down the river on a log after
a few percussion caps. That did not save Vicksburg."
"And how many had the courage to do that?" she exclaimed.

"Pooh," he said, "courage! the whole South has it, Courage! If I
did not have that, I would send Sambo to my father's room for his
ebony box and blow my brains out. No, Jinny, I am nothing but a
soldier of fortune.

I never possessed any quality but a wild spirit for adventure, to
shirk work. I wanted to go with Walker, you remember. I wanted to
go to Kansas.
I wanted to distinguish myself," he added with a gesture. "But that
is all gone now, Jinny. I wanted to distinguish myself for you.

Now I see how an earnest life might have won you. No, I have
not done yet."

She raised her head, frightened, and looked at him searchingly.

"One day," he said, "one day a good many years ago you and I and
Uncle Comyn were walking along Market Street in front of Judge
Whipple's office, and a slave auction was going on.

A girl was being sold on whom you had set your heart. There was
some one in the crowd, a Yankee, who bid her in and set her free.
Do you remember him?"

He saw her profile, her lips parted, her look far away, She inclined
her head.

"Yes," said her cousin, "so do I remember him. He has crossed my
path many times since, Virginia. And mark what I say--it was he
whom you had in mind on that birthday when you implored me to make
something of myself, It was Stephen Brice."
Her eyes flashed upon him quickly.

"Oh, how dare you?" she cried.

"I dare anything, Virginia," he answered quietly. "I am not blaming
you.
And I am sure that you did not realize that he was the ideal which
you had in mind."
The impression of him has never left it. Fate is in it. Again, that
night at the Brinsmades', when we were in fancy dress, I felt
that I had lost you when I got back. He had been there when I was
away, and gone again.
And--and--you never told me."
"It was a horrible mistake, Max," she faltered. "I was waiting for
you down the road, and stopped his horse instead. It--it was nothing--"

"It was fate, Jinny. In that half-hour I lost you. How I hated that
man," he cried, "how I hated him?"
"Hated!" exclaimed Virginia, involuntarily. "Oh, no!"
"Yes," he said, "hated!

I would have killed him if I could. But now--"
"But now?"
"Now he has saved my life. I have not--I could not tell you before:
He came into the place where I was lying in Vicksburg, and they
told him that my only chance was to come North, I turned my back
upon him, insulted him. Yet he went to Sherman and had me brought
home--to you, Virginia. If he loves you,--and I have long suspected
that he does--" 
"Oh, no," she cried, hiding her face "No."
"I know he loves you, Jinny," her cousin continued calmly,
inexorably.
"And you know that he does. You must feel that he does. It was a
brave thing to do, and a generous. He knew that you were engaged
to me. He thought that he was saving me for you. He was giving up
the hope of marrying you himself."
Virginia sprang to her feet. Unless you had seen her then, you had
never known the woman in her glory.
"Marry a Yankee!" she cried. "Clarence Colfax, have you known and
loved me all my life that you might accuse me of this? Never, never,
never!" Transformed, he looked incredulous admiration.
"Jinny, do you mean it?" he cried.
In answer she bent down with all that gentleness and grace that was
hers, and pressed her lips to his forehead. Long after she had
disappeared in the door he sat staring after her.
But later, when Mammy Easter went to call her mistress for supper,
she found her with her face buried in the pillows.

CHAPTER X
IN JUDGE WHIPPLE'S OFFICE
After this Virginia went to the Judge's bedside every day, in the
morning, when Clarence took his sleep. She read his newspapers to
him when he was well enough. She read the detested Missouri Democrat,
which I think was the greatest trial Virginia ever had to put up
with. To have her beloved South abused, to have her heroes ridiculed,
was more than she could bear. Once, when the Judge was perceptibly
better, she flung the paper out of the window, and left the room.
He called her back penitently.
"My dear," he said, smiling admiration, "forgive an old bear. A
selfish old bear, Jinny; my only excuse is my love for the Union.Her delight in every novel phase of life in the big
city fired his own enthusiasm, and it was with great satisfaction
that he observed her growing friendship with Mrs. Curley.

There were four or five men in the boarding-house, but they usually
disappeared after an early breakfast and did not come back until
supper, so that the two women had a long, idle day to themselves.
Henny, the coloured maid, droned and laughed with friends of her own
in the kitchen. Mrs. Curley, mighty, deep-voiced, with oily, graying
hair and spotted clothes, spent most of the day in a large chair by
the open window, and Martie, thinly dressed, wandered about
aimlessly. She never tired of the old woman's pungent reminiscences,
browsing at intervals on the old magazines and books that were
scattered over the house, even going into the kitchen to convulse
the appreciative Henny, and make a cake or pudding for dinner.

Summer smouldered in the city. The sun seemed to have been shining
hot and merciless for hours when Martie rose at six, to stand
yawning at her window. At nine families began to stream by, to the
Park; perspiring mothers pushing the baby carriages, small children,
already eating, staggering before and behind. By ten the streets
were deserted, baked, silent, glaring. Martie and Mrs. Curley would
establish themselves in a cool back room, as to-day, with a pitcher
of iced tea near at hand.

Somehow the hot, empty hours dragged by. At four o'clock the two,
with perhaps a friend or two who had come in, would begin to gasp
that this was the worst yet. This was awful. The heat had a positive
and brassy quality, there was no air stirring. The children in the
Park would drag home in the hot sunset light, tired, dirty, whining,
and a breathless evening follow the burning day. Then Martie and
Mrs. Curley and mild little Mr. Bull and bellicose Mr. Snow would
perhaps sit on the steps until eleven o'clock, exchanging
pleasantries with various neighbours, wilted like themselves in the
furnace of the day.

Martie liked the sense of extremes, as they all did. In a few months
they would be shaking their heads over a blizzard with the same
solemn enjoyment. She liked the suddenly darkening sky, the ominous
rattle of thunder; "like boxes being smashed," she wrote Sally. She
fairly sang when the rain began to stream down, washing, cooling,
cleansing.

From the window of the back bedroom she looked down to-day upon a
stretch of bare, fenced backyards. Here and there a cat slept in the
shade, or moved silently from shadow to shadow. From some of the
opposite windows strings of washed garments depended, and upon one
fire-escape two girls were curled, talking and reading.

Her hostess was the source of much affectionate amusement to Martie,
and as the old lady liked nothing so much as an appreciative
listener, they got on splendidly. Martie laughed at the older
woman's accounts of quarrels, births, and law-suits, thrilled over
the details of sudden deaths, murders, and mysteries, and drank in
with a genuine dramatic appreciation the vision of a younger,
simpler city. No subway, no telephones, no motor cars, no elevated
roads--what had New York been like when Mrs. Curley was a bride?
Booth and Parepa Rosa and Adelina Patti walked the boards again; the
terrible Civil War was fought; the draft riots raged in the streets;
the great President was murdered. There was no old family in the
city of whose antecedents Mrs. Curley did not know something. "The
airs of them!" she would say, musing over a newspaper list of "among
those present." "I could tell them something!"

Martie did not understand how any woman could really be content with
this dark old house, this business, these empty days, but she
realized that Mrs. Curley was free to adopt some other mode of
living had she pleased. Gradually Martie pieced the old woman's
history together; there had been plenty of change, prosperity, and
excitement in her life. She had had seven children, only three of
whom were living: Mary, a prosperous, big matron whose husband, Joe
Cunningham, had some exalted position on the Brooklyn police force;
Ralph, who was a priest in California; and George, the youngest, a
handsome ne'er-do-well of about twenty-five, who was a "heart
scald." George floated about his own and neighbouring cities, only
coming to see his mother when no other refuge offered.

The four children who had died were quite as much in their mother's
thoughts and conversation, and probably more in her prayers, than
the living ones. Of "Curley," too, Martie heard much. She was able
to picture a cheerful, noisy home, full of shouting, dark, untidy-
headed children, with an untidy-headed servant, a scatter-brained
mother, and an unexacting father in charge. "Curley" usually went to
sleep on the sofa after dinner, and Mrs. Curley's sister, Mrs.
Royce, with her children, or her sister-in-law, "Mrs. Dan," with
hers, came over to pick up the Curleys on the way to a Mission
sermon, a church concert, or a meeting of the Women's Auxiliary of
the Saint Vincent de Paul.

"... Or else maybe the priest would step in," said Mrs. Curley,
remembering these stirring days, "or often I'd take Mollie or Katie-
-God rest her!--and go over to see the Sisters. But many a night
there'd be sickness in the house--Curley had two cousins and an aunt
that died on us--and then I'd be there sitting up with the
medicines, and talking with this one and that. I was never one to
run away from sickness, nor death either for that matter. I'm a
great hand with death in the house; there's no sole to my foot when
I'm needed! I'll never forget the day that I went over to poor Aggie
Lemmon's house--she was a lovely woman who lived round the corner
from me. Well, I hadn't been thinking she looked very well for
several weeks, do you see?--and I passed the remark to my brother
Thomas's wife--God rest her---"

A reminiscence would follow. Martie never tired of them. Whether she
was held, just now, in the peaceful, unquestioning mood that
precedes a serious strain on mind and body, or whether her old
hostess really had had an unusually interesting experience, she did
not then or ever decide. She only knew that she liked to sit playing
solitaire in the hot evenings, under a restricted cone of light,
with Mrs. Curley sitting in the darkness by the window, watching the
lively street, fanning herself comfortably, and pouring forth the
history of the time Curley gave poor Ralph a "crule" beating, or of
the day Alicia Curley died in convulsions at the age of three.

Martie had hoped to be in her own little home when the baby came,
but this was swiftly proven impossible. Wallace's play failed after
the wonderful salary had been paid for only eight weeks. He idled
about with his wife for a few happy weeks, and then got another
engagement with a small comic opera troupe, and philosophically and
confidently went on the road. Presently he was home again and in
funds, but this time it was only a few days before the next parting.

The golden Indian Summer came, and the city blazed in glorious
colour. Homecoming began; the big houses on the Avenue were opened.
Martie never saw the burning leaves of September in later years
without a memory of the poignant uneasiness with which she first had
walked beneath them, worrying about money, about Wallace's
prospects, about herself and her child. Many of her walks were
filled with imaginary conversations with her husband, in which she
argued, protested, reproached. She was lonely, she was still strange
to the city, and she was approaching her ordeal.

Even when he was with her, she missed the old loverlike attitude.
She was wistful, gentle, dependent now, and she knew her wistfulness
and gentleness and dependence vaguely irritated. But she could not
help it; she wanted to touch him, to cling to him, to have him
praise and encourage her, and tell her how much he loved her.

Her hour came near, and she went bravely to meet it. Wallace was in
Baltimore, playing juvenile roles in a stock company. Martie went
alone to the big hospital, and put herself into the hands of a
capable but indifferent young nurse, who candidly explained that she
had more patients than she could care for without the newcomer.
Martie, frightened by the businesslike preparations and the clean,
ether-scented rooms, submitted and obeyed with a sick heart. Through
the dull quiet of a dark November day the first snow of the season,
the first Martie had ever seen, began to flutter. Moving restlessly
about her little room, she stopped at the window to look out upon it
through a haze of pain.

Heat and hot lights, strange halls, a strange doctor, and early
evening in a great operating-room; she had only a dazed impression
of them all. Life roared and crackled about her. She leaped into the
offered oblivion with no thought of what it might entail....

After a long while she awakened, in a peaceful dawning, to hear
nurses cheerfully chatting, and the boy warmly fussing and grunting
in his basket. The little room was flooded with sunlight, sunlight
bright on a snowy world, and the young women who had been so
casually indifferent to another woman's agony were proudly awake to
the charms of the baby. The cocoon was lifted; Martie in a tremor of
love and tenderness looked down at the scowling, wrinkled little
face.

Instantly terror for his safety, for his health, for his immortal
soul possessed her. She looked uneasily at Miss Everett, when that
nurse bore him away. Did the woman realize what motherhood MEANT?
Did she dream the value of that flannel bundle she was so jauntily
carrying?


CHAPTER IV


Rain was falling in such sweeping sheets that the windows actually
shook under the onslaught; all day long a high wind had raged about
the house. Above the noise of the November storm in the warm
basement bedroom rose the steady click and purr of the sewing-
machine and the chattering of a child's voice, and from outside, on
the pavement, was a furious rushing of coal. The big van had been
backed up against the curb, and the cascading black torrent
interrupted the passers-by.

"Heavens! Was there ever such an uproar!" exclaimed Martie, ceasing
her operations at the machine and leaning back in her chair with a
long sigh. The lengths of flimsy white curtaining she had been
hemming slipped to the floor; she put her hands behind her head, and
yawned luxuriously. The room was close, and even at four o'clock
there was need of lights; its other occupants were only two, the
child who played with the small gray and red stone blocks upon the
floor, and the old woman who was peering through her glasses at the
curtaining that lay across her lap, and manipulating it with knotted
hands. Mrs. Curley was "Nana" to little Teddy Bannister now, and
this shabby room overlooking a cemented area, and with its windows
safeguarded by curved ornamental iron bars from attack from the
street, would be his first memory of life.

But it was a comfortable room; once the dining room, it had been
changed and papered and carpeted for its present tenants when
Martie, as housekeeper of the boarding-house, had decided to move
the dining room into the big, useless rear parlour upstairs. She and
Teddy had privacy here; they had plenty of room, and the feet that
crisped by on the sidewalk, the noises from the kitchen behind her,
and the squeaking of rats about the basement entrance at night
annoyed her not at all. She had her own telephone here, her own
fireplace, and she was comfortably accessible for the maids--there
were two maids now--for the butcher and ice-man. Between her and
the kitchen was a small dark space, named by herself the "Cold
Lairs," where she had a wash-stand and a small bath-tub. A bead of
gas burned here night and day, but if Teddy ever became REALLY
naughty he was to be placed in here as punishment and the gas turned
out entirely. Teddy had never deserved this terrible fate, but he
did not like the Cold Lairs, where his little crash wash-rag and his
tiny toothbrush glimmered at him in the half-light, and where he
always smelled the raw smell of the lemon his mother kept to whiten
her hands.

He idolized his mother; they had a separate game for every hour and
every undertaking of his happy day. He climbed out of his crib, in
his little faded blue pajamas, for uproarious tumbling and pillow-
fighting every morning. Then it was seven o'clock, and she told him
a story while she dressed, and recited poems and answered his
questions. There was a game about getting all the tangles out of his
hair, the father and mother tangles, and the various children, and
even the dog and cat. Then for months it was a game to have her go
on washing Teddy's face as long as he cried, and stop short when he
stopped, so that after a while he did not cry at all. But by that
time he could spell "Hot" and "Cold" from the faucets, and could
clean out the wash-stand with great soaping and scrubbing all by
himself.

Then he and Mother went into the big dark kitchen, where Henny and
Aurora were yawning over the boarders' breakfasts, Henny perhaps
cutting out flat little biscuit, and Aurora spooning out prunes from
a big stone jar with her slender brown thumb getting covered with
juice. His mother stirred the oatmeal, and, if it were summer,
sometimes quickly and suspiciously tasted the milk that was going
into all the little pitchers. Then they went upstairs.

The boarders had their meals at little separate tables now, and the
"family," which was Mother and Nana, and Aunt Adele and Uncle John,
were together at the largest table at the back where the serving and
carving were done, and where the big shiny percolator stood. Teddy
knew all the boarders--old Colonel and Mrs. Fox from the big
upstairs bedroom, and Miss Peet and her sister, the school-teachers,
from the hall-room on that floor, and the Winchells, mother and
daughter and son, in the two front rooms on the third floor, and the
two clerks in the back room. Uncle John and Aunt Adele had the
pleasant big back room on the middle floor, and Nana existed darkly
in the small room that finished that floor. The persons who filled
his world, if they went away to the country at all in summer, went
only for a fortnight, and this gave Mother only the time she needed
to have their blankets washed and their rooms papered and the
woodwork cleaned before their return.

Of them all, of course he liked Uncle John and Aunt Adele best, as
Mother did. He had seen Aunt Adele kiss his mother, and often she
and Uncle John would get into such gales of laughter at dinner that
even Nana, even Teddy, in his high-chair, would laugh violently in
sympathy. All the boarders were kind to Teddy, but Uncle John was
much more than kind. He brought Teddy toys from Broadway, sombreros
and moccasins and pails. He was never too tired when he came home at
night to take Teddy into his lap, and murmur long tales of giants
and fairies. And on long, wet Sundays he had been known to propose
trips to the Zoo and the Aquarium.

Flanking his own picture on his mother's bureau was a photograph of
a magnificent person in velvet knickerbockers and a frilled shirt
with a cocked hat under his arm. This was Daddy, Teddy's mother told
him; he must remember Daddy! But Teddy could not remember him.

"Darling--don't you remember Muddy taking you down to a train, and
don't you remember the big man that carried you and bought you a
sand-machine?"

"Where is my sand-machine, Moth'?" the little boy would demand
interestedly.

"But Teddy, my heart, you were a big boy then, you were long past
two. CAN'T you remember?"

No use. When Wallace came back he must make the acquaintance of his
son all over again. Martie would sigh, half-vexed, half-amused.

"Aren't they the queer little things, Adele? He remembers his sand-
machine and doesn't remember his father!"

"Oh, I don't know, Martie. That was just after we came, you know.
And I remember thinking that Teddy was a mere baby then!"

"Well, Wallace may be back any day now." Martie always sighed deeply
over the courageous phrase. Wallace had followed a devious course in
these years of the child's babyhood. Short engagements, failures,
weeks on the road, some work in stock companies in the lesser
cities--it was a curious history. He had seen his wife at long
intervals, sometimes with a little money, once or twice really
prosperous and hopeful, once--a dreadful memory--discouraged and
idle and drinking. This was the last time but one, more than a year
ago. Then had come the visit when she had met him, and he had given
Teddy the sand toy. Martie had clung to her husband then; he had not
looked well; he would never make anything of this wretched
profession, she had pleaded. She was doing well at the boarding-
house; he could stay there while he looked about him for regular
work.

But Wallace was "working up" a new part, and it was going to be a
great hit, he said. Every one was crazy about it. He would not go to
the boardinghouse; he said that his wife's work there was the
"limit." For his three days in town he lived with a fellow-actor at
a downtown hotel, and Martie had a curious sense that he did not
belong to her at all. There was about him the heavy aspect and
manner of a man who has been drinking, but he told her that he was
"all to the wagon." His associate, a heavy, square-jawed man with a
dramatic manner, praised Wallace's professional and personal
character highly. Martie, deeply distressed, saw him go away to try
the new play and went back to her own life.

This was in a bitter January. Now Teddy, building houses on the
floor, had passed his third enchanting birthday, and winter was upon
the big city again. Martie awaited it philosophically. Her coal was
in, anyway, or would be in, in another hour, and if the coal-
drivers' strike came to pass she might sleep in the comfortable
consciousness that no one under her roof would suffer. Her clean
curtains would go up this week; it had been an endless job; it was
finished.

"And the next thing on the programme is Thanksgiving!" she said
between two yawns

"Most of them goes out for that," said Mrs. Curley. "But the Colonel
and her will stay. Nice to be them that never had to ask the price
of turkey-meat this ten years!"

"Oh, well--we don't have it but twice a year!" Martie was folding
the new curtains; presently she gave the neat pile a brisk,
condensing slap with the flat of her hand. "There now, look what
your smart Nana and Mother did, Ted!" she boasted. "And come here
and give hims mother seventeen kisses and hugs, you darling,
adorable, fat, soft, little old monkey!" The last words were
smothered in the fine, silky strands under Teddy's dark, thick mop,
on his soft little neck. He submitted to the tumbling and hugging,
trying meanwhile to keep one eye upon the ship he had been building
from an upturned chair.

Breathless, Martie looked up from the embrace to see a pretty
smiling woman standing in the doorway, a wet raincoat over one arm,
and a wet hat balanced on her hand.

"Hello, people!" said the newcomer. "I'm drenched. I don't believe
this can keep up, it's frightful."

"Hello, Adele!" Martie said, setting Teddy on his feet. "Come in,
and spread those things on the heater. Sit there where your skirts
will get the heat. How was the matinee?"

"It was killing," said Mrs. Dryden, establishing herself comfortably
by the radiator. She was a slender, bright-eyed woman of perhaps
thirty, whose colouring ran to cool browns: clear brown eyes, brown
hair prettily dressed, a pale brown skin under which a trace of red
only occasionally appeared. To-day her tailor-made suit was brown,
and about her throat was a narrow boa of some brown fur. "Here,
Teddy, take these to your mother," she added, extending a crushed
box half full of chocolates. "The place was PACKED," she went on,
crunching. "And, my dear!--coming out we were right CLOSE to Doris
Beresford, in the most divine coat I ever laid eyes on! I suppose
they all like to have an idea of what's going on at the other
theatres. I don't believe she uses one bit of make-up; wonderful
skin! There was such a mob in the car it was something terrible. A
man crushed up against Ethel; she said she thought he'd break her
arm! I got a seat; I don't know how it is, but I always do. We'd
been running, and I suppose my colour was high, and a man got up
IMMEDIATELY. Nice--I always thank them. I think that's the least you
can do. Ethel said he sat and stared at me all the way up to Fifty-
ninth, where he got off. He was an awfully nice-looking fellow; I'll
tell you what he looked like: a young doctor. Don't you know those
awfully CLEAN-looking men---"

Martie, now changing Teddy's little suit for dinner, let the stream
run on unchecked. Mrs. Curley, who did not particularly fancy Mrs.
Dryden, had gone upstairs, but Martie really liked to listen to
Adele. Presently she turned on the lights, and led Teddy into the
Cold Lairs, to have his face washed. Adele reached for the evening
paper, and began to peruse it idly. When Martie came out of the
bath-room, it was to hear a knock at the door.

"It's John!" predicted Adele. A moment later her husband came into
the room. Like his wife, he was cold and wet and rosy from the
street, but he had evidently been upstairs, for he wore his old
house-coat and dry slippers, and had brushed his hair. He was
younger than Adele by three or four years, but he looked like a boy
of twenty; squarely built, not tall, but giving an impression of
physical power nevertheless. Martie had first thought his face odd,
then interesting; now she found it strangely attractive. His eyes,
between sandy lashes and under thick sandy brows, were of a sea-blue
in colour, his head was covered with a cap of thick, lustreless,
sand-coloured hair. Something odd, elfin, whimsical, in his crooked
smile lent an actual charm to his face, for Martie at least. She
told him he looked like Pan.

Early in their acquaintance she had asked him if he were not a Dane,
not a Norwegian, if he had not viking blood? She said that he
suggested sagas and berserkers and fjords--"not that I am sure what
any of those words mean!" His answering laugh had been as wild as a
delighted child's. No; he was American-born, of an English father
and an Irish mother, he said. He had never been abroad, never been
to college, never had any family that he remembered, except Adele.
He had meant to be a "merchant sailor"--a term he seemed to like,
although it conveyed only a vague impression to Martie--but his
lungs hadn't been strong. So he went to Arizona and loafed. And
there he met Adele; her mother kept the boarding-house in which he
lived, in fact, and there they were married. Adele had a glorious
voice and she wanted to come to New York to cultivate it. And then
Adele had been ill.

His voice fell reverently when he spoke of this illness. Adele had
nearly died. What the hope that had also really died at this time
meant to him, Martie could only suspect when she saw him with Teddy.
Adele herself told her that she was never strong enough for new
hopes.

"We couldn't afford it, of course; so perhaps it was just as well,"
said Adele one day when she and Martie had come to be good friends,
and were confidential. "I felt terribly for a while, because I have
a wonderful way with children; I know that myself. They always come
to me--funniest thing! Dr. Poole was saying the other day that I had
a remarkable magnetism. I said, 'I don't know about THAT,'--and I
don't, Martie! I don't think I'm so magnetic, do you--'BUT,' I said,
'I really do seem to have a hold on children!' Jack loves children,
too, but he spoils them. I don't believe in letting children run a
house; it isn't good for them, and it isn't good for you. Let them
have their own toys and treat them as kindly as possible, but---"

John Dryden was a salesman in a furniture house; perhaps the city's
finest furniture house. Martie suspected that his pleasant, half-
shy, yet definite manner, made him an excellent salesman. He talked
to her about his associates, whom he took upon their own valuations,
and deeply admired. This one was a "wizard" at figures, and that one
had "a deuce of a manner with women." John chuckled over their
achievements, but she knew that he himself must be the secret wonder
of the place. He might be more or less, but he was certainly not a
typical furniture salesman. Sometimes the manager took him to lunch;
Martie wondered if he quoted the queer books he read, and made the
staid echoes of the club to which they went awake to his pagan
laughter.

His extraordinarily happy temperament knew sudden despairs, but they
were usually because he had made a "rotten mistake," or because he
was "such a fool" about something. He never complained of the stupid
daily round; perhaps it was not stupid to him, who always had a book
under his arm, and to whom the first snow and the first green leaves
were miracles of delight every year. He treated Adele exactly as if
she had been an engaging five-year-old, and she had charming
childish mannerisms for him alone. He pacified her when she fretted
and complained, and was eagerly grateful when her mood was serene.
Her prettiness and her little spoiled airs, Martie realized
surprisedly, were full of appeal for him.

"You don't mean that--you don't mean that!" he would say to her when
she sputtered and raged. He listened absently to her long
dissertation upon the persons--and for Adele the world was full of
them--who tried to cheat her, or who were insolent to her, and to
whom she was triumphantly insolent in return. She found Martie much
more sympathetic as a listener.

Toward Martie, too, John soon began to display a peculiar
sensitiveness. At first it was merely that she spurred his sense of
humour; he began to test the day's events by her laughter. After
that her more general opinions impressed him; he watched her at
dinner and accepted eagerly her verdict upon political affairs or
the books and plays of the hour. She noticed, and was a little
touched to notice, that he quoted her weeks after she had expressed
herself. He brought her books and they disagreed and argued about
them. In summer, with Adele languid under her parasol, and Teddy
enchanting in white, they went to the park concerts, or to the
various museums, and wrangled about the new Strauss and Debussy, and
commented upon the Hals canvases and the art of Meissonier and
Detaille.

This evening he had a book for her from the Public Library; he had
been dipping into it on the elevated train.

"Which ticket is this on, John?"

"Yours."

"Well, then, you paid my dues on the other! How much?"

"Six cents."

She showed him the six coppers on her white palm.

"You were an angel to do it. Listen; do you want to read this when
I'm through?"

"Well, if you think so."

"Think so?--Carlyle's 'Revolution'? Of course you ought to! Adele,
isn't he ignorant?"

"I read that in High School," smiled Adele. "It's awfully good."

"Mis' Ban'ster," Aurora was at the door, "Hainy was cuttin' open the
chickens f' t'morrer, and she says one of 'em give an awful queer
sort of POP--!"

"Oh, for Heaven's sake!" Martie started kitchenward. John Dryden
gave a laugh of purest joy; Aurora was one of his delights. "We
always say we're going to read aloud in the evenings," she called
back. "Now here's a chance--a wet evening, and Adele and I with
oceans of sewing!"

She went from the kitchen upstairs, finding the various boarders
quietly congregating in the hall and parlour, awaiting the opening
of the dining-room door. Adele had gone up to her room, but Teddy
and John were roaming about. Rain still slashed and swished out of
doors. The winter was upon them.

"Seems to be such a smell of PAINT," said the younger Miss Peet.

"Well, that's just trying out the radiators," Martie said
hearteningly. "It won't last. Did you get caught?"

"Sister did; I got home just before it started. It seems to me we're
having rain early this year--"

"We had had two inches at this time last year," said old Colonel Fox.
Martie knew that this unpromising avenue would lead him immediately
to Chickamauga; she slipped into the dining room and began to carve.
Aurora was rushing about with butter-plates, her cousin Lyola,
engaged merely for the dinner-hour, was filling glasses. A moment
later the entire household assembled for the meal. Mrs. Fox, a
gentle, bony old lady, with clean, cool hands, and with a dowdy
little yoke of good lace in the neck of her old silk, smiled about
her sadly. Mrs. Winchell was a plump little woman who always burst
out laughing as a preliminary to speech. Her daughter was eye-
glassed, pretty, capable, a woman who realized perfectly, at twenty-
six, that she had no charm whatever for men. She realized, too, that
Mrs. Bannister, with her bronze hair and quick speech, was full of
it, and envied the younger woman in a bloodless sort of way. Her
brother, known as "Win," had already had a definite repulse from
Mrs. Bannister, and nothing was too bad for the snubbed suitor to
intimate about her in consequence. Win had never seen "this husband
of hers"; Win thought she looked "a little gay, all right." He had a
much more successful friendship with Adele, who slapped his hand and
told him he was the "limit."

To-night one of the clerks from the top floor, shaking out his
napkin, called gaily to Mrs. Bannister that this was his birthday.
It was characteristic of her kindly relationship that she came
immediately to his table. Now why hadn't he told her yesterday? He
should have had a cake, and chicken-pie, because he had once said
chicken was his favourite "insect." He was twenty-eight? He seemed
such a boy!

She went back to her place, determining that she would set out a
little supper of cake and crackers and cheese for him to find when
his room-mate and he came in tired and wet from their theatre that
night. She looked at Teddy; would he keep a birthday in a boarding-
house some day with only the housekeeper to mother him?

"We're betting that you're younger than I am, Mrs. Bannister!"

"You win." She smiled at him frankly. "I'm not yet twenty-four!"
Martie was conscious of a little pang as she met his surprised
almost pitying look.

"I think that talk about ages was just a little undignified," said
Edna Winchell later that night.

"Yes, I do, too!" her mother answered quickly.

"There's something about that girl we don't understand, you bet,"
contributed the son. "When I went down for a match she was just
getting a special delivery letter, and she looked as if she was
going to drop. You mark my words--it had something to do with that
mysterious husband of hers!"

For the boarding-house had never seen Wallace, who held the whole
place in bitter scorn. He resented the fact of Martie's position
there; the fact of her having made herself useful to old Mrs. Curley
represented a difference in their point of view. When, in Teddy's
first year, regular letters and a regular remittance from Wallace
ceased to appear, Martie had gone through an absolute agony of
worry. Her husband was then on the road, and she was not even sure
that her letters reached him.

Alone except for the baby, in the freezing, silent cold of the city,
she had pondered, planned, and fretted for day after weary day. The
one or two acquaintances she had made in Wallace's profession would
have advised her not to worry, nobody ever was turned out for board
in these days. But Martie was too proud to appeal to them for
counsel, and for other but even stronger reasons she could not
confide in Mrs. Curley. So passed the first Christmas alone, doubly
sad because it reminded her of the Christmas a year before, when
they had been so happy and so prosperous in San Francisco.

In snowy February, however, Mrs. Curley herself had unconsciously
offered a solution. She wanted to go to her daughter in Brooklyn for
a fortnight. "Run the house for me, that's the good girl," she said
to Martie. "You can do it as good as I can, any day of the world!
Aurora knows what the menus for the week are and all you've got to
do is to do the ordering and show the rooms to folks that come
looking for them."

Martie had been feeling a little more comfortable about her overdue
board, because Wallace, playing in stock in Los Angeles, had sent
her one hundred dollars early in the year. It was not enough, but it
sufficed to pay a comfortable installment on her bill, and to keep
her in money for another week or two. But she was sick of waiting
and worrying, and she seized the opportunity to be helpful. Chance
favoured her, for during the old woman's visit the daughter in
Brooklyn fell ill, and it was mid-March before the mother came home
again. By that time the trembling Martie had weathered several
storms, had rented the long-vacant front room, and was more brisk
and happy than she had been for months, than she had ever been
perhaps. So the arrangement drifted along. There was no talk of a
salary then, but in time Martie came to ask for such money as she
needed--for Teddy's rompers, for gingham dresses for summer, for
stationery and stamps--and it was always generously accorded.

"Get good things while you're about it," Mrs. Curley would say. "You
buy for the ragman when you buy trash. This lad here," she would
indicate the splendid Teddy, with his loose dark curls and his
creamy skin, "he wants to look elegant, so that the girls will run
after him!"

Martie felt more free to obey her because the business was in a
steadily improving condition. This fancy for keeping a few "paying
guests" had become a sort of expensive luxury for the solitary
woman, whose children no longer needed her, and who would not live
with any of them. Mrs. Curley was not entirely dependent upon her
boarding-house, but she had never been reconciled to the actual loss
of money in the business. She liked to have other persons about, she
having no definite interests of her own, and the new arrangement
suited her perfectly: an attractive young woman to help her, a baby
to lend a familiar air to the table, and money enough to pay all
bills and have something left over.

Amazingly, the money flowed in. Martie told them one night at dinner
that she had always fancied a boarding-house was a place where a
slap-heeled woman climbed bleak stairs to tell starving geniuses
that their rent was overdue. Mrs. Curley had laughed comfortably at
the picture.

"You can always make money feeding people," she had asserted. John
had given Martie a serious look after his laugh.

"Geniuses don't HAVE to starve," he had submitted thoughtfully.

"There's always plenty of work in the world, if people will do it!"
Adele had added. "Dear me, I often wonder if the people who talk
charity--charity--charity--realize that it's all two thirds laziness
and dirt. I don't care HOW poor I was, I know that I would keep my
little house nice; you don't have to have money to do that! But
you'll always hear this talk of the unemployed--when any employer
will tell you the hard thing is to get trustworthy men! The other
day Ethel was asking me to join some society or other--take tickets
for an actors' benefit, I think it was--and I begged to be excused.
I told her we didn't have any money to spare for that sort of thing!
Genius, indeed! Why don't they get jobs?"

"Jobs in a furniture store, eh, John?" Martie smiled. The man
answered her smile sturdily.

"It isn't so rotten!" he said.

Her letters to-night, for there were two in the special delivery
stamped envelope, were from Lydia and Sally. Sally had written often
to her sister during the years, and Martie was fairly in touch with
Monroe events: the young Hawkeses had three babies now, and Grace
had twins. Rose had been ill, and had lost her hopes a second time,
but she was well now, and she and Rodney had been to New York.
People said that the Parkers were coining money, and Rose had
absolutely everything she wanted. Colonel Frost was dead. Miss Frost
looked like death--Martie had smiled at the old phrase--and Grandma
Kelly was dead; Father Martin was quoted as saying that she was a
saint if ever there was one. George Patterson had been sued by a
girl in Berkeley, and Monroe was of the opinion that the Pattersons
never would hold up their heads again. Pa and Len were in some real
estate venture together, Len had talked Pa into it at last. And
finally, Sally and the children were well, and Joe wrote her every
day.

This last sentence had puzzled Martie; where was Joe Hawkes then,
that he must write every day to his wife? She had intended to write
Sally in the old affectionate, confidential strain, and ask all the
questions that rose now and then in her thoughts of Monroe. But she
had not written for months, and now--now this.

She grasped the news in the tear-stained sheets at a first glance.
Her mother was dead. Martie repeated the words to herself with a
stupid realization that she could not grasp their meaning. The old
dark house in the sunken square would know that slender, gentle
presence no more. She had never felt the parting final; a chill wind
from some forgotten country smote her. Her mother was dead, her
child was growing up, her husband had failed her.

Sally's letter was brief, restrained, and tender. Martie could read
Sally's development in the motherly lines. But Lydia had written in
a sort of orgy of grief. Ma had "seemed like herself all Wednesday,"
and had gone with Lydia to see old Mrs. Mussoo, and had eaten her
dinner that night, and the next day, Thursday, she had come down as
usual to breakfast, and so on and on for ten long days, every hour
of which was treasured now in Lydia's heart. "And poor Pa," wrote
the older sister, "I must be all in all to him now; I never can
marry now. And oh, Martie, I couldn't help wishing, for your sake,
that you could feel that you had never, even as a thoughtless girl,
caused our dear angel an hour of grief and pain! You must say to
yourself that she forgave you and loved you through it all ..."

Martie made a wry mouth over the letter. But into the small hours of
the morning she lay awake, thinking of her mother and of the old
days. Odd little memories came to her: the saucer pies that she and
Sally used to have for their tea-parties, out under the lilac trees,
and a day when she, Martie, had been passionately concerned for the
fate of a sick cat, and had appealed to her mother for help. Mrs.
Monroe had been filling lamps, and her thin dark hands were oily and
streaked with soot, but she had been sympathetic about the kitten,
and on her advice the invalid had been wrapped in a clean cloth, and
laid tenderly on the heaps of soft, sweet, dying grass that had been
raked to one side of the lawn. Here kindly death had found the
kitten a little later, and Martie, cat and all, had climbed into her
mother's lap and cried. But she was not a little girl any longer--
she would never feel her mother's arms about her again.

The next day she received a box of roses, not remarkable roses,
inasmuch as they were rather small, of a solid red, and wired
heavily from the end of their sterns to the very flower. But the
enclosed note in which John Dryden said that he knew how hard it was
for her, and was as sorry as he could be, touched Martie. A far more
beautiful gift would not have gone to her heart quite so deeply as
did this cheap box and the damp card with its message smudged and
blurred.

Through the long icy winter she began to feel, with a sense of vague
pain, that life was passing, that if she and Wallace were ever to
have that big, shadowy studio, that long-awaited time of informal
hospitality and financial ease, it must come soon. Her marriage was
already measured by years; yet she was still a child in Wallace's
hands. He could leave her thus bound and thus free; she was
helpless, and she began to chafe against the injustice of it. One
day she found, and rewrote her old article, filled with her own
resentful theories of a girl's need of commercial fitness. She sent
it to a magazine; it was almost immediately returned.

But the episode bore fruit, none the less. For, discussing it with
John, as she discussed everything with John, she was led to accept
his advice as to the appearance of the closely written sheets. It
would have a much better chance if it were typewritten, he assured
her. He carried it off to his stenographer.

This was in April, and as, with characteristic forgetfulness, he
failed to bring it back, Martie, chancing to pass his office one
day, determined to go in and get it for herself. She had never been
in John's place of business before. She went from the spring warmth
and dazzle of the street into the pleasant dimness of the big store
that smelled pleasantly of reedy things, wickerwork and carpets.

Three or four salesmen "swam out like trout" from the shadows to
meet her, she told John presently, evoking one of his bursts of
laughter. One of them called him, and Martie had a sensation of real
affection as he came down, his eager, faunlike face one radiant
smile. She spoke of the manuscript, but he hardly heard her. Where
could they talk?--he said concernedly. He glanced about; his face
brightened.

"I know! There's a set of five rooms just finished by our decorator
on the fourth floor; we'll go there!"

"But, John--truly I haven't but a minute!" Martie protested.

He did not hear her. He touched the elevator bell, and they went
upstairs.

The furnished suite was unbelievably lovely to Martie's unaccustomed
eyes. She wanted to exclaim over the rugs and chairs; John wanted to
talk. They wandered through the perfect rooms, laughing like happy
children.

"I came down to get some things for to-morrow--Teddy needs a straw
hat, if we're really going to Coney"--Martie found his steady look a
little confusing. "You like my pongee, and my four-dollar hat?" she
said.

"I think you're PERFECTLY--GORGEOUS!" he answered intensely. "To
have you come in here like this!--I had no idea of it! Brewer simply
came and said 'a lady'--I thought it was that woman from the hotel.
I'll never forget the instant my eyes fell upon you, standing there
by old Pitcher. It--honestly, Martie, it seemed to me like a burst
of sunshine!"

"Why--you goose!" she said, a little shaken. The circumstance of
their being here, in this exquisite semblance of domestic comfort,
the sweet summer day, the new flowery hat and cool pongee gown,
combined to stir her blood. She forgot everything but that she was
young, and that it was strangely thrilling to have this man, so
ardent and so forceful, standing close beside her.

It was almost with a sense of relief, a second later, that she
realized that other groups were drifting through the little
apartment, that she and John were not alone. She remembered, with a
strange, poignant contraction of her heart, the expression in his
eyes as they met, the authoritative finger with which he had touched
the elevator bell.

John spoke appreciatively of her visit that night at the table;
Adele said that Martie had told her of it.

"I was going down town with her," said Adele, playing idly with
knife and fork. "But I got started on that disgusting centrepiece
again, and Ethel came in, and we just sewed. I'm so sick of the
thing now I told Miriam I was going to give it to her and let her
finish it herself--I'll have to go down town Monday and match the
silk anyway; it's too maddening, for there's just that one leaf to
do, but I might as well keep AT it, and get RID of it! If we go to
Coney to-morrow I believe I'll take it along, and go on with it; I
suppose it would look funny, but I don't know why not. Ethel went to
Coney last week with the Youngers in their auto; she said it was a
perfect scream all the way; Tom WOULD pass everything on the road,
and she said it was a scream! She says Mrs. Younger talks about
herself and her house and her servants all the time, and she
wouldn't get out of the car, so it wasn't much fun. I asked her why
she wouldn't get out of the car, and she said her complexion. I
didn't see anything so remarkable about it myself; anyway, if you
rub plenty of cream in--I'm going to do that to-morrow, Martie, and
you ought to!--and then wear a veil, I don't mean too heavy a veil,
but just to keep your hat tight, why, you don't burn!"

"Both you girls come down town Monday, and I'll show you a rug worth
fifty thousand dollars," suggested John.

"Oh, thank you, dear!" Adele said in bright protest. "But if you
knew what I've got to do Monday! I'm going to have my linen fitted,
and I'm going in to see the doctor about that funny, giddy feeling
I've had twice. And Miriam wants me to look at hats with her. I'll
be simply dead. Miriam and I will get a bite somewhere; we're dying
to try the fifty-cent lunch at Shaftner's; they say it isn't so bad.
It'll be an awful day, to say nothing of being all tired out from
Coney. But I suppose I'll have to get through it."

She smiled resignedly at Martie. But Martie had fallen suddenly into
absent thought. She was thinking of the odd look on John's face as
he came forward in the pleasant dimness and coolness of the big
store.

The next day they went duly to Coney Island; their last trip
together, as it chanced, and one of the most successful of their
many days in the parks or on the beaches. John, Martie, and Teddy
were equally filled with childish enthusiasm for the prospect, and
perhaps Adele liked as well her role of amused elder.

It was part of the pleasure for Martie to get up early, to slip off
to church in the soft, cool morning. The dreaming city, awaiting the
heat of the day, was already astir, churchgoers and holiday-makers
were at every crossing. Freshly washed sidewalks were drying,
enormous Sunday newspapers and bottles of cream waited in the
doorways. Fasting women, with contented faces, chatted in the bakery
and the dairy, and in the push-cart at the curb ice melted under a
carpet cover. It was going to be a scorcher--said the eager boys and
girls, starting off in holiday wear, coatless, gloveless, frantic to
be away. Little families were engineered to the surface cars, clean
small boys in scalloped blue wash suits, mother straining with the
lunch-basket, father carrying the white-coated baby and the
newspaper and the children's cheap coats.

Martie, kissing Teddy as a preliminary to her delayed breakfast,
came home to discuss the order of events. The route and the time
were primarily important: Teddy's bucket, John's camera, her own
watch, must not be forgotten. There were last words for Henny and
Aurora, good-byes for Grandma; then they were out in the Sunday
streets, and the day was before them!

John took charge of the child; Adele and Martie talked and laughed
together all the long trip. The extraordinary costumes of the boys
and girls about them, the sights that filled the streets, these and
a thousand other things were of fresh interest. Adele's costume was
discussed.

"My gloves washed so beautifully; he said they would, but I didn't
believe him! My skirt doesn't look a bit too short, does it, Martie?
I put this old veil on, and then if we have dinner any place decent,
I'll change to the other. I wore these shoes, because I'll tell you
why: they only last one summer, anyway, and you might as well get
your wear out of them. Listen, does any powder show? I simply put it
on thick, because it does save you so. It's that dead white. I told
her I didn't have colour enough for it; she said I had a beautiful
colour--absurd, but I suppose they have to say those things!"

And Adele, her clear brown eyes looking anxiously from her slender
brown face, leaned toward Martie for inspection. Martie was always
reassuring. Adele looked lovely; she had her hat on just right.

At Coney Teddy played bare-legged in the warm sand. Adele had a
beach chair near by. She put on her glasses, and began her sewing;
later they would all read parts of the paper, changing and
exchanging constantly. Martie and John, beaming upon all the world,
joined the long lines that straggled into the bath-houses, got their
bundled suits and their gray towels, and followed the attendant
along the aisles that were echoing with the sound of human voices,
and running with the water from wet bathing-suits. Fifteen minutes
later they met again, still beaming, to cross under the damp, icy
shadow of the boardwalk, and come out, fairly dancing with high
spirits, upon the long, hot curve of the beach. The delicious touch
of warm sand under her stockinged feet, the sunlight beating upon
her glittering hair, Martie would run down the shore to the first
wheeling shallows of the Atlantic.

"Nothing I have ever done in my life is so wonderful as this!" she
shouted as the waves caught them, and carried them off their feet.
John swam well; Martie a little; neither could get enough of the
tumbling blue water.

Breathless, they presently joined Adele; Martie spreading her
glittering web of hair to dry, as she sat in the sand by the other
woman's chair; John stretched in the hot sand for a nap; Teddy
staggering to and fro with a dripping pail. They liked to keep a
little away from the crowd; a hundred feet away the footmarked sand
was littered with newspapers, cigarette-butts, gum-wrappers, and
empty paper-bags, the drowsing men and women were packed so close
that laughing girls and boys, going by in their bathing-suits, had
to weave a curving path up and down the beach.

Presently they had a hearty meal: soft-shell crabs fried brown, with
lemon and parsley, coffee ready-mixed with milk and sugar, sliced
tomatoes with raw onions, all served in cheap little bare rooms, at
scarred little bare tables, a hundred feet from the sea. Later came
the amusements: railways and flying-swings enjoyed simultaneously
with hot sausages and ice-cream cones.

Adele liked none of this so much as she liked to go up toward the
big hotels at about five o'clock, to find a table near the
boardwalk, and sit twirling her parasol, and watching the people
stream by. The costumes and the types were tirelessly entertaining.
At six they ordered sandwiches and beer, and Teddy had milk and
toast. The uniformed band, coming out into its pagoda, burst into a
brassy uproar, the sun sank, the tired crowd in its brilliant
colours surged slowly to and fro. Beyond all, the sea softly came
and went, waves broke and spread and formed again unendingly.

Martie felt that she would like to sit so forever, with her son's
soft, relaxed little body in her arms. To-night she did not analyze
the new emotion that John's glances, John's voice, John's quiet
solicitude for her comfort, had lent the day. Of course he liked
her; of course he admired her; that was a fact long recognized with
maternal amusement by Adele and herself. Of course he laughed at
her, but every one laughed at Martie when she chose to be humorous.
Let it go at that!

Sandy, sore, sleepy, and sunburned, they were presently in the
returning cars, all wilted New York returning with them. Teddy slept
soundly, sometimes in his mother's arms, sometimes in John's. It was
John who carried him up the steps of the Seventieth Street house at
ten o'clock.

A gentleman waiting to see Mrs. Bannister? Goodness, Aurora, why
didn't you ask Mrs. Curley to see him? Martie surrendered her loose
coat and hat to the maid, put a hand to her disordered hair.
Apologetic, smiling, she went into the parlour.

Wallace Bannister was waiting for her; she was in her husband's
arms.

"But, Wallace--Wallace--Wallace, what does it matter, dear? You
don't have to tell me all about it, all the sickness and failure and
bad luck! You're home again, now, and you've gotten back into your
own line, and that's all that matters!"

Thus Martie, laughing with lashes still wet. She understood, she
forgave; what else was a wife for? All that mattered was that he was
here, and was deep in new plans, he had a new part to work up, he
was to begin rehearsing next week, and the past was all a troubled
dream. Ah, this was worth while; this made up for it all!

Not quite a dream, for he seemed much older; the boyish bravado was
gone. He was stout, settled, curiously deliberate in manner. But
then she was older, too.

He answered her generous concession only with compliments. She had
grown handsome, by George, she had a stunning figure, she had a
stunning air! Martie laughed; she knew it was true.

He felt his old hatred for her employment at the boarding-house, and
she was as eager as he to launch into real housekeeping at last.
After the lonely years, it was wonderful to have a husband again! He
bought whatever she wanted, took her proudly about. She went with
him to his first rehearsals, finding the old stage atmosphere
strangely exhilarating. Adele was frankly jealous of this new
development, Martie saw and heard her as little as she noticed
John's silence and seriousness, and Mrs. Curley's dubious
cooperation.

A friend of Wallace proposed to sub-let them a furnished apartment
in East Twenty-sixth Street. Martie inspected it briefly, with eyes
too dazzled with dreams to see it truly.

She was not trained to business responsibility: she merely laughed
because her old employer was annoyed to have her housekeeper desert
her. After all, could there be a better reason for any move than
that one's husband wished it? Swiftly and gaily she snapped the ties
that bound her to the boarding-house.

There seemed to be plenty of money for teas and dinners: she stared
about the brightly lighted restaurants like an excited child.
Wallace was boisterously fond of his son, but he was too busy to be
much with Teddy, and he wanted his wife all day and every day. So
Martie engaged a housekeeper to take her place in the house, and a
little coloured girl to take care of Teddy, and devoted herself to
Wallace.


CHAPTER V


The flat in East Twenty-sixth Street was not what Martie's lonely
dreams had fashioned, but she accepted it with characteristic
courage and made it a home. She had hoped for something irregular,
old-fashioned: big rooms, picturesque windows, picturesque
inconveniences, interesting neighbours.

She found five rooms in a narrow, eight-story, brick apartment-
house; a narrow parlour with a cherry mantel and green tiles,
separated from a narrow bedroom by closed folding doors, a narrow,
long hall passing a dark little bathroom and the tiny dark room that
Teddy had, a small dining room finished in black wood and red paper,
and, wedged against it, a strip of kitchen.

These were small quarters after the airy bareness of the Curley
home, and they were additionally reduced in effect by the peculiar
taste their first occupant had shown in furnishing. The walls were
crowded with heavily framed pictures, coloured photographs of
children in livid pink and yellow gowns dancing to the music played
by draped ladies at grand pianos; kittens in hats, cheap prints of
nude figures, with ugly legends underneath. The chairs were of every
period ever sacrificed to flimsy reproduction: gilt, Mission, Louis
XIV, Pembroke, and old English oak. There were curtains, tassels,
fringes, and portieres everywhere, of cotton brocade, velours,
stencilled burlap, and "art" materials generally. There was a
Turkish corner, with a canopy, daggers, crescents, and cushions. The
bookcase in the parlour and the china cabinet in the dining room
were locked. The latter was so large, and the room it adorned so
small, that it stood at an angle, partly shutting out the light of
the one window. Every room except the parlour opened upon an air-
well, spoken of by the agent as "the court." The rent was fifty
dollars, and Wallace considered the place a bargain.

For the first day or two Martie laughed bravely at her surroundings,
finding in this vase or that picture cause for great amusement. She
promised herself that she would store some of these horrors, but
inasmuch as there was not a spare inch in the flat for storage, it
was decidedly simplest to leave them where they were. Wallace did
not mind them, and Wallace's happiness was her aim in life.

But, strangely, after the first excitement of his return was over, a
cool distaste descended upon her. Before the first weeks of the new
life were over, she found herself watching her husband with almost
hostile eyes. It must be wrong for a wife to feel so abysmal--so
overwhelming an indifference toward the man whose name she bore.
Wallace, weary with the moving, his collar off, his thick neck bare,
his big pale face streaked with drying perspiration, was her husband
after all. She was angry at herself for noticing that his sleek hair
was thinning, that the old look of something not fine was stamped
more deeply upon his face. She resolutely suppressed the deepening
resentment that grew under his kisses; kisses scented with alcohol.

Generations of unquestioning wives behind her, she sternly routed
the unbidden doubts, she deliberately put from her thoughts many
another disillusion as the days went by. She was a married woman
now, protected and busy; she must not dream like a romantic girl.
There was delightfully novel cooking to do; there was freedom from
hateful business responsibility. All beginnings were hard, she told
her shrinking soul; she was herself changed by the years; what
wonder that Wallace was changed?

Perhaps in his case it was less change than the logical development
of qualities that would have been distinctly discernible to clearer
eyes than hers in the very hour of their meeting. Wallace had always
drifted with the current, as he was drifting now. He would have been
as glad as she, had success come instead of failure; he did not even
now habitually neglect his work, nor habitually drink. It was merely
that his engagement was much less distinguished than he had told her
it was, his part was smaller, his pay smaller, and his chances of
promotion lessening with every year. He had never been a student of
life, nor interested in anything that did not touch his own comfort;
but in the first days of their love, days of youth and success and
plenty, Martie had been as frankly an egotist as he. His heaviness,
his lack of interest in what excited her, his general
unresponsiveness, came to her now more as a recollection than a
surprise.

The farce in which he had a part really did prove fairly successful,
and his salary was steady and his hours comfortable until after the
new year. Then the run ended, and Wallace drifted for three or four
weeks that were full of deep anxiety for Martie.

When he was engaged again, in a vaudeville sketch that was booked
for a few weeks on one of the smaller circuits about New York, she
had some difficulty in making him attend rehearsals, and take his
part seriously. His friends were generally of the opinion that it
was beneath his art. His wife urged that "it might lead to
something."

Wallace was amused at her concern. Actors never worked the whole
year round, he assured her. There was nothing doing in the
summertime, ever. Martie remarked, with a half-sorry laugh, that a
salary of one hundred dollars a week for ten weeks was less than
eighty-five dollars a month, and the same salary, if drawn for only
five weeks, came to something less than a living income.

"Don't worry!" Wallace said.

"Wallace, it's not for myself. It's for the--the children. My dear!
If it wasn't for that, it would be a perfect delight to me to take
luck just as it came, go to Texas or Canada with you, work up parts
myself!" she would answer eagerly. She wanted to be a good wife to
him, to give him just what all men wanted in their wives. But under
all her bravery lurked a sick sense of defeat. He never knew how
often he failed her.

And he was older. He was not far from forty, and his youth was gone.
He did not care for the little dishes Martie so happily prepared,
the salads and muffins, the eggs "en cocotte" and "suzette." He
wanted thick broiled steak, and fried potatoes, and coffee, and
nothing else. He slept late in the mornings, coming out frowsy-
headed in undershirt and trousers to breakfast at ten or eleven,
reading the paper while he ate, and scenting the room with thick
cigar smoke.

Martie waited on him, interrupting his reading with her chatter. She
would sit opposite him, watching the ham and eggs vanish, and the
coffee go in deep, appreciative gulps.

"How d'you feel, Wallie?"

"Oh, rotten. My head is the limit!"

"Too bad! More coffee?"

"Nope. Was that the kid banging this morning?"

"My dear, he was doing it just for the time it took me to snatch the
hammer away! I was so sorry!"

"Oh, that's all right." He would yawn. "Lord, I feel rotten!"

"Isn't it perhaps--drinking and smoking so much, Wallace?" Martie
might venture timidly.

"That has nothing to do with it!"

"But, Wallie, how do you know it hasn't?"

"Because I do know it!"

He would return to his paper, and Martie to her own thoughts. She
would yawn stupidly, when he yawned, in the warm, close air.
Sometimes she went into the tumbled bedrooms and put them in order,
gathering up towels and scattered garments. But usually Wallace did
not bathe until after his breakfast, and nothing could be done until
that was over. Equally, Martie's affairs kitchenward were delayed;
sometimes Wallace's rolls were still warming in the oven when she
put in Teddy's luncheon potato to bake. The groceries ordered by
telephone would arrive, and be piled over the unwashed dishes on the
table, the frying pan burned dry over and over again.

After Teddy and his mother had lunched, if Wallace was free, they
all went out together. He was devoted to the boy, and broke
ruthlessly into his little schedule of hours and meals for his own
amusement. Or he and Martie went alone to a matinee. But when he was
playing in vaudeville, even if he lived at home, he must be at the
theatre at four and at nine. Often on Sunday afternoons he went out
to meet his friends, to drift about the theatrical clubs and hotels,
and dine away from home.

Then Martie would take Teddy out, happy times for both. They went to
the library, to the museums, to the aquarium and the Zoo. Martie
came to love the second-hand book-stores, where she could get George
Eliot's novels for ten cents each, a complete Shakespeare for
twenty-five. She drank in the passing panorama of the streets: the
dripping "L" stations, the light of the chestnut dealer, a blowing
flame in the cold and dark, the dirty powder of snow blowing along
icy sidewalks, and the newspapers weighted down at corner stands
with pennies lying here and there in informal exchange. Cold, rosy
faces poured into the subway hoods, warm, pale faces poured out, wet
feet slipped on the frozen rubbish of the sidewalks, little
salesgirls gossiped cheerfully as they dangled on straps in the
packed cars.

Often Martie and Teddy had their supper at Childs', in the clean
warm brightness of marble and nickel-plate. Teddy knew their
waitress and chattered eagerly over his rice and milk. Martie had a
sandwich and coffee, watching the shabby fingers that fumbled for
five-cent tips, the anxious eyes studying the bill-of-fare, the pale
little working-women who favoured a supper of butter cakes and lemon
meringue pie after the hard day.

She would go home to find the breakfast dishes waiting, the beds
unmade, the bathroom still steamed from Wallace's ablutions. Teddy
tucked away for the night, she would dream over a half-sensed book.
Why make the bed she was so soon to get into? Why wash the dishes
now rather than wait until she was in her comfortable wrapper? She
went back to her old habit of nibbling candy as she read.

The jolly little Bohemian suppers she had foreseen never became a
reality. Wallace hated cheap food; he was done with little
restaurants, he said. More than that, among his friends there did
not seem to be any of those simple, busy, gifted artists to whose
acquaintance Martie had looked forward. The more distinguished
members of his company he hardly knew; the others were semi-
successful men like himself, women too poor and too busy to waste
time or money, or other women of a more or less recognized looseness
of morals. Martie detested them, their cologne, their boasting,
their insinuations as to the personal lives of every actor or
actress who might be mentioned. They had no reserves, no respect for
love or marriage or parenthood; they told stories entirely beyond
her understanding, and went about eating, drinking, dressing, and
dancing as if these things were all the business of life.

Wallace's favourite hospitality was extended to six silent,
overdressed, genial male friends, known as "the crowd." These he
frequently asked to dinner on Sunday nights, a hard game of poker
always following. Martie did not play, but she liked to watch her
husband's hands, and during this winter he attributed his phenomenal
good luck to her. He never lost, and he always parted generously
with such sums as he won. He loved his luck; the envious comments of
the other players delighted him; the good dinner, and the presence
of his beautiful wife always put him in his best mood. They called
him "Three deuces Wallie," and Martie's remark that his weight was
also "Two--two--two" passed for wit.

She took his winnings without shame. It was to take them, indeed,
that she endured the long, silent evening, with its incessant
muttering and shuffling and slapping of cards. The gas whined and
rasped above their heads, the air grew close and heavy with smoke.
Ash-trays were loaded with the stumps and ashes of cigars; sticky
beer glasses ringed the bare table. But Martie stuck to her post. At
one o'clock it would all be over, and Wallace, carrying a glass of
whisky-and-soda to his room, would be undressing between violent
yawns and amused recollections.

"Some of that comes to me, Wallie. I have the rent coming this
week!"

"Sure. Take all you want, old girl. You're tired, aren't you?"

"Tired and cold." Martie's circulation was not good now, and she
knew why. Her meals had lost their interest, and sometimes even
Teddy's claims were neglected. She was sleepy, tired, heavy all the
time. "When I see a spoon lying on the dining-room floor, and
realize that it will lie there until I pick it up I could scream!"
she told Wallace.

"It's a shame, poor old girl!"

"Oh, no--it's all right." She would blink back the tears. "I'm not
sorry!"

But she was sorry and afraid. She resented Wallace's easy sympathy,
resented the doctor's advice to rest, not to worry, his mild
observation that a good deal of discomfort was inevitable.

Early in the new year she began to agitate the question of a dinner
to the Drydens. Wallace, who had taken a fancy to Adele, agreed
lazily to endure John's company, which he did not enjoy, for one
evening. But he obstinately overruled Martie on the subject of a
dinner at home.

"Nix," said Wallace flatly. "I won't have my wife cooking for
anybody!"

exclaimed Maude, giggling. "He is pulled over on his head."
The Colonel roared. And the gentlemen and ladies who were standing
by laughed, too.

Virginia did not laugh. It was all too serious for her.

"You will see that they can fight," she said. "They can beat the
Yankees and Dutch."

This speech made the Colonel glance around him: Then he smiled,--in
response to other smiles.

"My dear," he said, "you must remember that this is a peaceable camp
of instruction of the state militia.

There fly the Stars and Stripes from the general's tent.

Do you see that they are above the state flag? Jinny; you forget
yourself."
Jinny stamped her foot

"Oh, I hate dissimulation," she cried, "Why can't we, say outright
that we are going to run that detestable Captain Lyon and his
Yankees and Hessians out of the Arsenal."
"Why not, Colonel Carvel?" cried Maude. She had forgotten that one
of her brothers was with the Yankees and Hessians.

"Why aren't women made generals and governors?" said the Colonel.

"If we were," answered Virginia, "something might be accomplished."

"Isn't Clarence enough of a fire-eater to suit you?" asked
her father.

But the tents were pitched, and at that moment the young Captain
was seen to hand over his horse to an orderly, and to come toward
them.

He was followed by George Catherwood.

"Come, Jinny," cried her cousin, "let us go over to the main camp."

"And walk on Davis Avenue," said Virginia, flushing with pride. "Isn't
there a Davis Avenue?"
"Yes, and a Lee Avenue, and a Beauregard Avenue," said George,
taking his sister's arm.

"We shall walk in them all," said Virginia.

What a scene of animation it was.

The rustling trees and the young grass of early May, and the two
hundred and forty tents in lines of military precision. Up and down
the grassy streets flowed the promenade, proud fathers and mothers,
and sweethearts and sisters and wives in gala dress.

Wear your bright gowns now, you devoted women.

The day is coming when you will make them over and over again, or
tear them to lint, to stanch the blood of these young men who wear
their new gray so well.

Every afternoon Virginia drove with her father and her aunt to Camp
Jackson. All the fashion and beauty of the city were there. The bands
played, the black coachmen flecked the backs of their shining horses,
and walking in the avenues or seated under the trees were natty
young gentlemen in white trousers and brass-buttoned jackets.
All was not soldier fare at the regimental messes. Cakes and jellies
and even ices and more substantial dainties were laid beneath those
tents.

Dress parade was one long sigh of delight: Better not to have been
born than to have been a young man in St. Louis, early in Camp
Jackson week, and not be a militiaman.

One young man whom we know, however, had little of pomp and vanity
about him,--none other than the young manager (some whispered
"silent partner") of Carvel & Company.

If Mr. Eliphalet had had political ambition, or political leanings,
during the half-year which had just passed, he had not shown them.
Mr. Cluyme (no mean business man himself) had pronounced Eliphalet
a conservative young gentleman who attended to his own affairs and
let the mad country take care of itself.

This is precisely the wise course Mr. Hopper chose. Seeing a regiment
of Missouri Volunteers slouching down Fifth street in citizens' clothes
he had been remarked to smile cynically. But he kept his opinions so
close that he was supposed not to have any.

On Thursday of Camp Jackson week, an event occurred in Mr. Carvel's
store which excited a buzz of comment.

Mr. Hopper announced to Mr. Barbo, the book-keeper, that he should
not be there after four o'clock. To be sure, times were more than
dull. The Colonel that morning had read over some two dozen letters
from Texas and the Southwest, telling of the impossibility of
meeting certain obligations in the present state of the country.
The Colonel had gone home to dinner with his brow furrowed. On the
other hand, Mr. Hopper's equanimity was spoken of at the widow's
table.

At four o'clock, Mr. Hopper took an Olive Street car, tucking himself
into the far corner where he would not be disturbed by any ladies
who might enter. In the course of an hour or so, he alighted at the
western gate of the camp on the Olive Street road. Refreshing
himself with a little tobacco, he let himself be carried leisurely
by the crowd between the rows of tents. A philosophy of his own (which
many men before and since have adopted) permitted him to stare
with a superior good nature at the open love-making around him.

He imagined his own figure,--which was already growing a little
stout,--in a light gray jacket and duck trousers, and laughed.
Eliphalet was not burdened with illusions of that kind. These
heroes might have their hero-worship. Life held something
dearer for him.

As he was sauntering toward a deserted seat at the foot of a tree, it
so chanced that he was overtaken by Mr. Cluyme and his daughter
Belle. Only that morning, this gentleman, in glancing through the
real estate column of his newspaper, had fallen upon a deed of
sale which made him wink. He reminded his wife that Mr. Hopper had
not been to supper of late. So now Mr. Cluyme held out his hand with
more than common cordiality. When Mr.

Hopper took it, the fingers did not close any too tightly over his
own.

But it may be well to remark that Mr.

Hopper himself did not do any squeezing. He took off his hat grudgingly
to Miss Belle. He had never liked the custom.

"I hope you will take pot luck with us soon again, Mr. Hopper,"
said the elder gentleman.

"We only have plain and simple things, but they are wholesome, sir.
Dainties are poor things to work on. I told that to his Royal
Highness when he was here last fall. He was speaking to me on the
merits of roast beef--"
"It's a fine day," said Mr. Hopper.

"So it is," Mr. Cluyme assented. Letting his gaze wander over the
camp, he added casually, "I see that they have got a few mortars and
howitzers since yesterday. I suppose that is the stuff we heard
so much about, which came on the 'Swon' marked 'marble.' They say
Jeff Davis sent the stuff to 'em from the Government arsenal the
Secesh captured at Baton Rouge.

They're pretty near ready to move on our arsenal now."
Mr. Hopper listened with composure. He was not greatly interested in
this matter which had stirred the city to the quick.

Neither had Mr. Cluyme spoken as one who was deeply moved. Just then,
as if to spare the pains of a reply, a "Jenny Lind" passed them.

Miss Belle recognized the carriage immediately as belonging to an
elderly lady who was well known in St.

Louis. Every day she drove out, dressed in black bombazine, and heavily
veiled. But she was blind. As the mother-in-law of the stalwart
Union leader of the city, Miss Belle's comment about her appearance
in Camp Jackson was not out of place.

"Well!" she exclaimed, "I'd like to know what she's doing here!"

Mr. Hopper's answer revealed a keenness which, in the course of
a few days, engendered in Mr. Cluyme as lusty a respect as he
was capable of.

"I don't know," said Eliphalet; "but I cal'late she's got stouter."

"What do you mean by that?" Miss Belle demanded.

"That Union principles must be healthy," said he, and laughed.

Miss Cluyme was prevented from following up this enigma. The
appearance of two people on Davis Avenue drove the veiled lady from
her mind.
Eliphalet, too, had seen them.

One was the tall young Captain of Dragoons, in cavalry boots, and the
other a young lady with dark brown hair, in a lawn dress.

"Just look at them!" cried Miss Belle. "They think they are alone
in the garden of Eden. Virginia didn't use to care for him. But
since he's a captain, and has got a uniform, she's come round
pretty quick. I'm thankful I never had any silly notions about
uniforms."
She glanced at Eliphalet, to find that his eyes were fixed on the
approaching couple.

"Clarence is handsome, but worthless," she continued in her sprightly
way. "I believe Jinny will be fool enough to marry him. Do you
think she's so very pretty, Mr. Hopper?"
Mr. Hopper lied.

"Neither do I," Miss Belle assented. And upon that, greatly to the
astonishment of Eliphalet, she left him and ran towards them.
"Virginia!" she cried; "Jinny, I have something so interesting to
tell you!"
Virginia turned impatiently. The look she bestowed upon Miss
Cluyme was not one of welcome, but Belle was not sensitive. Putting
her arm through Virginia's, she sauntered off with the pair toward
the parade grounds, Clarence maintaining now a distance of three
feet, and not caring to hide his annoyance.

Eliphalet's eyes smouldered, following the three until they were
lost in the crowd. That expression of Virginia's had reminded him
of a time, years gone, when she had come into the store on her
return from Kentucky, and had ordered him to tell her father of her
arrival.

He had smarted then. And Eliphalet was not the sort to get over
smarts.

"A beautiful young lady," remarked Mr. Cluyme. "And a deserving
one, Mr.
Hopper.

Now, she is my notion of quality. She has wealth, and
manners, and looks. And her father is a good man. Too bad he
holds such views on secession. I have always thought, sir, that you
were singularly fortunate in your connection with him."

There was a point of light now in each of Mr. Hopper's green eyes.
But Mr.

Cluyme continued:

"What a pity, I say, that he should run the risk of crippling himself
by his opinions.

Times are getting hard."

"Yes," said Mr. Hopper.

"And southwestern notes are not worth the paper they are written
on--"
But Mr. Cluyme has misjudged his man.

If he had come to Eliphalet for information of Colonel Carvel's
affairs, or of any one else's affairs, he was not likely to get
it. It is not meet to repeat here the long business conversation
which followed. Suffice it to say that Mr. Cluyme, who was in dry
goods himself, was as ignorant when he left Eliphalet as when he
met him.

But he had a greater respect than ever for the shrewdness of the
business manager of Carvel & Company.

.........................

That same Thursday, when the first families of the city were
whispering jubilantly in each other's ears of the safe arrival of
the artillery and stands of arms at Camp Jackson, something of
significance was happening within the green inclosure of the walls
of the United States arsenal, far to the southward.

The days had become alike in sadness to Stephen.

Richter gone, and the Judge often away in mysterious conference,
he was left for hours at a spell the sole tenant of the office.

Fortunately there was work of Richter's and of Mr. Whipple's left
undone that kept him busy.

This Thursday morning, however, he found the Judge getting into that
best black coat which he wore on occasions. His manner had recently
lost much of its gruffness.

"Stephen," said he, "they are serving out cartridges and uniforms
to the regiments at the arsenal.

Would you like to go down with me?"

"Does that mean Camp Jackson?" asked Stephen, when they had
reached the street.

"Captain Lyon is not the man to sit still and let the Governor
take the first trick, sir," said the Judge.

As they got on the Fifth Street car, Stephen's attention was at
once attracted to a gentleman who sat in a corner, with his children
about him.

He was lean, and he had a face of great keenness and animation.

He had no sooner spied Judge Whipple than he beckoned to him with
a kind of military abruptness.

"That is Major William T.

Sherman," said the Judge to Stephen.

"He used to be in the army, and fought in the Mexican War.

He came here two months ago to be the President of this Fifth Street
car line."

They crossed over to him, the Judge introducing Stephen to Major
Sherman, who looked at him very hard, and then decided to bestow
on him a vigorous nod.

"Well, Whipple," he said, "this nation is going to the devil; eh?"
Stephen could not resist a smile.

For it was a bold man who expressed radical opinions (provided
they were not Southern opinions) in a St.

Louis street car early in '61.

The Judge shook his head.

"We may pull out," he said.

"Pull out!" exclaimed Mr. Sherman. "Who's man enough in Washington to
shake his fist in a rebel's face? Our leniency--our timidity--has
paralyzed us, sir."
By this time those in the car began to manifest considerable interest
in the conversation. Major Sherman paid them no attention, and the
Judge, once launched in an argument, forgot his surroundings.

"I have faith in Mr. Lincoln. He is calling out volunteers."
"Seventy-five thousand for three months!"

said the Major, vehemently, "a bucketful on a conflagration I tell
you, Whipple, we'll need all the water we've got in the North."

The Judge expressed his belief in this, and also that Mr. Lincoln
would draw all the water before he got through.

"Upon my soul," said Mr. Sherman, "I'm disgusted. Now's the time
to stop 'em.

The longer we let 'em rear and kick, the harder to break 'em.

You don't catch me going back to the army for three months.

If they want me, they've got to guarantee me three years.

That's more like it." Turning to Stephen, he added: "Don't you sign
any three months' contract, young man."
Stephen grew red. By this time the car was full, and silent.

No one had offered to quarrel with the Major. Nor did it seem likely
that any one would.

"I'm afraid I can't go, sir."
"Why not?" demanded Mr. Sherman.

"Because, sir," said the Judge, bluntly, "his mother's a widow, and
they have no money.

He was a lieutenant in one of Blair's companies before the call
came."

The Major looked at Stephen, and his expression changed.

"Find it pretty hard?"

he asked.

Stephen's expression must have satisfied him, but he nodded again,
more vigorously than before.

"Just you WAIT, Mr. Brice," he said. "It won't hurt you any."
Stephen was grateful. But he hoped to fall out of the talk. Much
to his discomfiture, the Major gave him another of those queer
looks. His whole manner, and even his appearance, reminded Stephen
strangely of Captain Elijah Brent.

"Aren't you the young man who made the Union speech in Mercantile
Library Hall?"

"Yes, sir," said the Judge. "He is."

At that the Major put out his hand impulsively, and gripped
Stephen's.

"Well, sir," he said, "I have yet to read a more sensible speech,
except some of Abraham Lincoln's.

Brinsmade gave it to me to read. Whipple, that speech reminded me
of Lincoln. It was his style. Where did you get it, Mr. Brice?" he
demanded.

"I heard Mr. Lincoln's debate with Judge Douglas at 'Freeport,"
said Stephen; beginning to be amused.

The Major laughed.

"I admire your frankness, sir," he said.

"I meant to say that its logic rather than its substance reminded
one of Lincoln."

"I tried to learn what I could from him, Major Sherman."
At length the car stopped, and they passed into the Arsenal grounds.

Drawn up in lines on the green grass were four regiments, all at
last in the blue of their country's service.

Old soldiers with baskets of cartridges were stepping from file to
file, giving handfuls to the recruits. Many of these thrust them in
their pockets, for there were not enough belts to go around. The
men were standing at ease, and as Stephen saw them laughing and
joking lightheartedly his depression returned. It was driven away
again by Major Sherman's vivacious comments.

For suddenly Captain Lyon, the man of the hour, came into
view.

"Look at him!" cried the Major, "he's a man after my own heart. Just
look at him running about with his hair flying in the wind, and the
papers bulging from his pockets. Not dignified, eh, Whipple? But this
isn't the time to be dignified. If there were some like Lyon in
Washington, our troops would be halfway to New Orleans by this time.
Don't talk to me of Washington! Just look at him!"
The gallant Captain was a sight, indeed, and vividly described
by Major Sherman's picturesque words as he raced from regiment to
regiment, and from company to company, with his sandy hair awry,
pointing, gesticulating, commanding.

In him Stephen recognized the force that had swept aside stubborn army
veterans of wavering faith, that snapped the tape with which they
had tied him.

Would he be duped by the Governor's ruse of establishing a State
Camp at this time?

Stephen, as he gazed at him, was sure that he would not.

This man could see to the bottom, through every specious argument.
Little matters of law and precedence did not trouble him.

Nor did he believe elderly men in authority when they told gravely
that the state troops were there for peace.

After the ranks were broken, Major Sherman and the Judge went to
talk to Captain Lyon and the Union Leader, who was now a Colonel
of one of the Volunteer regiments.

Stephen sought Richter, who told him that the regiments were to
assemble the morning of the morrow, prepared to march.

"To Camp Jackson?" asked Stephen.

Richter shrugged his shoulders.

"We are not consulted, my friend," he said.

"Will you come into my quarters and have a bottle of beer with
Tiefel?"

Stephen went. It was not their fault that his sense at their comradeship
was gone. To him it was as if the ties that had bound him to them
were asunder, and he was become an outcast.

CHAPTER XVIII
THE STONE THAT IS REJECTED
That Friday morning Stephen awoke betimes with a sense that
something was to happen.

For a few moments he lay still in the half comprehension which
comes after sleep when suddenly he remembered yesterday's incidents
at the Arsenal, and leaped out of bed.

"I think that Lyon is going to attack Camp Jackson to-day," he said
to his mother after breakfast, when Hester had left the room.

Mrs. Brice dropped her knitting in her lap.

"Why, Stephen?"
"I went down to the Arsenal with the Judge yesterday and saw
them finishing the equipment of the new regiments. Something was in
the wind.
Any one could see that from the way Lyon was flying about.

I think he must have proof that the Camp Jackson people have
received supplies from the South."
Mrs. Brice looked fixedly at her son, and then smiled in spite of
the apprehension she felt.

"Is that why you were working over that map of the city last night?"
she asked.

"I was trying to see how Lyon would dispose his troops.

I meant to tell you about a gentleman we met in the street car, a
Major Sherman who used to be in the army. Mr. Brinsmade knows
him, and Judge Whipple, and many other prominent men here. He
came to St.

Louis some months ago to take the position of president of the Fifth
Street Line. He is the keenest, the most original man I have ever
met. As long as I live I shall never forget his description of
Lyon."

"Is the Major going back into the army?" said Mrs.

Brice, Stephen did not remark the little falter in her voice. He
laughed over the recollection of the conversation in the street
car.

"Not unless matters in Washington change to suit him," he said.
"He thinks that things have been very badly managed, and does not
scruple to say so anywhere.

I could not have believed it possible that two men could have talked
in public as he and Judge Whipple did yesterday and not be shot down.

I thought that it was as much as a man's life is worth to mention
allegiance to the Union here in a crowd. And the way Mr. Sherman
pitched into the Rebels in that car full of people was enough
to make your hair stand on end."
"He must be a bold man," murmured Mrs. Brice.

"Does he think that the--the Rebellion can be put down?"
"Not with seventy-five thousand men, nor with ten times that number."

Mrs. Brice sighed, and furtively wiped her eyes with her handkerchief.

"I am afraid we shall see great misery, Stephen," she said.

He was silent. From that peaceful little room war and its horrors
seemed very far away. The morning sun poured in through the south
windows and was scattered by the silver on the sideboard. From above,
on the wall, Colonel Wilton Brice gazed soberly down.

Stephen's eyes lighted on the portrait, and his thoughts flew
back to the boyhood days when he used to ply his father with
questions about it. Then the picture had suggested only the
glory and honor which illumines the page of history. Something
worthy to look back upon, to keep ones head high.

The hatred and the suffering and the tears, the heartrending, tearing
apart for all time of loving ones who have grown together,--these
were not upon that canvas, Will war ever be painted with a wart?

The sound of feet was heard on the pavement. Stephen rose, glancing
at his mother. Her face was still upon her knitting.

"I am going to the Arsenal," he said. "I must see what as happening."

To her, as has been said, was given wisdom beyond most women.

She did not try to prevent him as he kissed her good-by. But when
the door had shut behind him, a little cry escaped her, and she
ran to the window to strain her eyes after him until he had turned
the corner below.

His steps led him irresistibly past the house of the strange flag,
ominously quiet at that early hour. At sight of it anger made him
hot again.

The car for South St. Louis stood at the end of the line, fast
filling with curious people who had read in their papers that
morning of the equipment of the new troops.

There was little talk among them, and that little guarded.

It was a May morning to rouse a sluggard; the night air tingled
into life at the touch of the sunshine, the trees in the flitting
glory of their first green. Stephen found the shaded street in front
of the Arsenal already filled with an expectant crowd. Sharp commands
broke the silence, and he saw the blue regiments forming on
the lawn inside the wall. Truly, events were in the air,--great
events in which he had no part.

As he stood leaning against a tree-box by the curb, dragged down
once more by that dreaded feeling of detachment, he heard familiar
voices close beside him.

Leaning forward, he saw Eliphalet Hopper and Mr.
Cluyme. It was Mr. Cluyme who was speaking.

"Well, Mr. Hopper," he said, "in spite of what you say, I expect
you are dust as eager as I am to see what is going on. You've taken
an early start this morning for sightseeing."
Eliphalet's equanimity was far from shaken.

"I don't cal'late to take a great deal of stock in the military,"
he answered. "But business is business. And a man must keep an eye
on what is moving."
Mr. Cluyme ran his hand through his chop whiskers, and lowered his
voice.
"You're right, Hopper," he assented. "And if this city is going to
be Union, we ought to know it right away."
Stephen, listening with growing indignation to this talk, was unaware
of a man who stood on the other side of the tree, and who now came
forward before Mr. Hopper. He presented a somewhat uncompromising
front. Mr.
Cluyme instantly melted away.
"My friend," said the stranger, quietly, "I think we have met before,
when your actions were not greatly to your credit. I do not forget
a face, even when I see it in the dark. Now I hear you utter words
which are a disgrace to a citizen of the United States. I have some
respect for a rebel. I have none for you, sir."
As soon as Stephen recovered from the shock of his surprise, he saw
that Eliphalet had changed countenance. The manner of an important
man of affairs, which he hay so assiduously cultivated, fell away
from him. He took a step backward, and his eyes made an ugly shift.
Stephen rejoiced to see the stranger turn his back on the manager
of Carvel & Company before that dignitary had time to depart, and
stand unconcernedly there as if nothing had occurred.
Then Stephen stared at him.
He was not a man you would look at twice, ordinarily, he was smoking
a great El Sol cigar. He wore clothes that were anything but new,
a slouch hat, and coarse grained, square-toed boots. His trousers
were creased at the knees. His head fell forward a little from his
square shoulders, and leaned a bit to one side, as if meditatively.
He had a light brown beard that was reddish in the sun, and he was
rather short than otherwise.
This was all that Stephen saw. And yet the very plainness of the
man's appearance only added to his curiosity. Who was this stranger?
His words, his action, too, had been remarkable. The art of
administering a rebuke like that was not given to many men. It was
perfectly quiet, perfectly final. And then, when it was over, he
had turned his back and dismissed it.
Next Stephen began to wonder what he could know about Hopper.Protesting,
raw, it fell on Martie's ears like the resolving chord of an
exquisite melody. Still breathless, still panting from strain and
fright, she smiled.

"Ah, the darling! Is he all right?" she whispered.

"You haf a girl!" the old woman interrupted her clucking and
grumbling to say briefly. "Vill you lay still, and let the old
Grandma fix you, or not vill you?" she added sternly. "Grandma who
has het elefen of dem...."

"Don't cry, little Margaret!" Martie murmured, happy under the
kindly adjusting old hands. The old woman stumped about composedly,
opening bureau drawers and scratching matches in the kitchen, before
she would condescend to telephone for the superfluous doctor. She
was pouring a flood of Yiddish endearments and diminutives about the
newcomer, when the surprised practitioner arrived. Mrs. Simons
scouted the idea of a nurse; she would come upstairs, her daughters
would come upstairs--what was it, one baby! Martie was allowed a
cupful of hot milk, and went to sleep with one arm about the flannel
bundle that was Margaret.

Well--she thought, drifting into happy dreams--of course, the
hospital was wonderful: the uniformed nurses, the system, the
sanitation. But this was wonderful, too. So many persons had to be
consulted, had to be involved, in the coming of a hospital baby; so
much time, so many different rooms and hallways.

The clock had not yet struck two; she had given Wallace his
breakfast at eleven, Isabeau would be home at five; Grandma had gone
downstairs to borrow some of the put-away clothes of the last little
Napthaly. Martie had nothing to do but smile and sleep. To-morrow,
perhaps, they would let her go on with "The Life of the Bee."

Peace lapped soul and body. The long-approaching trial was over. In
a few days she would arise, mistress of herself once more, and free
to remake her life.

First, they must move. Even if they could afford to pay six hundred
dollars a year in rent, this flat was neither convenient nor
sanitary for little children. Secondly, Wallace must understand that
while he worked and was sober, his wife would do her share; if he
failed her, she must find some other life. Thirdly, as soon as the
baby's claims made it possible, Martie must find some means of
making money; her own money, independent of what Wallace chose to
give.

She pondered the various possibilities. She could open a boarding-
house; although that meant an outlay for furniture and rent. She
could take a course in library work or stenography; that meant
leaving the children all day.

She began to study advertisements in the newspapers for working
housekeepers, and one day wrote a businesslike application to the
company that controlled a line of fruit steamers between the city
and Panama. Mrs. Napthaly's sister-in-law was stewardess on one of
these, and had good pay. Short stories, film-plays, newspaper work--
other women did these things. But how had they begun?

"Begin at the beginning!" she said cheerfully to herself. The move
was the beginning. Through the cool autumn days she resolutely
hunted for flats. It was a wearisome task, especially when Wallace
accompanied her, for his tastes ran to expensive and vestibuled
apartments and fashionable streets. Martie sternly held to quiet
side streets, cut off from the city by the barriers of elevated
trains and the cheap shopping districts.

When she found what she wanted, she and Wallace had a bitter
struggle. He refused at first to consider four large bare shabby
rooms in a poor street, overlooking a coal-yard, and incidentally,
on the very bank of the East River. What cars went there, he
demanded indignantly; what sort of neighbours would they have? What
would their friends think!

Martie patiently argued her point. The neighbourhood, the east
fifties, if cheap and crowded, was necessarily quiet because the
wide street ended at the river. The rooms were on a first floor, and
so pleasantly accessible for baby and baby-carriage. The coalyard,
if not particularly pleasant, was not unwholesome; there was
sunshine in every room, and finally, the rent was eighteen dollars.
They must entertain their friends elsewhere.

She did not know then that what really won him was her youth and
beauty; the new brilliant colour, the blue, blue eyes, the revived
strength and charm of the whole, lovely woman. She put her arms
about him, and he kissed her and gave her her way.

Happily they went shopping. Martie had gathered some furniture in
her various housekeeping adventures; the rest must be bought. They
prowled through second-hand stores for the big things: beds, tables,
a "chestard" for Wallace. The cottage china, chintzes, net curtains,
and grass rugs were new. Martie conceded a plaster pipe-rack, set
with little Indian faces, to Wallace; her own extravagance was a
meat-chopper. Wallace got a cocktail shaker, and when the first
grocery order went in, gin and vermouth and whisky-were included.
Martie made their first meal a celebration, in the room that was
sitting-and dining-room combined, and tired and happy, they sat long
into the evening over the table, talking of the future.

Theoretically, Wallace agreed with her. If they were to succeed,
there must be hard work, carefully controlled expenditure, and
temperance. They were still young, their children were well, and
life was before them. In a few years Wallace might make a big
success; then they could have a little country home, and belong to a
country club, and really live. Eager tears brimmed Martie's eyes as
she planned and he approved.

Actually, Wallace was not quite so satisfactory. He would be sweet-
tempered and helpful for a few days, but he expected a reward. He
expected his wife's old attitude of utter trust and devotion.
Rewarded by a happy evening when they dined and talked in utter
harmony, he would fail her again. Then came dark days, when Martie's
heart smouldered resentfully hour after busy hour. How could he--how
could he risk his position, waste his money, antagonize his wife,
break all his promises! She could not forgive him this time, she
could not go through the humiliating explanations, apologies,
asseverations, again be reconciled and again deceived!

He knew how to handle her, and she knew he knew. When the day or two
of sickness and headache were over he would shave and dress
carefully and come quietly and penitently back into the life of the
house. Would Ted like to go off with Dad for a walk? Couldn't he go
to market for her? Couldn't he go along and wheel Margaret?

Silently, with compressed lips, Martie might pass and repass him.
But the moment always came when he caught her and locked her in his
arms.

"Martie, dearest! I know how you feel--I won't blame you! I know
what a skunk and a beast I am. What can I do? How can I show you how
sorry I am? Don't--don't feel so badly! Tell me anything--any oath,
any promise, I'll make it! You're just breaking my heart, acting
like this!"

For half an hour, for an hour, her hurt might keep her unresponsive.
In the end, she always kissed him, with wet eyes, and they began
again.

Happy hours followed. Wallace would help her with the baby's bath,
with Teddy's dressing, and the united Bannisters go forth for a
holiday. Martie, her splendid square little son leaning on her
shoulder, the veiled bundle of blankets that was Margaret safely
sleeping in the crib, her handsome husband dressing for "a party,"
felt herself a blessed and happy woman.

Frequently, when he was not playing, they went to matinees,
afterward drifting out into the five o'clock darkness to join the
Broadway current. Here Wallace always met friends: picturesque
looking men, and bright-eyed, hard-faced women. Invariably they went
into some hotel, and sat about a bare table, for drinks. Warmed and
cheered, the question of convivialities arose.

"Lissen; we are all going to Kingwell's for eats," Wallace would
tell his wife.

"But, Wallace, Isabeau is going to have dinner at home!" It was no
use; the bright eye, the thickened lips, the loosened speech evaded
her. He understood her, he had perfect self-control, but she could
influence him no longer. Mutinous, she would go with the chattering
women into the dressing room, where they powdered, rouged lips and
cheeks, and fluffed their hair.

"Lord, he is a scream, that boy!" Mrs. Dolly Fairbanks might remark
appreciatively, offering Martie a mud-coloured powder-pad before
restoring it to the top of her ravelled silk stocking. "I'll bet
he's a scream in his own home!"

Martie could only smile forcedly in response. She was not in
sympathy with her companions. She hated the extravagance, the noise,
and the drinking that were a part of the evening's fun. Wallace's
big, white, ringed hand touched the precious greenbacks so readily;
here! they wanted another round of drinks; what did everybody want?

Wherever they went, the scene was the same: heat, tobacco smoke,
music; men drinking, women drinking, greenbacks changing hands,
waiters pocketing tips. Who liked it? she asked herself bitterly. In
the old days she and Sally had thought it would be fun to be in New
York, to know real actors and actresses, to go about to restaurants
in taxicabs. But what if the money that paid for the taxicabs were
needed for Ted's winter shirts and Margar's new crib? What if the
actors were only rather stupid and excitable, rather selfish and
ignorant men and women, to whom homes and children, gardens and
books were only words?

Presumably the real actors, the real writers and painters led a mad
and merry life somewhere, wore priceless gowns and opened champagne;
but it was not here. These were the imitators, the pretenders, and
the rich idlers who had nothing better to do than believe in the
pretenders.

Still, when Wallace suggested it, Martie found it wise to yield. He
might stumble home beside her at eleven, the worse for the eating
and drinking, but at least he did come home, and she could tell
herself that the men in the car who had smiled at his condition were
only brutes; she would never see them again; what did their opinion
matter! In other ways she yielded to him; peace, peace and affection
at any cost. Yet it cost her dear, for the possibility of another
child's coming was the one thought that frightened and dismayed her.

Strongly contrasted to Wallace's open-handedness when he was with
his friends was the strict economy Martie was obliged to practise in
her housekeeping. She went to market herself, as the spring came on,
heaping her little purchases at Margar's feet in the coach. Teddy
danced and chattered beside her, neighbours stopped to smile at the
baby. At the fruit carts, the meat market, the grocery, Martie
pondered and planned. Oranges had gone up, lamb had gone up--dear,
dear, dear!

Sitting at the grocery counter, she would rearrange her menus.

"Butter fifty--my, that is high! Hasn't the new butter come in? I
had better have half a pound, I think. And the beans, and the
onions, yes. Let me see--how do you sell the canned asparagus--
that's too much. Send me those things, Mr. O'Brien, and I'll see
what I can get in the market."

All about her, in the heart-warming spring sunshine, other women
were mildly lamenting, mildly bartering. Martie's brain was still
busily milling, as she wheeled the coach back through the checkered
sun and shade of the elevated train. She would bump the coach down
into the area, carefully loading her arms with small packages,
catching Margar to her shoulder.

Panting, the perspiration breaking out on her forehead, she would
enter the dining room.

"Take her, Isabeau! My arms are breaking! Whew!--it is HOT! Not now,
Teddy, you can't have anything until lunch time. Amuse her a minute,
Isabeau, I can't take her until--I get--my breath! I had to change
dinner; he had no liver. I got veal for veal loaf; Mr. Bannister
likes that; and stuffed onions, and the pie, and baked potatoes.
Make tea. Put that down, Teddy, you can't have that. Now, my
blessedest girl, come to your mother! She's half asleep now; I'll
change her and put her out for her nap!"

The baby fed and asleep, Ted out again, Martie would serve Wallace's
breakfast herself rather than interrupt the steady thumping of irons
in the kitchen. She tried to be patient with his long delays.

"How's the head?" she would ask, sitting opposite him with little
socks to match, or boxed strawberries to stem.

"Oh, rotten! I woke up when the baby did."

"But, Wallie--that was seven o'clock! You've been asleep since."

"Just dozing. I heard you come in!"

"Well, I think I'll move her clothes out of that room. Aren't your
eggs good?"

"Nope. They taste like storage. I should think we could get good
eggs now!"

"They OUGHT to be good!"

"You ought to get a telephone in here," he might return sourly.
"Then you could deal with some decent place! I hate the way women
pinch and squeeze to save five cents; there's nothing in it!"

Silence. Martie's face flushed, her fingers flew.

"What are you doing to-day?" she might ask, after a while.

"Oh, I'll go down town, I guess. Never can tell when something'll
break. Bates told me that Foster was anxious to see me. He says
they're having a deuce of a time getting people for their plays.
Bates says to stick 'em for a couple of hundred a week."

Martie placed small hope in such a hint, but she was glad he could.
When he had sauntered away, she would go on patiently, mixing the
baby's bottles, picking toys from the floor, tying and re-tying
Ted's shoe-laces. This was a woman's life. Martha Bannister was not
a martyr; nobody in the city could stop to help or pity her.

The hot summer shut down upon them, and the baby drooped, even
though Martie was careful to wheel her out into the shade by the
river every day. She herself drooped, staring at life helplessly,
hopelessly. In March there would be a third child.

After a restless night, the sun woke her, morning after morning,
glaring into her room at six. Wearily, languidly, she dressed the
twisting and leaping Teddy, fastened little Margar, with her string
of spools and her shabby double-gown, in the high-chair. The kitchen
smelled of coffee, of grease; the whole neighbourhood smelled in the
merciless heat of the summer day. Had that meat spoiled; was the
cream just a little turned?

Ted, always absorbed in wheels, pulleys, and nails, would be in an
interrogative mood.

"Mother, could a giant step across the East River?"

"What was it, dear?--the water was running; Mother didn't hear you."

"Could a giant step across a river?"

"Why, I suppose he could. Don't touch that, Ted."

"Could he step across the whole WORLD?"

"I don't know. Here's your porridge, dear. Listen---"

For Wallace was shouting. Martie would go to the bedroom door, to
interrogate the tousle-headed, heaving form under the bedclothes.

"Say, Martie, isn't there an awful lot of noise out there?"

Martie would stand silent for a moment.

"You can't blame the children for chattering, Wallace."

"Well, you tell Ted he'll catch it, if I hear any more of it!"

She would go lifelessly back to the kitchen, to sip a cup of
scalding black coffee. Margar went into her basket for her
breakfast, banging the empty bottle rapturously against the wicker
sides as a finale.

"Wash both their faces, Isabeau," Martie would murmur, flinging back
her head with a long, weary sigh. "There are no buttons on this
suit; I'll have to go back into Mr. Bannister's room--too bad, for
he's asleep again! Yes, dear, you may go to market and push the
carriage--DON'T ask Mother that again, Ted! I always let you go, and
you ALWAYS push Sister." Her voice would sink to a whisper, and her
face fall into her hands. "Oh, Isabeau, I do feel so wretched.
Sometimes it seems as if---However!" and with a sudden desperate
courage, Martie would rally herself. "However, it's all in the day's
work! Run down to the sidewalk, Ted, and Mother'll be right down
with the baby!"

Coming in an hour later perhaps, Wallace, better-natured now, would
call her again.

"Come in, Mart! Hell-oo! Is that somebody that loves her Daddy?"

"She's just going to have her bottle, Wallie" Martie would fret.

"Well, here! Let me give it to her." Sitting up in bed, his
nightgown falling open at the throat, Margar's father would hold out
big arms for the child.

"No, you can't. She'll never go to sleep at that rate; and if she
misses her nap, that upsets her whole day!"

"Lord, but you are in a grouch, Mart. For Heaven's sake, cheer up!"
Wallace, rumpling and kissing his daughter, would give her a
reproachful look.

Martie's face always darkened resentfully at such a speech.
Sometimes she did not answer.

"Perhaps if YOU couldn't sleep," she might say in a low, shaken
tone, "and you felt as miserable as I do, you might not be so
cheerful!"

"Oh, well, I know! But you know it's nothing serious, and it won't
last. Forget it! After all, your mother had four children, and mine
had seven, and they didn't make such a fuss!"

He did not mean to be unkind, she would remind herself. And what he
said was true, after all. There was nothing more to say.

"Wallie, have you any money for the laundry?"

"Oh, Lord! How much is it?"

"Two dollars and thirteen cents; four weeks now."

"Well, when does he come?"

"To-day."

"Well, you tell him that I'll step in to-morrow and pay the whole
thing. I'm going to see Richards to-day; I won't be home to dinner."

"But I thought you were going to see that man in the Bronx, about
the moving picture job to-morrow?"

"Yes, I am. What about it?"

"Nothing. Only, Wallie, if you have dinner with Mr. Richards and all
those men, you know--you know you may not feel like--like getting up
early to-morrow!" Martie, hesitating in the doorway with the baby,
wavered between tact and truth.

"Why don't you say I'll be drunk, while you're about it?"

The ugly tone would rouse everything that was ugly in response.

"Very well, I WILL say that, if you insist!" The slamming door ended
the conversation; Martie trembled as she put the child to bed.
Presently Isabeau would come to her to say noncommittally, but with
watchful, white-rimmed eyes, that Mist' Bans'ter he didn' want no
breakfuss, he jus' take hisse'f off. For the rest of the day, Martie
carried a heart of lead.

Mentally, morally, physically, the little family steadily descended.
With Martie too ill to do more than drag herself through the autumn
days, Wallace idle and ugly, Isabeau overworked and discontented,
and bills accumulating on every side, there was no saving element
left. Desperately the wife and mother plodded on; the children must
have milk and bread, the rent-collector must be pacified if not
satisfied. Everything else was unimportant. Her own appearance
mattered nothing, the appearance of the house mattered nothing. She
pinned the children's clothing when their buttons disappeared; she
slipped a coat wearily over her house-dress, and went to the
delicatessen store five minutes before dinner-time. She was thin
enough now,--Martie, who had always longed to be thin. Sometimes,
sitting on the side of an unmade bed, with a worn little shirt of
Ted's held languidly in her hands, she would call the maid.

"Isabeau! Hasn't Teddy a clean shirt?"

"No, MA'AM! You put two them shirts in yo' basket 'n' says how you's
going to fix 'em!"

"I must get at those shirts," Martie would muse helplessly. "Come,
Ted, look what you're doing! Pay attention, dear!"

"Man come with yo meat bill, Mis' Ban'ster," Isabeau might add,
lingering in the doorway. "Ah says you's OUT."

"Thank you, Isabeau." Perhaps Martie would laugh forlornly. "Never
mind--things must change! We can't go on THIS way!"

Suddenly, she was ill. Without warning, without the slip or stumble
or running upstairs that she was quite instinctively avoiding, the
accident befell. Martie, sobered, took to her bed, and sent Isabeau
flying for Dr. Converse, the old physician whose pleasant wife had
often spoken to Teddy in the market. Strange--strange, that she who
so loved children should be reduced now to mere thankfulness that
the little life was not to be, mere gratitude for an opportunity to
lie quiet in bed!

"For I suppose I should stay in bed for a few days?" Martie asked
the doctor. Until she was told she might get up. Very well, but he
must remember that she had a husband and two children to care for,
and make that soon.

Dr. Converse did not smile in answer. After a while she knew why.
The baffling weakness did not go, the pain and restlessness seemed
to have been hers forever. Day after day she lay helpless; while
Isabeau grumbled, Margar fretted, and Teddy grew noisy and
unmanageable. Wallace was rarely at home, the dirt and confusion of
the house rode Martie's sick brain like a nightmare. She told
herself, as she lay longing for an appetizing meal, an hour's
freedom from worry, that there was a point beyond which no woman
might be expected to bear things, that if life went on in this way
she must simply turn her face to the wall and die.

Ghost-white, she was presently on her feet. The unbearable had been
borne. She was getting well again; ridden with debts, and as shabby
and hopeless as it could well be, the Bannister family staggered on.
Money problems buzzed about Martie's eyes like a swarm of midges:
Isabeau had paid this charge of seventy cents, there was a drug bill
for six dollars and ten cents--eighty cents, a dollar and forty
cents, sixty-five cents--the little sums cropped up on all sides.

Martie took pencil and paper, and wrote them all down. The hideous
total was two hundred and seventeen dollars on the last day of
October. But there would be rent again on the eleventh--

Her bright head went suddenly down on her arms. Oh, no--no--no! It
couldn't be done. It was all too hard, too bewildering--

Suddenly, looking at the pencilled sums, the inspiration came. Was
it a memory of those days long ago in Monroe, when she had
calculated so carefully the cost of coming on to the mysterious
fairyland of New York? As carefully now she began to count the cost
of going home.

It was five years since she had seen her own people; and in that
time she had carried always the old resentful feeling that she would
rather die than turn to Pa for help! But she knew better now; her
children should not suffer because of that old girlish pride.

Her mother was gone. Len and his wife, one of the lean, tall Gorman
girls, were temporarily living with Pa in the old place. Sally had
four children, Elizabeth, Billy, Jim, and Mary, and lived in the old
Mussoo place near Dr. Ben. Joe Hawkes was studying medicine, Lydia
kept house for Pa, of course, and Sally and her father were
reconciled. "We just started talking to each other when Ma was so
ill," wrote Sally, "and now he thinks the world and all of the
children."

All these changes had filtered to Martie throughout the years. Only
a few weeks ago a new note had been sounded. Pa had asked Sally if
she ever heard of her sister; had said that Mary Hawkes was like her
Aunt Martie, "the cunningest baby of them all."

Wild with hope, Sally had written the beloved sister. It was as if
all these years of absence had been years of banishment to Sally.
Martie recognized the unchanging Monroe standard.

She got Sally's letter now, and re-read it. If Pa could send her a
few hundreds, if she could get the children into Lydia's hands, in
the old house in the sunken garden, if Teddy and Margar could grow
up in the beloved fogs and sunshine, the soft climate of home, then
how bravely she could work, how hopefully she could struggle to get
a foothold in the world for them! She wrote simply, lovingly,
penitently, to her father--She was convalescent after serious
illness; there were two small children; her husband was out of work;
could he forgive her and help her? In the cold, darkening days, she
went about fed with a secret hope, an abounding confidence.

But she held the letter a fortnight before sending it. If her father
refused her, she was desperate indeed. Planning, planning, planning,
she endured the days. Wallace was not well; wretched with grippe, he
spent almost the entire day in bed when he was at home, dressing at
four o'clock and going out of the house without a farewell.
Sometimes, for two or three nights a week, Martie did not know where
he was; his friends kept him in money, and made him feel himself a
deeply wronged and unappreciated man. She could picture him in bars,
in cafes, in hot hotel rooms seriously talking over a card-table,
boasting, threatening.

She dismissed Isabeau Eato with a promise that the girl accepted
ungraciously.

"If I had the money Isabeau, you should have it; you know that!"

"Yas'm. Hit's what dey all says'm."

"You SHALL have it," Martie promised, with hot cheeks. She breathed
easier when the girl was gone. She told the grocer that she had
written her father, and that his bills should be paid; she reminded
the big rosy man that she had been ill. He listened without comment,
cleaning a split thumb-nail. The story was not a new one.

No answer came to her letter, and a sick suspicion that no answer
would come began to trouble her. December was passing. Teddy was
careful to tell her just what he wanted from Santa Claus. On
Christmas Eve she asked Wallace, as he was silently going out, for
some money.

"I want to get Ted SOMETHING for Christmas, Wallie."

"What does he want?"

"Well, of course he wants a coaster and skates, but that's absurd. I
thought some sort of a gun--he's gun-mad, and perhaps a book of
fairy-tales."

With no further comment her husband gave her a five-dollar-bill, and
went on his way. She saw that he had other bills, and went
impulsively after him.

"Wallie! Could you let me have a little more? I do need it so!"

Still silent, he took the little roll from his pocket, and gave her
another five dollars. She saw still a third, and a one dollar bill.

But this was more than her wildest hopes. Joyfully, she went, shabby
and cold, through the happy streets. She walked four blocks to a new
market, and bought bread and butter and salt codfish and a candy
cane. She went into a department store, leaving Teddy to watch the
coach on the sidewalk, and got him the gun and the book. She gave
her grocer four, her butcher three dollars, with a "Merry
Christmas!" Did both men seem a little touched, a little pitying, or
was it just the holiday air? The streets were crowded, the leaden
sky low and menacing; they would have a white Christmas.

Teddy hung up his stocking at dark. The big things, he explained,
would have to go on the floor.

"What big things, my heart?" Martie was toasting bread, eying the
browned fish cakes with appetite.

"Well, the coaster or the skates!" he elucidated off-hand.

His mother's breast rose on a long sigh. She came to put one arm
about him, as she knelt beside him on the floor.

"Teddy, dear, didn't Mother tell you that old Santa Claus is poor
this year? He has so many, many little boys to go to! Wouldn't my
boy rather that they should all have something, than that some poor
little fellows should have nothing at all?" She stopped, sick at
heart, for the child's lip was trembling, and a hot tear fell on her
hand.

"But--but I've been good, Mother!" he stammered with a desperate
effort at self-control.

Well, if he could not be brave, she must be. She began to tell him
about going to California, to Grandfather's house. Later she put the
orange, the apple, the gun, with a triangle puzzle given away at the
drug store, a paper cow from the dairy, and five cents' worth of
pressed figs, into the little dangling stocking, placed the book
beside it, and hung the candy cane over all. Mrs. Converse, the
doctor's wife, had sent a big flannel duck, obviously second-hand,
but none the less wonderful for that, for Margar; Teddy had not seen
it, so it would be one more Christmas touch!

And at eight o'clock, as she was putting her kitchen in order, a
tired driver appeared, clumsily engineering something through the
narrow hall; a great coaster, its brave red and gold showing through
the flimsy, snow-wet wrappings.

"Teddy from Dad," Martie, bewildered, read on the card. Not to the
excited child himself would it bring the joy it gave his mother.
Poor Wallace--always generous! He had gone straight from her plea
for the boy's Christmas to spend his money for this. She hoped he
would come home to-morrow; that they might spend the day together.
Some of the shops would be open for a few hours; if he brought home
money, she could manage a chicken, and one of the puddings from the
French confectioner's--

Another ring at the bell? Martie wiped her hands, and went again to
the door. A telegram--

She tore and crumpled the wet yellow paper. The wonderful words
danced before her eyes:

Pa says come at once told Lydia he would give you and children home
as long as he lives sends his love merry Christmas darling

SALLY.

Martie went back to the kitchen, and put her head down on the little
table and cried.

Wallace did not come home for Christmas Day, nor for many days.
Teddy rejoiced in his coaster while his mother went soberly and
swiftly about her plans. Perhaps Pa had realized that she did not
actually have a cent, and was sending a check by mail. The perfect
telegram would have been just a little more than perfect, if he had
said so. But if he were not sending money, she must go nevertheless.
She must give up this house on January tenth, landlord and grocer
must trust her for the overdue rent and bill. If they would not,
well, then they must have her arrested; that was all.

The fare to California would be less than two hundred dollars. She
was going to borrow that from John.

Martie herself was surprised at the calm with which she came to this
decision. It had all the force of finality to her. She cared for the
hurt to her pride as little as she cared for what Rose Parker would
think of her ignominious return, as little as she cared for what the
world thought of a wife who deliberately left the father of her
children to his fate.

Early in January she planned to take the children with her, and find
John in his office. That very day the tickets should be bought. If
Wallace cared enough for his family to come home in the meantime,
she would tell him what she was doing. But Martie hoped that he
would not. The one possible stumbling-block in her path would be
Wallace's objection; the one thing of which she would not allow
herself to think was that he MIGHT, by some hideous whim, decide to
accompany them. Thinking of these things, she went about the process
of house-cleaning and packing. The beds, the chairs, the china and
linen and blankets must bring what they could. On the third day of
the year, in his room, Martie, broom in hand, paused to study
Wallace's "chestard." That must go, too. It had always been a
cheaply constructed article, with one missing caster that had to be
supplied by a folded wedge of paper. Still, in a consignment with
other things, it would add something to the total. Martie put her
hand upon it, and rocked it. As usual, the steadying wedge of paper
was misplaced.

She stooped to push the prop into position again; noticed that it
was a piece of notepaper, doubly folded; recognized John Dryden's
handwriting--

The room whirled about her as she straightened the crumpled and
discoloured sheet, and smoothed it, and grasped at one glance its
contents:

DEAR MR. BANNISTER:

I am distressed to hear of Mrs. Bannister's illness, and can readily
understand that she must not be burdened or troubled now. Please let
me know how she progresses, and let me be your banker again, if the
need arises. I am afraid she does not know how to save herself.

Faithfully yours,

JOHN DRYDEN.

The date was mid-December.

Martie read it once, read it again, crushed it in her hand in a
spasm of shame and pain. She brought the clenched hand that held it
against her heart, and shut her eyes. Oh, how could he--how could
he! To John, the last refuge of her wrecked life, he had closed the
way in the very hour of escape!

For a long time she stood, leaning against the tipped chest, blind
and deaf to everything but her whirling thoughts. After a while she
looked apathetically at the clock; time for Margar's toast and
boiled egg. She must finish in here; the baby would be waking.

Somehow she got through the cold, silent afternoon. She felt as if
she were bleeding internally; as if the crimson stain from her
shaken heart might ooze through her faded gingham. She must get the
children into the fresh air before the snow fell.

Out of doors a silence reigned. A steady, cold wind, tasting already
of snow, was blowing. The streets were almost deserted. Martie
pushed the carriage briskly, and the sharp air brought colour to her
cheeks, and a sort of desperate philosophy to her thoughts. Waiting
for the prescription for Margar's croup, with the baby in her lap,
Martie saw herself in a long mirror. The blooming young mother, the
rosy, lovely children, could not but make a heartening picture.
Margar's little gaitered legs, her bright face under the shabby,
fur-rimmed cap; Teddy's sturdy straight little shoulders and his
dark blue, intelligent eyes; these were Martie's riches. Were not
comfort and surety well lost for them at twenty-seven? At thirty-
seven, at forty-seven, there would be a different reckoning.

No woman's life was affected, surely, by a trifle like the tourist
fare to California, she told herself sensibly. If the money was not
to come from John, it must be forthcoming in some other way, if not
this month, then next month, or the next still. Perhaps she would
still go to John, and tell him the whole story.

Pondering, planning, she went back to the house, her spirits sinking
as the warm air smote her, the odour of close rooms, and of the
soaking little garments in the kitchen tub. Wallace had come in, had
flung himself across his bed, and was asleep.

Martie merely glanced at him before she set about the daily routine
of undressing the baby, setting the table, getting a simple supper
for Teddy and herself. No matter! It was only a question of a little
time, now. In ten days, in two weeks, she would be on the train; the
new fortune hazarded. The snoring sleeper little dreamed that some
of her things were packed, some of the children's things packed,
that Margar's best coat had been sent to the laundry, with the
Western trip in view; that a furniture man had been interviewed as
to the disposal of the chairs and tables.

At six o'clock Margar, with her bottle, was tucked away in the front
room, and Martie and Teddy sat down to their meal. Roused perhaps by
the clatter of dishes, Wallace came from the bedroom to the kitchen
door, and stood looking in.

"Wallace," Martie said without preamble, "why did you never tell me
that you borrowed money from Mr. Dryden?"

He stared at her stupidly, still sleepy, and taken unawares.

"He told you, huh?" he said heavily, after a pause.

"I found his note!" Martie said, beginning to breathe quickly.

Without glancing at Wallace, she put a buttered slice of bread
before Teddy.

"I didn't want to distress you with it, Mart," Wallace said weakly.

"Distress me!" his wife echoed with a bitter laugh.

"Of course, some of it is paid back," Wallace added unconvincingly.
Martie shot him a quick, distrustful glance. Ah, if she could
believe him! "I have his note acknowledging half of it, seventy-
five," added Wallace more confidently. "I'll show it to you!"

"I wish you would!" Martie said in cold incredulity. Teddy, deceived
by his mother's dispassionate tone, gave Wallace a warm little
smile, embellished by bread and milk.

"I guess you've been wondering where I was?" ventured Wallace,
rubbing one big bare foot with the other, and hunching his shoulders
in his disreputable wrapper. Unshaven, unbrushed, he gave a
luxurious yawn.

"No matter!" Martie said, shrugging. She poured her tea, noticed
that her fingernails were neglected, and sighed.

"I don't see why you take that attitude, Mart," Wallace said mildly,
sitting down. "In the first place, I sent you a letter day before
yesterday, which Thompson didn't mail--"

"Really!" said Martie, the seething bitterness within her making
hand and voice tremble.

"I have the deuce of a cold!" Wallace suggested tentatively. His
wife did not comment, or show in any way that she had heard him. "I
know what you think I've been doing," he went on. "But for once,
you're wrong. A lot of us have just been down at Joe's in the
country. His wife's away, and we just cooked and walked and played
cards--and I sat in luck, too!" He opened the wallet he held in his
hands, showing a little roll of dirty bills, and Martie was ashamed
of the instant softening of her heart. She wanted money so badly! "I
was coming home Monday," pursued Wallace, conscious that he was
gaining ground, "but this damn cold hit me, and the boys made me
stay in bed."

"Will you have some tea?" Martie asked reluctantly. He responded
instantly to her softened tone.

"I WOULD like some tea. I've been feeling rotten! And say, Mart," he
had drawn up to the table now, and had one wrappered arm about
Teddy, "say, Mart," he said eagerly, "listen! This'll interest you.
Thompson's brother-in-law, Bill Buffington, was there; he's an
awfully nice fellow; he's got coffee interests in Costa Rica. We
talked a lot, we hit it off awfully well, and he thinks there's a
dandy chance for me down there! He says he could get me twenty jobs,
and he wants me to go back when he goes--"

"But, Wallace--" Martie's quick enthusiasm was firing. "But what
about the children?"

"Why, they'd come along. Buff says piles of Americans down there
have children, you just have to dress 'em light--"

"And feed them light; that's the most important!" Martie added
eagerly.

"Sure. And I get my transportation, and you only half fare, so you
see there's not much to that!"

"Wallace!" The world was changing. "And what would you do?"

"Checking cargoes, and managing things generally. We get a house,
and he says the place is alive with servants. And he asked if you
were the sort of woman who would take in a few boarders; he says the
men there are crazy for American cooking, and that you could have
all you'd take--"

"Oh, I would!" Martie said excitedly. "I'd have nothing else to do,
you know! Oh, Wallie, I am delighted about this! I am so sick of
this city!" she added, smiling tremulously. "I am so sick of cold
and dirt and worry!"

"Well," he smiled a little shamefacedly, "one thing you'll like. No
booze down there. Buff says there's nothing in it; it can't be done.
He says that's the quickest way for a man to FINISH himself!"

The kitchen had been brightening for Martie with the swift changes
of a stage sunrise. Now the colour came to her face, and the happy
tears to her eyes. For the first time in many months she went into
her husband's arms, and put her own arms about his neck, and her
cheek against his, in the happy fashion of years ago.

"Oh, Wallie, dear! We'll begin all over again. We'll get away, on
the steamer, and make a home and a life for ourselves!"

"Don't you WANT to go, Moth'?" Teddy asked anxiously. Martie laughed
as she wiped her eyes.

"Crying for joy, Ted," she told him. "Don't sit there sneezing,
Wallie," she added in her ordinary tone. Her husband asked her,
dutifully, if she would object to his mixing a hot whisky lemonade
for his cold. After a second's hesitation she said no, and it was
mixed, and shortly afterward Wallace went to bed and to sleep. At
eight Martie tucked Teddy into bed, straightening the clothes over
Margar before she went into the dining room for an hour of
solitaire.

"Mrs. Bannister's Boarding House"; she liked the sound. The men
would tell each other that it was luck to get into Mrs. Bannister's.
White shoes--thin white gowns--she must be businesslike--bills and
receipts--and terms dignified, but not exorbitant--when Ted was old
enough for boarding-school--say twelve--but of course they could
tell better about that later on!

A little sound from the front bedroom brought her to her feet,
fright clutching her heart. Margar was croupy again!

It was a sufficiently familiar emergency, but Martie never grew used
to it. She ran to the child's side, catching up the new bottle of
medicine. A hideous paroxysm subsided as she took the baby in her
arms, but Margar sank back so heavily exhausted that no coaxing
persuaded her to open her eyes, or to do more than reject with
fretful little lips the medicine spoon. She is very ill--Martie said
to herself fearfully. She flew to her husband's side.

"Wallie--I hate to wake you! But Margar is croupy, and I'm going to
run for Dr. Converse. Light the croup kettle, will you, I won't be a
moment!"

His daughter was the core of Wallace's heart. He was instantly
alert.

"Here, let me go, Mart! I'll get something on--"

"No, no, I'm dressed! But look at her, Wallie," Martie said, as they
came together to stand by the crib. "I don't like the way she's
breathing--"

She looked eagerly at his face, but saw only her own disquiet
reflected there.

"Get the doctor," he said, tucking the blankets about the shabby
little double-gown. "I'll keep her warm--"

A moment later Martie, buttoned into her old squirrel-lined coat,
was in the quiet, deserted street, which was being muffled deeper
and deeper in the softly falling snow. Steps, areas, fences, were
alike furred in soft white, old gratings wore an exquisite coating
over their dingy filigree. The snow was coming down evenly,
untouched by wind, the flakes twisting like long ropes against the
street lights. A gang of men were talking and clanking shovels on
the car tracks; an ambulance thudded by, the wheels grating and
slipping on the snow.

Dr. and Mrs. Converse were in their dining room, a pleasant, shabby
room smelling of musk, and with an old oil painting of fruit, a cut
watermelon, peaches and grapes, a fringed napkin and a glass of red
wine, over the curved black marble mantel. The old man was enjoying
a late supper, but struggled into his great coat cheerfully enough.
Mrs. Converse tried to persuade Martie to have just a sip of sherry,
but Martie was frantic to be gone. In a moment she and the old man
were on their way, through the silent, falling snow again, and in
her own hallway, and she was crying to Wallace: "How is she?"

The room was steamy with the fumes of the croup kettle; Wallace, the
child in his arms, met them with a face of terror. Both men bent
over the baby.

"She seems all right again now," said Wallace in a sharp whisper,
"but right after you left--my God, I thought she would choke!"

Martie watched the doctor's face, amazement and fright paralyzing
every sense but sight. The old man's tender, clever hands rested for
a moment on the little double-gown.

"Well, poor little girl!" he said, softly, after a moment of pulsing
silence. He straightened up, and looked at Martie. "Gone," he said
simply. "She died in her father's arms."

"Gone!" Martie echoed. The quiet word fell into a void of silence.
Father and mother stood transfixed, looking upon each other. Martie
was panting like a runner, Wallace seemed dazed. They stood so a
long time.

Relief came first to Wallace; for as they laid the tiny form on the
bed, and arranged the shabby little gown about it, he suddenly fell
upon his knees, and flung one arm about his child and burst into
bitter crying. But Martie moved about, mute, unhearing, her mouth
fallen a little open, her breath still coming hard. She answered the
doctor's suggestions only after a moment's frowning concentration--
what did he say?

After a while he was gone, and Wallace was persuaded to go to bed
again, Teddy tucked in beside him. Then Martie lowered the light in
what had been the children's room, and knelt beside her dead.

The snow was still falling with a gentle, ticking sound against the
window. Muffled whistles sounded on the river; the night was so
stilled that the clanking of shovels and the noise of voices came
clearly from the car-tracks at the corner.

Hour after hour went by. Martie knelt on; she was not conscious of
grief or pain; she was not conscious of the world that would wake in
the morning, and go about its business, and of the bright sun that
would blaze out upon the snow. There was no world, no sun, no
protest, and no hope. There was only the question: Why?

In the soft flicker of the gaslight Margar lay in unearthly beauty,
the shadow of her dark eyelashes touching her cheek, a smile
lingering on her baby mouth. She had been such a happy baby; Martie
had loved to rumple and kiss the aureole of bright hair that framed
the sleeping face.

The old double-gown--with the middle button that did not match--
Martie had ironed only yesterday. She would not iron it again. The
rag doll, and the strings of spools, and the shabby high-chair where
Margar sat curling her little bare toes on summer mornings; these
must vanish. The little feet were still. Gone!

Gone, in an hour, all the dreaming and hoping. No Margar in a
cleaned coat would run about the decks of the steamer--

Martie pressed her hand over her dry and burning eyes. She wondered
that she could think of these things and not go mad.

The days went by; time did not stop. Wallace remained ill; Teddy had
a cold, too. Mrs. Converse and John and Adele were there, all
sympathetic, all helpful. They were telling Martie that she must
keep up for the others. She must drink this; she must lie down.

Presently the front room, so terribly occupied, was more terribly
empty. Little Margaret Bannister was laid beside little Mary and
Rose and Paul Converse at Mount Kisco. Children, many of them, died
thus every year, and life went on. Martie had the perfect memory,
and the memory of Adele's tears, of Mrs. Converse's tears, of John's
agony of sympathy.

Then they all went out of her life as suddenly as they had entered
it. Only the old doctor came steadily, because of Teddy's cold and
Wallace's cold. Martie worked over their trays, read fairy-tales to
Teddy, read the newspaper to Wallace, said that she felt well, she
HAD eaten a good lunch, she WAS sleeping well.

When the first suspicion of Wallace's condition came to her she was
standing in the kitchen, waiting for a kettle to boil, and staring
dully out into a world of frozen bareness. Margaret had been with
her a week ago; a week ago it had been her privilege to catch the
warm little form to her heart, to kiss the aureole of gold, to
listen to the shaken gurgle of baby laughter--

The doctor came out from Wallace's room; Martie, still wrapped in
her thoughts, listened to him absently. ... pneumonia. Suddenly she
came to herself with a shock, repeating the word. Pneumonia? What
was he saying? But, Doctor--but Doctor--is Mr. Bannister so ill?

He was very ill; gravely ill. The fact that taken in time, and
fought with every weapon, the disease had gained, augured badly.
Martie listened in stupefaction.

She suggested a nurse. The old doctor smiled at her affectionately.
Perhaps to-morrow, if he was no better, they might consider it.
Meanwhile, he was in excellent hands.

A strange, silent day followed. Martie looked at her husband now
with that augmented concern that such a warning brings. He slept,
waked, smiled at her, was not hungry. His big hand, when she touched
it, was hot. Teddy, coughing, and with oil-saturated flannel over
his chest, played with his blocks and listened to fairy-tales.
Outside, a bitter cold wind swept the empty streets. Her husband
ill, perhaps dying, Margar gone; it was all unreal and unconvincing.

At four o'clock the doctor came back, and at five the nurse
pleasantly took possession of the sick room. She was a sensible New
England woman, who cooked potatoes in an amazing way for Teddy's
supper, and taught Martie a new solitaire in the still watches of
the night. Martie was anxious to make her comfortable; she must lie
down; and she must be sure to get out into the fresh air to-morrow
afternoon.

But Miss Swann did not leave her case the next day, a Sunday, and
Martie, awed and silent, spent the day beside the bed. Wallace died
at five o'clock.

He wandered in a light fever that morning, and at two o'clock fell
into the stupor that was not to end in this world. But Martie had,
to treasure, the memory of the early morning when she slipped
quietly into the room that was orderly, dimly lighted, and odorous
of drugs now. He was awake then, his eyes found her, and he smiled
as she knelt beside him.

"Better?" she said softly.

The big head nodded almost imperceptibly. He moistened his lips.

"I'm all right," he said voicelessly. "Bad--bad cold!"

He shut his eyes, and with them shut, added in a whisper: "Sweet,
sweet woman, Martie! Remember that day--in Pittsville--when you had
on--your brother's--coat? Mabel--and old Jesse--!"

Heavenly tears rushed to her eyes; she felt the yielding of her
frozen heart. She caught his hand to her lips, bowing her face over
it.

"Ah, Wallace dear! We were happy then! We'll go back--back to that
time--and we'll start fresh!"

A long silence. Then he opened his eyes, found her, with a start, as
if he had not been quite sure what those opening eyes would see, and
smiled sleepily.

"I'll make it--up to you, Martie!" he said heavily She had her arms
about him as he sank into unnatural sleep. At eight, whispering in
the kitchen with John, who had come for Teddy, she said that Wallie
was better; and busy with coffee and toast for Miss Swann, she began
to plan for Costa Rica. Beaten, crushed, purified by fire, healed by
tears, she was ready for life again.

But that was not to be. Wallace was dead, and those who gathered
about Martie wondered that she wept for her husband more than for
her child.

Wept for the wasted life, perhaps, and for the needless suffering
and sorrow. But even in the first hours of her widowhood Martie's
heart knew a deep and passionate relief. Vague and menacing as was
the future, stretching before her, she knew that she would never
wish Wallace back.


BOOK III

CHAPTER I


There were times when Martie found it difficult to believe that she
had ever been away from Monroe at all; evenings, when she and Lydia
sat talking in the shabby sitting room of the old house; or mornings
when she fed the chickens in the soft fog under the willow trees of
the yard. Len and Sally were married and gone, dear Ma was gone, and
Belle had married, too; a tall gaunt woman called Pauline was in her
place.

But these things might all have transpired without touching Martie's
own life directly. She might still, in many ways, have been the
dreaming, ambitious, helpless girl of seven years ago. Sometimes the
realization of all she had endured came to her with an odd sense of
shock. She would glance down at her thin hand, in its black cuff,
and fall into deep musing, her face grave and weary. Or she would
call Teddy from his play, and hold his warm little body close,
staring at him with a look that always made the child uneasy. Third
Avenue, barred with sun and shade, in the early summer mornings;
Broadway on a snowy winter afternoon with the theatre crowd
streaming up and down, spring and babies taking possession of the
parks--were these all a dream?

No; she had gained something in the hard years; she saw that more
and more. Her very widowhood to Monroe had the stamp of absolute
respectability. Even Pa was changed toward her; or was it that she
was changed toward him? However caused, in their relationship there
was a fundamental change.

Pa had been a figure of power and tyranny seven years ago. Now he
seemed to Martie only an unreasonable, unattractive old man,
thwarted in his old age in everything his heart desired. Lydia was
still tremblingly filial in her attitude toward Pa, but Martie at
once assumed the maternal. She scolded him, listened to him, and
dictated to him, and he liked it. Martie had never loved him as
Lydia did; she had defied and disobeyed and deserted him, yet he
transferred his allegiance to her now, and clung to her helplessly.

He liked to have her walk down to his office beside him in the
mornings, in her plain black. While they walked he pointed out
various pieces of property, and told her how cheaply they had been
sold forty years ago. The whole post-office block had gone for seven
hundred dollars, the hotel site had been Mason's cow-yard! Old man
Sark had lived there, and had refused to put black on his house when
Lincoln was assassinated.

"And didn't he go to jail for that, Pa?"

"Yes, ma'am, he did!"

"But YOU--"

"I was in jail, too." Malcolm Monroe would chuckle under his now
gray moustache that was yellowed with tobacco stains. "Yes, sir, I
rounded up some of the boys, the Twentyonesters, we called
ourselves, and we led a riot 'round this town! The ringleaders were
arrested, but that was merely a form--merely a form!"

"You must have been a terror, Pa."

"Well--well, I had a good deal of your grandmother's spirit! And I
suppose they rather looked to me to set the pace--"

Smiling, they would go along in the sunlight, past the little homes
where babies had been turned out into grassy yards, past the
straggling stables and the smithy, and the fire-house, and the
office of the weekly Zeus. There was more than one garage in Monroe
now and the squared noses of Ford cars were at home everywhere.
Mallon's Hardware Emporium, the Five-and-Ten-Cent Store, still with
its pillars of twisted handkerchiefs, Mason and White's--how
familiar they were! And the old Bank, with its wide windows and
double roller shades was familiar, too. Martie learned that the Bank
had duly worn black a year or two ago for kindly old Colonel Frost;
his name had been obliterated from the big window, and Clifford
Frost was vice-president now.

"One death is two deaths, they say," Lydia had sighed, telling
Martie of the Colonel's death. "You know Cliff's wife died only two
months before his father did. That was a terrible thing! Her little
girl was seven years old, and she was going to have another--"

When Martie, in the early afternoon of a warm sweet day on mid-
February, had stepped from the train, with Teddy's little fingers
held tight in hers, Sally's face, running over with tears and
smiles, had been the first she found. Curiously changed, yet
wonderfully familiar, the sisters had clung together, hardly knowing
how to begin their friendship again after six long years. There were
big things to say, but they said the little things. They talked
about the trip and the warm weather that had brought the buttercups
so soon, and the case that had kept Pa on jury duty in Pittsville.

Len--rather pompous, and with a moustache!--explained why his wife
could not be there: the two-year-old daughter was not very well.
Martie questioned him eagerly of his two children. Both girls, Len
said gloomily; he asked his sister if she realized that there was
not a Monroe yet.

Lydia wept a few tears; "Martie, dear, to see you in black!" and
Martie's eyes watered, and her lip shook.

"Grace and all the others would have come," Sally said quickly, "but
we knew you'd be tired, and then it's homecoming, Martie, and you'll
have lots of time to see us all!"

She introduced Elizabeth, a lovely, fly-away child with bright loose
hair, and Billy, a freckled, ordinary-looking boy, who gave his aunt
a beautiful smile from large, dark eyes. The others were left with
"Mother"--Joe's mother.

"But, Sally, you're so fat!"

"And, Mart, you're so thin!"

"Never mind; it's becoming to you, Sally. You look still like a
little girl. Really, you do! And how's Joe?"

"Oh, Joe's lovely. I went down and spent a week with him. I had the
choice of that or a spring suit, and I took that!"

"Went--but where is he? I suppose he hasn't been sent to San
Quentin?"

"Oh, Martie, don't! You know Russell Harrison, 'Dutch's' cousin,
that used to play with Len, really WAS sent there!"

"For Heaven's sake, what for?"

"Well, Hugh Wilson had some trouble with Paul King, and--it was
about money--and Russell Harrison went to Hughie and told him--"

So the conversation was diverted over and over again; and the
inessential things were said, and the important ones forgotten. Len
had borrowed the firm's motor car, and they all got in. Martie, used
to Wallace's careless magnificence, was accustomed enough to this
mode of travel, but she saw that it was a cause of great excitement
to the children, and even to Sally.

"You say the 'firm,' Len--I'll never get used to my little brother
with a moustache! What do you mean by the 'firm?'" asked Martie. "My
goodness--goodness--goodness, there's the Library and Lacey's!" she
added, her eyes eagerly roving the streets.

"Miss Fanny is still there; she always speaks so affectionately of
you, Martie," said Lydia eagerly and tremulously. Martie perceived
that in some mysterious way Lydia was ill at ease. Lydia did not
quite know how to deal with a younger sister who was yet a widow,
and had lived in New York.

"There was an awful lot of talk about getting her out of the
Library," contributed Sally; "they said the Streets were at the back
of it; they wanted to put a man in! There was the greatest
excitement; we all went down to the Town Hall and listened to the
speeches--it was terrific! I guess the Streets and their crowd felt
pretty small, because they got--what was it, Len?"

"Seventeen votes out of one hundred and eleven!" Len said, not
moving his eyes from the road before him.

"My house is right down there, next door to Uncle Ben's," said
Sally, craning her neck suddenly. "You can't see it, but no matter;
there's lots of time! Here's the Hawkes's place; remember that?"

"I remember everything," Martie said, smiling. "We're nearly home!"

The old Monroe house looked shabby, even in the spring green. Martie
had seen the deeper, fresher green of the East for six successive
springs. The eucalyptus trees wore their tassels, the willows' fresh
foliage had sprung over the old rusty leaves. A raw gateway had been
cut, out by the old barn, into Clipper Lane, and a driveway filled
in. Tired, confused, train-sick, Martie got down into the old yard,
and the old atmosphere enveloped her like a garment. The fuchsia
bushes, the marguerites so green on top, so brown and dry under
their crown of fresh life, the heliotrope sprawling against the
peeling boards under the dining-room windows, and tacked in place
with strips of kid glove--how well she knew them!

They went in the side door, and through the dark dining room,
odorous of vegetable soup and bread and butter. An unearthly quiet
held the house. Pa's door was closed; Martie imagined the room
darker and more grim than ever.

Lydia had given her her old room; the room in which she and Sally
had grown to womanhood. It was as clean and bare as a hotel room.
Lydia and Sally had discussed the advisability of a bowl of flowers,
but had decided flowers might remind poor Mart of funerals. Martie
remembered the counterpane on the bed and the limp madras curtains
at the windows. She put her gloves in a bureau drawer lined with
folded newspaper, and hung her wraps in the square closet that was,
for some unimaginable reason, a step higher than the room.

Lydia sat on the bed, and Sally on a chair, while Martie slowly
moved about her new domain. The children had gone into the yard,
'Lizabeth and Billy charged not to let their little cousin get his
clothes dirty; when the trunks came, with his overalls, he could get
as dirty as he pleased.

The soiled, tumbled contents of the hand bag, after the five days'
trip, filled Martie with a sort of weary concern. She stood,
puzzling vaguely over the damp washcloth that was wrapped about a
cake of soap, the magazines of which she had grown so tired, the
rumpled night-wear.

"I suppose I should hang these up; we may not get the trunks to-
night."

"Oh, you will!" Lydia reassured her. A certain blankness fell on
them all. It was the glaring spring hour of four o'clock; not lunch
time, nor dinner time, nor bed time, nor time to go to market.
Suddenly a tear fell on Martie's hand; she sniffed.

"Ah, don't, Mart!" Lydia said, fumbling for her own handkerchief.
"We know--we know how hard it is! Your husband, and Ma not here to
welcome you--"

The sisters cried together.

But she slept well in the old walnut bed, and enjoyed a delicious,
unfamiliar leisure the next morning, when Teddy was turned out to
the safety of the yard, and Pa, after paternally reassuring her as
to her welcome and pompously reiterating that her old father's home
was hers for the rest of her life, was gone. She and Lydia talked
deeply over the breakfast table, while Pauline rattled dishes in the
kitchen and a soft fog pressed against the windows.

Martie had said that she was going over to Sally's immediately after
breakfast, but, in the old way, time drifted by. She went upstairs
to make her bed, and she and Lydia talked again, from doorway to
doorway. When they were finally dressed to walk down town, Lydia
said that she might as well go to market first; they could stop at
Sally's afterward.

Teddy galloped and curveted about them; Monroe enchanted Teddy. The
sunshine was just pushing back the fog, and the low hills all about
the town were coming into view, when Martie took her son in to meet
Miss Fanny.

Grayer and thinner, the librarian was otherwise unchanged. The old
strong, coarse voice, the old plain dress, serviceable and
comfortable, the old delighted affection. Miss Fanny wore glasses
now; she beamed upon Teddy as she put them on, after frankly wiping
her eyes.

She made a little fuss about Martie's joining the Library, so that
Teddy could take home "Davy and the Goblin."

They went out into the warming, drying Main Street again; everywhere
Martie was welcomed. In the shops and on the street humble old
friends eyed her black respectfully.

The nervousness that she had felt about coming back began to melt
like the mist itself. She had dreaded Monroe's old standards,
dreaded Rose and Len, and the effect her poverty must have on them.
Now she began to see that Rose mattered as little here as she had
mattered when Martie was struggling in East Twenty-sixth Street.
Rose "went" with the Frosts and the Streets and the Pattersons now.
Her intimate friend was Dr. Ellis's wife, a girl from San Francisco.

"Shall we go in for a minute, and make a little visit?" said Lydia,
as she had said years ago, whenever they passed the church. Martie
nodded. They creaked into the barnlike shabbiness of the edifice;
the little red light twinkled silently before the altar. Clara
Baxter was tiptoeing to and fro with vases. Teddy twisted and
turned, had to be bumped to his knees, was warned in a whisper that
he must not talk.

Father Martin was not well; he had an assistant, Lydia said. The
bishop wanted to establish a convent here, and old Mrs. Hanson had
left eleven hundred dollars for it. Gertie Hanson lived in
Fruitvale; she was married to a widower. She had threatened to fight
the will, but people said that she got quite a lot of money; the
Hansons were richer than any one thought. Anyway, she had not put up
a gravestone to her mother yet, and Alice Clark said that Gertie had
said that she couldn't afford it.

"Why, that house must have been worth something!" Martie commented,
picking up the threads with interest.

"Well, wouldn't you think so!" Lydia said eagerly.

The morning had been so wasted that Sally was in a whirl of dinner-
getting when they reached her house. She had her hearty meal at noon
on the children's account; her little kitchen was filled with smoke
and noise. To-day she had masses of rather dark, mushy boiled rice,
stewed neck of lamb, apples, and hot biscuits. Martie, fresh from
New York's campaign of dietetic education, reflected that it was
rather unusual fare for small children, but Sally's quartette was
healthy-looking enough, and full of life and excitement. 'Lizabeth
set the table; there was great running about, and dragging of
chairs.

Martie studied her sister with amused admiration. There was small
room for maternal vapours in Sally's busy life. Her matter-of-fact
voice ruled the confusion.

"Jim, you do as 'Lizabeth tells you, or you'll get another whipping,
sir! Pour that milk into the pitcher, Brother. Put on both sugar
bowls, darling; Brother likes the brown. Martie, dearest, I am
ashamed of this muss, but in two minutes I'll have them all started-
-there's baby--'Lizabeth, there's baby; you'll have to go up--"

"I'll go up!" Lydia and Martie said together. Martie went through
the bare little hallways upstairs, and peeped into shabby bedrooms
full of small beds and dangling nightgowns and broken toys.

Mary was sitting up in her crib, tumbled, red-cheeked, tears hanging
on her lashes. The room was darkened for her nap; she wore a worn
little discoloured wrapper; she clung to her rag doll. Martie, with
deathly weakness sweeping over her, smiled, and spoke to her. The
baby eyed her curiously, but she was not afraid. Martie picked her
up, and stood there holding her, while the knife turned and twisted
in her heart.

After a while she wrapped a blanket about Mary, and carried her
downstairs. Sally saw that Martie's face was ashen, and she knew
why. Lydia saw nothing. Lydia would have said that Martie had placed
poor Wallace's picture on her bureau that morning, and had talked
about him, calmly and dry-eyed; so why should she feel so much more
for her baby? Teddy had been a little strange, if eagerly friendly,
with his other cousins; but he knew how to treat Mary. He picked up
the things she threw down from her high-chair, and tickled her, and
made her laugh.

"If this elaborate and formal meal is dinner, Sally dear, what is
supper?"

"Oh, Martie, it's so delicious to hear you again! Why, supper will
be apple sauce and bread and butter and milk, and gingerbread and
cookies. It's the same the year round! I like it, really; after we
go up to Pa's to supper the children don't sleep well, and neither
do I."

"You haven't told me yet where Joe is."

"Oh, I know, and I WILL! We get talking, and somehow there's so much
to say. Why, Joe's finishing his course at Cooper's College in San
Francisco; he'll graduate this May. Dr. J. F. Hawkes; isn't that
fun!"

"A regular doctor!" Martie exclaimed. "But--but is he going to BE
one?"

"BE one! I should think he is!" Sally announced proudly. "Uncle Ben
says he's a born doctor--"

"And how long has it been UNCLE Ben?"

"Oh, 'Lizabeth adopted him. He adores the children."

"He loaned Joe the money," Lydia said with her old air of delicately
emphasizing an unsavoury truth.

Sally gave her younger sister a rather odd look at this, but she did
not deny the statement.

"And who keeps the quartette going?" asked Martie, glancing about.

"Joe's people; and Pa does send barrels of apples and things,
doesn't he, Sally?" Lydia supplied.

"Oh, yes; we only pay twelve dollars rent, and we live very
cheaply!" Sally said cheerfully, with another mysterious look.

A day or two later, when they were alone, she told Martie the whole
truth.

"It's Uncle Ben, of course, Mart; you remember his old offer, if
ever I had any children? He pays me twelve hundred a year for my
four. Nobody knows it, not even Lyd. People would only talk, you
know, and it's none of their affair. It's his fad, you know. We
married young, and Joe had no profession. Uncle Ben thinks the State
ought to pay women for bearing children. He says it's their business
in life. Women are taking jobs, foregoing marriage, and the nation
is being robbed of citizens. He believes that the hardest kind of
work is the raising of children, and the women who do it for the
State ought to be paid by the State. He does it for me, and I feel
as if he was a relation. It's meant everything to Joe and me, and
the children, too. Sometimes, when I stop to think of it, it is a
little queer, but--when you think of the way people DO spend money,
for orchids or old books or rugs--it's natural after all! He simply
invests in citizens, that's what he says. I would have had them
anyway, but I suppose, indeed I know, Mart, that there are lots of
women who wouldn't!"

"And is he financing Joe, too?"

"Oh, no, indeed! Uncle Ben never speaks of money to me; I don't ever
get one cent except my regular allowance. Why, when Joe was ill, and
one of the babies--Billy, it was--was coming, he came in to see me
now and then, but he never said boo about helping! Joe is working
his way; he's chauffeur for Dr. Houston; that's something else
nobody knows."

"I think that's magnificent of Joe!" Martie said, her face glowing.

"He graduates this year," Sally said proudly, "and then I think he
will start here. For a long time we thought we'd have to move away
then, because every one remembers little Joe Hawkes delivering
papers, and working in the express office. But now that the
hospital, up toward the Archer place, is really going to be built,
Uncle Ben says that Joe can get a position there. It's Dr. Knowles's
hospital, and Uncle Ben is his best friend. Of course that's big
luck for Joe."

"Not so much luck," Martie said generously, "as that Joe has worked
awfully hard, and done well."

"Oh, you don't know how hard, Mart! And loving us all as he does,
too, and being away from us!" Sally agreed fervently. "But if he
really gets that position, with my hundred, we'll be rich! We'll
have to keep a Ford, Mart; won't that be fun?"

"Dr. Ben might die, Sally," Martie suggested.

"That wouldn't make any difference," the older sister said
composedly. "I have the actual deeds--the titles, whatever they are-
-to the property MY money comes from. He gave me them a year ago,
when he was sixty. I certainly dread the talk there'll be when his
will comes to light, but Joe will be here then, and Joe isn't afraid
of any one."

"He's done for you what Pa should have done," Martie mused.

"Oh, well, Pa did his best for us, Mart." Sally said dutifully; "he
gave us a good home--"

"WAS it a good home?" Martie questioned mildly.

"It was a much finer home than MY children have, Mart."

"As far as walls and tables and silver spoons, I suppose it was.
But, Sally, there's no child alive who has a sweeter atmosphere than
this--always with mother, always learning, and always considered!
Why, my boy is blooming already in it!"

Sally's face flushed with pleasure.

"Martie, you make me so proud!"

"If you can only keep it up, Sally. With me it doesn't matter so
much, because I've only the one, and no husband whose claims might
interfere. But when 'Lizabeth and Mary, as well as the boys, are
older--"

"You mean--always let them have their friends at the house, and so
on?" Sally asked slowly.

"Yes, but more than that! Let them feel as much a part of the world
as the boys do. Put them into any work--only make them respect it!"

"Pa might have helped us, only neither you nor I, nor Lyd, ever
showed the least interest in work," Sally submitted thoughtfully.

"Neither did Len--but he MADE Len!"

"Yes, I see what you mean," Sally admitted with an awakening face.
"But we would have thought he was pretty stern, Mart," she added.

"Just as children do when they have to learn to read and write,"
countered Martie. "Don't you see?"

Sally did not see, but she was glad to see Martie's interest. She
told Lydia later that Martie really seemed better and more like her
old self, even in these few days.

With almost all the women of Monroe, Lydia now considered Martie's
life a thing accomplished, and boldly accomplished. To leave home,
to marry, to have children in a strange city, to be honorably
widowed and to return to her father's home, and rear her child in
seclusion and content; this was more than fell to the lot of many
women. Lydia listened with actual shudders to Martie's casually
dropped revelations.

"This John Dryden that I told you about, Lyd--the man who wrote the
play that failed--was anxious for me to go on with the Curley
boarding-house," Martie said one day, "and sometimes now I think I
should have done so."

"Good heavens!" Lydia, smoothing the thin old blankets on Martie's
wide, flat bed, stopped aghast. "But why should you--Pa is more than
willing to have you here!"

"I know, darling. But what really deterred me was not so much Pa's
generosity, but the fact that I would have had to lease the property
for three years; George Curley wanted to be rid of the
responsibility. And to really make the thing a success, I should
have had the adjoining house, too; that would have been about four
thousand rent."

"Four thousand--Martie, you would have been crazy!"

Martie, tinkling pins into a saucer on the bureau, opening the upper
drawer to sweep her brush and comb into it, and jerking the limp
linen scarf straight, only smiled and shrugged in answer. She had
been widowed three months, and already reviving energy and self-
confidence were running in her veins. Already she realized that it
had been a mistake to accept her father's hospitality in the first
panic of being dependent. However graceful and dignified her
position was to the outsider's eye, in this old house in the sunken
block, she knew now that Pa was really unable to offer her anything
more than a temporary relief from financial worry, and that her
chances of finding employment in Monroe as compared to New York were
about one to ten.

Malcolm Monroe had been deeply involved for several years in "the
firm" by which term he and Len referred to their real estate
business together. A large tract of grassy brown meadow, south of
the town, had been in his possession for thirty years; it was only
with the opening of the new "Monroe's Grove" that he had realized
its possibilities, or rather that Len had realized them.

Len had held one or two office positions in Monroe unsatisfactorily
before his twentieth year, and then had persuaded his father to send
him to Berkeley, to the State University. Ma and Lydia had been
proud of their under-graduate for one brief year, then Len was back
again, disgusted with study. After a few months of drifting and
experimenting, the brilliant idea of developing the old south tract
into building sites had occurred to Len, and presently his father
was also persuaded that here was a splendid opportunity. A little
office on Main Street was rented, and its window embellished with
the words "Own a Home in the Monroe Estates." Your husband is in
the shops?

WOMAN. He was, doctor. Now he is in the American army.

DR. JONATHAN.

Sasenoshky--in the American army.

WOMAN (proudly). Yes, he is good American now,--he fight to make
them free in the old country, too.

DR. JONATHAN. Well, we'll have a look at the baby. He may be in the
White House some day--President Sasenoshky! I'll be back, Asher.

(The noon whistle blows.)
ASHER. That's the signal! I'll get along, too.

DR. JONATHAN. Where are you going?

ASHER. I guess it doesn't make much difference where I go.

(He walks out, followed by DR. JONATHAN and the WOMAN. The room is
empty for a moment, and then MINNIE FARRELL enters through the
opposite door, left, from DR. JONATHAN'S office. She gazes around
the room, and then goes resolutely to the bench and takes up several
test tubes in turn, holding theme to the light.

Suddenly her eye falls on GEORGE'S letter, which ASHER has left
open on the bench with the envelope beside it.

MINNIE Slowly reaches out and picks it up, and then holds it to her
lips . . . She still has the letter in her hand, gazing at it,
when AUGUSTA PINDAR enters, right.)

AUGUSTA. Oh, I thought Mr. Pindar was here!

MINNIE. Perhaps he's been here--I don't know. I just came
in.

(She hesitates a second, then goes to the bench and lays the letter
down.)

AUGUSTA. He must have been here,--he told me he was coming to talk
with Dr. Pindar.

(She approaches the bench and glances at the letter.)
Isn't that a letter from my son?

MINNIE (a little defiantly, yet almost in tears). I guess it
is.

AUGUSTA. It was written to you?

MINNIE. No.

AUGUSTA. Then what were you doing with it?

MINNIE. I just--picked it up.

You think I was reading it? Well, I wouldn't.

AUGUSTA. Then how did you know it was written by my son?

(MINNIE is silent.)

You must be familiar with his handwriting.

I think I'd better take it.

(She folds it up and puts it in the envelope.) Does George write to
you?

MINNIE. I've had letters from him.

AUGUSTA. Since he went to France?

MINNIE. Yes.

AUGUSTA (after a pause). I've never approved of Dr. Findar employing
you here.

I warned him against you--I told him that you would betray his
kindness as you betrayed mine, but he wouldn't listen to me. I told
him that a girl who was capable of drawing my son into an intrigue
while she was a member of the church and of my Bible class, a girl
who had the career you had in Newcastle, couldn't become a decent
and trustworthy woman.

The very fact that you had the audacity to come back to Foxon Falls
and impose on Dr.

Pindar's simplicity, proves it.

MINNIE. You know all about me, Mrs. Pindar.

AUGUSTA. I wasn't born yesterday.

MINNIE. Oh, ladies like you, Christian ladies, are hard!

They won't believe nothing good of anybody--only the bad. You've
always been sheltered, you've always had everything you'd want, and
you come and judge us working girls.

You'd drive me out of the only real happiness I ever had, being here
with a man like Dr.

Jonathan, doing work it's a pleasure to do--a pleasure every
minute!--work that may do good to thousands of people, to the
soldiers over there--maybe to George, for all you know! (She burst
into tears.) You can't understand--how could you?
After all, you're his mother. I oughtn't to forget it.

AUGUSTA. Yes, I'm his mother. And you? You haven't given up the
idea that he may marry you some day, if you stay here and pretend
to have reformed.

You write to him.

George may have been foolish, but he isn't as foolish as that!

MINNIE. He doesn't care about me.

AUGUSTA. I'm glad you realize it. But you mean to stay here in Foxon
Falls, nevertheless. You take advantage of Dr. Pindar, who is
easily imposed upon, as his father was before him. But if I told you
that you might harm Dr.

Pindar by staying here, interfere with his career, would you be
willing to leave?

MINNIE. Me? Me doing Dr. Jonathan harm?

AUGUSTA, Yes. I happen to know that he has very little money.
He makes none, he never asks anyone for a bill. He spends what
he has on this kind of thing--research, for the benefit of humanity,
as he thinks,--but very little research work succeeds, and even
then it doesn't pay.

MINNIE. He doesn't care about money.

AUGUSTA. Perhaps not. He is one of those impractical persons who have
to be looked out for, if they are fortunate enough to have anyone
to look out for them.

Since he is a cousin of my husband, Mr. Pindar considers him as one
of his many responsibilities. Mr. Pindar has always had, in a
practical way, the welfare of his working people at heart,
and now he proposes to establish a free hospital for them and to put
Dr. Pindar in charge of it. This will give him a good living as
well as a definite standing in the community, which he needs also.

MINNIE. He's the biggest man in Foxon Falls today!

AUGUSTA. That is as one thinks.

At any rate, he has this opportunity.

Are you going to stand in the way of it?

MINNIE. Me stand in the way of it?

AUGUSTA. If Dr. Pindar accepts the place, you can't go with him,--you
will have to find some other position. Mr. Pindar is firm about that,
and rightly so. But I believe Dr. Pindar would be quite capable
of refusing rather than inconvenience anyone with whom he is
connected.

MINNIE. You're right there!

AUGUSTA. He's quixotic.

MINNIE. If that's a compliment, you're right again.

AUGUSTA. It isn't exactly a compliment.

MINNIE. I guess you mean he's queer--but you're wrong--you're wrong!

He's the only man in Foxon Falls who knows what kind of a world
we're going to live in from now on. Why? Because he's a scientist,
because he's trained himself to think straight, because he understands
people like you and people like me. He don't blame us for
what we do--he knows why we do it.

(A pause.)
That's the reason I try not to blame you for being hard--you can't
understand a girl like me. You can't understand George.

AUGUSTA (white). We'll leave my son out of the conversation, if you
please.

We were talking of Dr. Pindar. You seem to have some consideration
for him, at least.

MINNIE. I'd go to the electric chair for him!

AUGUSTA. I'm not asking you to do that.

MINNIE. You want me to go away and get another place.

I remember a lesson you gave us one day in Bible class, "Judge
not, that you be not judged,"--that was what you talked about.

But you're judging me on what you think is my record,--and you'd warn
people against hiring me.

If everybody was a Christian like that these days, I'd starve or
go on the street.

AUGUSTA. We have to pay for what we do.

MINNIE. And you make it your business to see that we pay.

(A pause.)
Well, I'll go. I didn't know how poor Dr. Jonathan was,--he never
said anything about it to me. I'll disappear.

AUGUSTA. You have some good in you.

MINNIE. Don't begin talking to me about good!

(TIMOTHY FARRELL enters, right.)

TIMOTHY. Good morning, ma'am. (Looking at MINNIE and AUGUSTA). I
came to fetch Minnie to pass an hour with me.

AUGUSTA (agitated and taken aback). Were--were having a little
talk.
(She goes up to TIMOTHY.) I'm distressed to hear about Bert!

TIMOTHY. Thank you for your sympathy, ma'am.

(A brief silence. Enter ASHER, right.)
ASHER (surveying the group).

You here, Augusta? (He goes up to TIMOTHY and presses his hand.)
I wanted to see you, Timothy,--I understand how you feel. We
both gave our sons in this war. You've lost yours, and I expect
to lose mine.

AUGUSTA. Asher!

TIMOTHY. Don't say that, Mr. Pindar
ASHER. Why not? What right have I to believe, after what has happened
in my shops today, that he'll come back?

TIMOTHY. God forbid that he should be lost, too! There's trouble
enough--sorrow enough--
ASHER. Sorrow enough! But if a man has one friend left, Timothy, it's
something.

TIMOTHY (surprised). Sure, I hope it's a friend I am, sir,--a friend
this thirty years.

ASHER. We're both old fashioned, Timothy,--we can't help that.

TIMOTHY. I'm old fashioned enough to want to be working. And now
that the strike's on, whatever will I do? Well, Bert is after
giving his life for human liberty,--the only thing a great-hearted
country like America would be fighting for.

There's some comfort in that! I think of him as a little boy, like
when he'd be carrying me dinner pail to the shops at noon, runnin'
and leppin' and callin' out to me, and he only that high!

ASHER. As a little boy!

TIMOTHY. Yes, sir, it's when I like to think of him best.

There's a great comfort in childher, and when they grow up we lose
them anyway.

But it's fair beset I'll be now, with nothing to do but think of
him.

ASHER. You can thank these scoundrels who are making this labour
trouble for that.

TIMOTHY. Scoundrels, is it? Scoundrels is a hard word, Mr.
Pindar.

ASHER. What else are they? Scoundrels and traitors! Don't tell me
that you've gone over to them, Timothy--that you've deserted me, too!
That you sympathize with these agitators who incite class against
class!

TIMOTHY.

I've heard some of them saying, sir, that if the unions gain what
they're after, there'll be no classes at all at all.

And classes is what some of us didn't expect to find in this country,
but freedom.

ASHER. Freedom! They're headed for anarchy. And they haven't
an ounce of patriotism.

TIMOTHY (meaningly). Don't say that, sir. Me own boy is after dying
over there, and plenty have gone out of your own shops, as ye can
see for yourself every time you pass under the office door with
some of the stars in the flag turning to gold.

And those who stays at home and works through the night is patriots,
too.

The unions may be no better than they should be, but the working
man isn't wanting anyone to tell him whether he'd be joining them
or not.

ASHER. I never expected to hear you talk like this!

TIMOTHY. Nor I, sir. But it's the sons, Mr. Pindar,--the childher
that changes us.

I've been thinking this morning that Bert had a union card in his
pocket when he went away,--and if he died for that kind of liberty,
it's good enough for his old father to live for. I see how wicked
it was to be old fashioned.

ASHER. Wicked?

TIMOTHY.

Isn't it the old fashioned nation we're fighting, with its kings
and emperors and generals that would crush the life and freedom
out of them that need life.

And why wouldn't the men have the right to organize, sir, the way
that they'd have a word to say about what they'd be doing?

ASHER. You--you ask me to sacrifice my principles and yield
to men who are deliberately obstructing the war?

TIMOTHY. Often times principles is nothing but pride, sir.

And it might be yourself that's obstructing the war, when with a
simple word from you they'd go on working.

ASHER (agitatedly). I can't, I won't recognize a labour union!

TIMOTHY. Have patience, sir. I know ye've a kind heart, and that
ye've always acted according to your light, the same as me. But
there's more light now, sir,--it's shining through the darkness,
brighter than the flashes of the cannon over there.

In the moulding room just now it seems to break all around me, and
me crying like a child because the boy was gone. There was things
I hadn't seen before or if I saw them, it was only dim-like, to
trouble me (ASHER turns away) the same as you are troubled now. And
to think it's me that would pity you, Mr. Pindar! I says to myself,
I'll talk to him. I ain't got no learning, I can't find the words I'm
after--but maybe I can persuade him it ain't the same world we're
living in.

ASHER. I was ready to recognize that.

Before they came to me this morning I had made a plan to
reorganize the shops, to grant many privileges.

TIMOTHY. You'll excuse me, sir, but it's what they don't want,--anyone
to be granting them privileges, but to stand on their own feet, the
same as you. I never rightly understood until just now,--and that
because I was always looking up, while you'd be looking down,
and seeing nothing but the bent backs of them. It's inside we must
be looking, sir,--and God made us all the same, you and me, and Mr.
George and my son Bert, and the Polak and his wife and childher.
It's the strike in every one of us, sir,--and half the time we'd
not know why we're striking!

ASHER. You're right there, Timothy
TIMOTHY. But that makes no difference, sir. It's what we can't be
reasoning, but the nature in us all--
(He flings his arm toward the open windows.)
--like the flowers and the trees in the doctor's garden groping to
the light of the sun. Maybe the one'll die for lack of the proper
soil, and many is cruelly trampled on, but the rest'll be growing,
and none to stop 'em.
ASHER (pacing to the end of the room, and turning). No, I won't
listen to it! You--you ask me to yield to them, when you have lost
your son, when they're willing to sacrifice--to murder my son on
the field of battle?
(He pauses and looks toward the doorway, right. DR. JONATHAN standing
there, holding in his hand a yellow envelope. ASHER starts forward.)
A telegram? For me?

DR. JONATHAN. Yes, Asher.
(After giving it to ASHER, DR. JONATHAN takes his stand beside
MINNIE, who is at the back of the room, near the bench. He lays a
hand on her arm. ASHER tears open the envelope and stares at the
telegram, his hands trembling.)
ASHER (exclaiming, in a half whisper). George!
AUGUSTA. Oh Asher, not--not--!
(She reaches for the telegram. He gives it to her. She reads.)
"Captain George Pindar severely wounded, condition critical."
TIMOTHY. Please God he'll be spared to ye!

CURTAIN.
ACT III
SCENE: Same as in Act I, the library of ASHER PINDAR'S house.

TIME:
The following day, early afternoon. A storm is raging, with wind
and rain and occasional bright flashes of lightning and heavy peals
of thunder. ASHER is pacing up and down the room, folding and
unfolding his hands behind his back, when AUGUSTA enters, lower
right, her knitting in her hand. There is a flash and a peal of
thunder.
AUGUSTA. Oh! Asher, did you know that the elm at the end of the
Common was struck just now?--that splendid old landmark!
ASHER. All the old landmarks are being struck down, one after
another.
AUGUSTA (going up to him and putting her hand on his arm). I've
been so nervous all day. Do be careful how you go about during this
strike.
Those sullen and angry groups of men on the street this morning--

ASHER. Oh, they wouldn't dare touch me. If we only had a state
constabulary we'd soon break that sort of thing up. But the Legislature
trembles whenever a labour leader opens his mouth.
AUGUSTA (sitting down and taking up her knitting). If only I could
be of some help to you! But it's always been so.
ASHER. You've been a good wife, Augusta!
AUGUSTA. I don't know. I've kept your house, I've seen that you
were well fed, but I've been thinking lately how little that is for
a woman --for a human being.
ASHER (surprised). Why, Augusta! I can't remember the time when you
haven't been busy. You've taken an active part in church work and
looked out for the people of the village.
AUGUSTA. Yes, and what has it all amounted to? The poor are ungrateful,
they won't go near the church, and today they're buying pianos.
Soon there won't be any poor to help.
ASHER. That's so. We'll be the paupers, if this sort of thing keeps
on.
AUGUSTA. I've tried to do my duty as a Christian woman, but the
world has no use, apparently, for Christians in these times. And
whenever you have any really serious trouble, I seem to be the last
person you take into your confidence.
ASHER. I don't worry you with business matters.
AUGUSTA. Because you do not regard me as your intellectual
equal.
ASHER. A woman has her sphere. You have always filled it
admirably.

AUGUSTA. "Adorn" is the word, I believe.
ASHER. To hear you talk, one would think you'd been contaminated
by Jonathan. You, of all people!
AUGUSTA. There seems to be no place for a woman like me in these
days, --I don't recognize the world I'm living in.
ASHER. You didn't sleep a wink last night, thinking of George.
AUGUSTA. I've given up all hope of ever seeing him again alive.
(Enter DR. JONATHAN, lower right. His calmness is in contrast to
the storm, and to the mental states of ASHER and AUGUSTA.)
Why, Jonathan, what are you doing out in this storm?She was infinitely helpful in times of emergency, and would take
charge of Sally's babies, if Sally were ill, or slave in Sally's
nursery if all or any of the children were indisposed. But she was
not so obliging if mere pleasure took Sally away from her maternal
duties. Sally told Martie that there was no asking Lyd to help,
either she did it voluntarily, or wild horses couldn't make her do
it at all.

If her younger sisters entrusted their children to Aunt Lydia, she
was an adoring and indulgent aunt. She loved to open her cookie jar
for their raids, and to have them beg her favours or stories. But if
Lydia had expressed the opinion that it was too cold for the
children to go barefoot, and Martie or Sally revoked the decision,
then Lydia wore a dark, resentful look for hours, and was apt to
vent her disapproval on the children themselves.

"No, get out of my lap, Jimmy. I don't want a boy that runs to his
Mama and doesn't trust his Auntie," Lydia would say patiently,
firmly, and kindly. Martie and Sally, wives for years, were able to
refrain from any comment. To be silent when children are disciplined
is one of the great lessons of marriage.

"But I don't believe that a woman who ever had had a baby COULD
rebuff a child like that," Martie told Sally. "I don't know, though,
some aunts are wonderful! Only that pleasant justice does seem
wasted on a child; it merely stings without being comprehensible in
the least!"

So the younger girls dismissed it philosophically. But it was one of
the results of a life like Lydia's that human intercourse had no
lighter phases for her. She must analyze and suspect and brood.
Wherever a possible slight was hidden Lydia found it. She sometimes
disappeared for a few hours upstairs, and came back with reddened
eyes.

Her father's devotion to Martie she bore with martyred sweetness.
When they laughed together at dinner she listened with downcast
eyes, a faint, pained smile on her lips.

"Would you like Martie to sit in Ma's place, Pa?" she asked one
morning, when she was folding her napkin neatly into the orange-wood
napkin-ring marked "Souvenir of Santa Cruz." Her father's surprised
negative hardly interrupted the account he was giving his youngest
daughter of the law-suit he had won years ago against old man
Thomas. But after breakfast Martie found Lydia crying into one of
the aprons that Were hanging in the side-entry. "It's nothing!" she
gulped as Martie's warm arms went about her. "Only--only I can't
bear to have Ma forgotten already! You heard how Pa spoke-so short
and so cold!"

"Oh, Lyddy, DARLING!" Martie protested, half-amused, half-
sympathetic. Lydia straightened herself resentfully.

"I suppose I'm foolish," she said. "I suppose the best thing for us
all to do is to forget and laugh, and go on as if life and death
were only a JOKE!"

But these storms were rare. Lydia's was a placid life. She was
deeply delighted when her cooking was praised, although she
pretended to be annoyed by it. She was wearing dresses now that had
been hers six years ago; sometimes a blue gingham or a gray madras
was worn a whole season by Lydia without one trip to the tub. She
carried a red and gray parasol that Cliff Frost had given her ten
years ago; her boots were thin, unadorned kid, creased by her narrow
foot; they seemed never to wear out.

As the years went by she quoted her mother more and more. The rather
silent Mrs. Monroe had evidently left a fund of advice behind her.
Nothing was too trivial to be affected by the memory of Ma's
opinion.

"Nice thick cream Williams is giving us," Lydia might say at the
breakfast table. "Dear Ma used to say that good cream was half the
secret of good coffee!" "I remember Ma used to say that marigolds
were rather bold, coarse flowers," she confided to Martie, "and
isn't it true?"

Her appetite for the news of the village was still insatiable; it
was rarely uncharitable, but it never ended. Martie came to
recognize certain tones in Lydia's voice, when she and Alice Clark
or Angela Baxter or young Mrs. King were on the shady side porch.
There was the delicately tentative tone in which she trod upon
uncertain ground: "How do you mean she's never been the same since
last fall, Lou? I don't remember anything special happening to
Minnie Scott last fall." There was a frankly and flatly amazed tone,
in which Lydia might say: "Well, Clara told me yesterday about
Potter Street, and if you'll tell me what POSSESSED that boy, I'll
be obliged to you!" And then there was the tone of incredible
announcement: "Alice, I don't know that I should tell this, because
I only heard it last night, but I haven't been able to think of one
other thing ever since, and I believe I'll tell you; it won't go any
further. Mrs. Hughie Wilson came in here last night, and we got to
talking about old Mrs. Mulkey's death--"

And so on, for perhaps a full hour. Martie, smiling over her
darning, would hear Alice's gratifying, "Well, for pity!" and "Did
you EVER!" at intervals. Sometimes she herself contributed
something, a similar case in New York, perhaps, but the others were
not interested. They knew, without ever having expressed it, that
there is no intimacy like that of a small village, no novelty or
horror that comes so closely home to the people of the Eastern
metropolis as did these Monroe events to their own lives.

Martie loved her sister, and they came to understand each other's
ways perfectly. Teddy was happy with Aunt Lyd when his mother was at
the Library, and Lydia liked her authority over the child and his
companionship. There was no peace in the old house, for all her
silent meekness, unless Lydia's curious sense of justice was
satisfied, and Martie took pains to satisfy it.

One memorable day, just before Christmas, Martie opened a small
package, to find John Dryden's book. She was in the Library when
Miss Fanny came in with the mail, and her hand trembled as she cut
the strings. The flimsy tissue paper jacket blew softly over her
hand; a dark blue book, slim, dignified: "Mary Beatrice."

He had not autographed it, but then John would never think of doing
so. Martie smiled her motherly smile at the memory of his childish
dependence upon her suggestions as to the smaller points of living.
Her letter of congratulation began to run through her mind as she
turned the title page.

Suddenly her heart stopped beating. She wet her lips and glanced
about. Miss Fanny had gone into the coat-room; nobody was near.

Oh, madman, madman! He had dedicated it to her! A detected felony
could not have given Martie a more sinking sensation than she
experienced at the sight.

Her initials: M. S. B.--she need puzzle only a second over the
selection, for her letters to him were always signed, "Martha
Salisbury, Bannister." And under the initials, this:

Even as to Caesar, Cassar's toll, To God what in us is divine; So to
your soul above my soul Whatever life finds good in mine. Martie
read the four lines as many times, then she lifted the page to her
cheek, and held it there, shutting her eyes, and drawing a deep,
ecstatic breath.

"Oh, John, JOHN, how wonderful of you!" she whispered, her heart
rising on a swift, triumphant flight. Ah, this was something to have
brought from the long years; this counted in that inner tribunal of
hers.

After awhile she began to turn the pages, wishing that she were a
better judge of all these phrases. The play was short: three brief
acts.

"I think it's wonderful!" Martie decided. "I KNOW it is!"

For the little volume, even at this first quick glimpse, was stamped
with something fiery and strange. Martie's eyes drifted here and
there; presently fell upon the lines that brought the frightened
little Italian princess, fresh from her convent, to the strange
coast of England, and to the welcome of the strange King, her
prospective husband's brother. The words were simplicity's self,
like all inspired words, yet they brought the colour to Martie's
face, and a yearning pain to her heart. Youth and love in all their
first gold glory were captured here, and something of youth and
glory seemed to flood the Library throughout the quiet winter
afternoon.

The hours droned on, Martie, moving noiselessly about, and touching
the switch that suddenly lighted the dim big room, paused at the
window to look down upon Monroe. An early twilight was creeping into
the village street, and the drug-store windows glowed with globes of
purple and green. The shops were already disguised under bushy
evergreens; wreaths of red and green paper made circles of steam
against the show windows. Silva, of the fruit market opposite, was
selling a Christmas tree from the score that lay at the curb, to a
stout country woman, whose shabby, well-wrapped children watched the
transaction breathlessly from a mud-spattered surrey. The Baxter
girls went by, Martie saw them turn into the church yard, and
disappear into the swinging black doors, "for a little visit."

Nothing dramatic or beautiful in the scene: a little Western village
street, on the eve of Christmas Eve, but to-night it was lighted for
Martie with poetry and romance. The thought of a slim, dark-blue
book with its four magic lines thrilled in her heart like a song.

"Christmas day after to-morrow!" she said to Fanny, "don't you love
Christmas?"

But she knew that her real Christmas joy had come to-day.

The December kitchen was gas-lighted long before she got there, and
Pauline was deep in calm preparation for dinner. Pauline was a
Canadian girl, and if her work ever confused or fatigued her, at
least she never betrayed the fact. There never were pots and pans
awaiting cleaning in Pauline's sink, there never was a teaspoonful
of flour spilled upon her biscuit board. Her gingham cuffs were
always starched and stiff, her colourless hair smooth. She was a
silent, dun-coloured creature, whose most violent expression was an
occasional deep, unctuous laugh at Mrs. Bannister's nonsense.

Pauline did not prepare a meal in a series of culminating
convulsions, with hair rumpling, face reddening, and voice rising
every passing minute. She moved a shining pot forward on a shining
stove, she took plates of inviting cold things from the safe, and
lifted a damp napkin from her pats of butter. Then she said, in an
uninterested voice: "You might tell your p'pa, Miss Lydia--"

Humble as her business was, she had been taught it well. Martie,
insatiable on this particular topic, sometimes questioned Pauline.
She was given a meagre picture of a farmhouse on Prince Edward's
Island, of a stern, exacting, loving mother who "licked" daughters
and sons alike with a "trace-end" for any infractions of domestic
rule. Of snows so lasting and deep that housewives buried their
brown linens in October, and found them again, snowy white, on the
April grass. Pauline's mother, dying of "a shock," had been the
devoted daughter's charge for eleven hard years, then Pauline had
married at thirty, only to be made a widow, by a lumber jam, at
thirty-two. So it was fortunate that she could cook, for she was a
plain woman, and what the country folk call "dumb," meaning dull,
and unresponsive, and unambitious.

To-night there was a little unusual clutter in the big, hot, clean
kitchen; Lydia was making sandwiches for the Girls' Sodality
Christmas Tree at the large table. Two or three empty cardboard
boxes stood waiting the neatly trimmed and pressed bread: Lydia did
this sort of thing perfectly. At the end of the table, his cheeks
glowing, and his dark mop in a tumble, Teddy was watching in deep
fascination.

The room had the charm that use and simplicity lend to any room.
There was nothing superfluous here, and nothing assumed. Martie knew
every crack in the yellow bowl that held a crinkled rice-pudding;
the broom had held that corner for thirty years; for thirty years
the roller towel had dangled from that door. She and Len and Sally
had seen their mother go to the broom for a straw, to test baking
cake, a hundred times; their sticky little faces had been dried a
hundred times on the towel.

But to-night a new, homely sweetness seemed to permeate the place.
Martie had left the slim, dark-blue book upstairs in her bureau
drawer, but her mood of exquisite lightheartedness she had not laid
aside. She sat down in the kitchen rocker, and Teddy climbed into
her lap, and, while she talked with Lydia, distracted her with
little kisses, with small hands squeezing her cold cheeks, and with
the casual bumping of his hard little head against her face.

"I declare it begins to feel Christmassy, Lyd! Did you get down town
to see the stores? I never saw anything like Bonestell's in my life.
It's cold, too--but sort of bracing cold! We had both the stoves
going all day; we had to light the lights at four! It was rather
nice, everybody coming in to say 'Merry Christmas!'"

"The children had their closing exercises at school this morning,"
Lydia contributed, "and afterward Sally and I walked down town, with
all the children. She expects Joe to-morrow. She wanted Billy and
Jim to get in a nap, so I brought Ted home."

"And I took a long nap!" Teddy whispered in his mother's ear.

"I don't know what possesses the child to whisper that way!" Lydia
said, annoyed.

"He just said that he had a nap, Lyd, I think he didn't want to
interrupt."

"Oh, he got a good nap in," Lydia admitted, pacified, "if you're
really going to take him to-night, I've laid out his clean things."

"I saw them on the bed, Lyd--you're a darling!"

"Am I going?" Teddy asked, with a bounce.

"Is Aunt Sally going to take the children?" Martie temporized. But
Teddy knew from her tone that he was safe. Indeed, his mother loved
the realization that she was his court of last appeal, that it was
to her memory of authority abused that his happiness was entrusted.
It was her joy to explain, to adjust, to reconcile, the little
elements of his life. She taught him the rules of simplicity and
industry and service as another mother might have taught him his
multiplication table. Teddy might have poverty and discouragement to
face some day, but life could never be all dark to him while his
mother interpreted it.

She took him upstairs now, to dress for the great occasion of the
Sodality Christmas tree, and dressed herself, prettily, as well. But
before she turned out the gas, and followed the galloping small boy
downstairs, she opened her bureau drawer.

And again the slim book was in her hands, and again her dazzled eyes
were reading the few words that gave her new proof that John had not
forgotten.

For a few minutes she stood dreaming; dreaming of the old boarding-
house, and the little furniture clerk with his eager, faun-like
smile. And for the first time she let her fancy play with the
thought of what life might be for the woman John Dryden loved.

But she put the book and the thought quickly away, her cheeks
burning, and went down to the homely, inviting odours of supper, of
Pauline's creamed salmon and fluffy rolls. Her father sat beside the
fire, in a sort of doze, his long, lean hands idly locked, his
glasses pushed up on his lead-coloured forehead.

Martie kissed him, catching the old faint unpleasant smell of breath
and moustache as she did so, helped him to the table, and tied
Teddy's napkin under the child's round, firm chin. She talked of
anything and everything, of Christmas surprises, and Christmas
duties--

And all the while her heart sang. When with Teddy on one side, and
Lydia leaning on the free arm, she was walking through the winter
darkness her feet wanted to dance on the cold, hard earth.

"It's Christmas--Christmas--Christmas!" she laughed, when the little
boy commented upon her gaiety. Lydia found the usual damper for her
mood.

"Very different for you from last Christmas, poor Mart!" she
observed, with a long sigh.

Martie was sobered. They went into the church for a moment's prayer,
and Teddy wriggled against her in the dark, and managed to get a
little arm about her neck, for he knew that she was crying. The
revulsion had come, and Martie, tears running down her face in the
darkness, was only a lonely woman again, unsuccessful, worried,
trapped in a dull little village, missing her baby!

Women were coming and going on the altar, trimming it with odorous
green for Christmas. There was a pungent smell of evergreen in the
air. About the confessionals there was a constant shuffle,
whispering and stirring; radiators hissed and clanked, the big doors
creaked and swung windily.

Sally and her whispering tribe were just in front of them; presently
they all went out into the cold, and across a bare yard to the
lights and warmth and noise and music of the Sodality Hall. Sally
saw that Martie had been crying, and when they were seated together
in one of the rows of chairs against the wall, with their laps full
of children's coats, she touched the hidden hurt.

"Martie, dearest, I'm so sorry!"

"I know!" Martie blinked and managed a smile.

"I'll be glad for you when this first Christmas is over!" Sally said
earnestly.

Martie's answering look was full of gratitude: she thought it
strangely touching to see the blooming little mother deliberately
try to bring her gay Christmas mood into tune with sorrow and loss.
Sally's beautiful Elizabeth was one of the Christmas angels in the
play to-night, and Sally's pride was almost too great to bear. Billy
was sturdily dashing about selling popcorn balls, and Jim was
staggering to and fro flirting with admiring Sodality girls. The
young Hawkeses were at their handsome best, and women on all sides
were congratulating Sally.

What could Sally dream, Martie mused, of a freezing Eastern city
packed under dirty snow, of bitter poverty, of a tiny, gold-crowned
girl in a shabby dressing-gown, of a coaster wrapped in wet paper,
and delivered in a dark, bare hall? Sally's serene destiny lay here,
away from the damp, close heat under which milk poisoned and babies
wilted, away from the icy cold that caught shuddering flesh and
blood under its solid pall. These friendly, chattering women were
Sally's world, these problems of school and rent and food were
Sally's problems.

But Martie knew now that she was not of Monroe, that she must go
back. She was not Sally, she was not Rose; she had earned her entry
into a higher school. Those Eastern years were not wasted, she must
go on now, she must go on--to what?--to what?

And with New York her thoughts were suddenly with John, and Sally,
glancing anxiously at her, saw that she was smiling. Martie did not
notice the look: she was far away. She saw the Christmas tree, and
the surging children, through a haze of dreams.

Mysterious, enviable, unattainable--thought the Sodality girls,
eying the black-clad figure, with its immaculate touches of white at
wrists and throat. Mrs. Bannister had run away with an actor and had
lived in New York, and was a widow, they reminded each other, and
thrilled. At the sound of her name, the girl started. She came
and bent over him.
And when she kissed him on the forehead, he trembled.

"Uncle Silas!" she faltered.

Weakly he reached up and put his hands on her shoulders. He whispered
in her ear. The tears came and lay wet upon her lashes as she undid
the button at his throat.

There, on a piece of cotton twine, hung a little key, She took it
off, but still his hands held her.

"I have saved it for you, my dear," he said. "God bless you--" why
did his eyes seek Stephen's?--"and make your life happy. Virginia--will
you play my hymn--once more--once more?"

They lifted the night lamp from the piano, and the medicine. It
was Stephen who stripped it of the black cloth it had worn, who
stood by Virginia ready to lift the lid when she had turned the lock.
The girl's exaltation gave a trembling touch divine to the
well-remembered chords, and those who heard were lifted, lifted far
above and beyond the power of earthly spell.

"Lead, Kindly Light, amid the encircling gloom Lead Thou me on The
night is dark, and I am far from home; Lead Thou me on.
Keep Thou my feet! I do not ask to see The distant scene; one step
enough for me."

A sigh shook Silas Whipple's wasted frame, and he died.

THE CRISIS
By Winston Churchill

Volume 8.

CHAPTER XII
THE LAST CARD
Mr. Brinsmade and the Doctor were the first to leave the little room
where Silas Whipple had lived and worked and died, Mr.

Brinsmade bent upon one of those errands which claimed him at all
times. He took Shadrach with him. Virginia sat on, a vague fear
haunting her,--a fear for her father's safety. Where was Clarence?
What had he seen? Was the place watched? These questions, at first
intruding upon her sorrow, remained to torture her.

Softly she stirred from the chair where she had sat before the piano,
and opened the door of the outer office. A clock in a steeple near
by was striking twelve. The Colonel did not raise his head. Only
Stephen saw her go; she felt his eyes following her, and as she slipped
out lifted hers to meet them for a brief instant through the
opening of the door. Then it closed behind her.

First of all she knew that the light in the outer office was burning
dimly, and the discovery gave her a shock.

Who had turned it down?

Had Clarence? Was he here? Fearfully searching the room for him, her
gaze was held by a figure in the recess of the window at the back
of the room. A solid, bulky figure it was, and, though uncertainly
outlined in the semi-darkness, she knew it. She took a step nearer,
and a cry escaped her.

The man was Eliphalet Hopper. He got down from the sill
with a motion at once sheepish and stealthy.

Her breath caught, and instinctively she gave back toward the door,
as if to open it again.

"Hold on!" he said. "I've got something I want to say to you,
Miss Virginia."

His tones seemed strangely natural. They were not brutal. But
she shivered and paused, horrified at the thought of what she
was about to do. Her father was in that room--and Stephen. She
must keep them there, and get this man away.

She must not show fright before him, and yet she could not trust her
voice to speak just then.

She must not let him know that she was afraid of him--this she kept
repeating to herself. But how to act? Suddenly an idea flashed upon
her.

Virginia never knew how she gathered the courage to pass him, even
swiftly, and turn up the gas. He started back, blinking as the jet
flared. For a moment she stood beside it, with her head high;
confronting him and striving to steady herself for speech.
"Why have you come here?" she said. "Judge Whipple--died--to-night."

The dominating note in his answer was a whine, as if, in spite of
himself, he were awed.

"I ain't here to see the Judge."
She was pale, and quite motionless. And she faltered now. She felt
her lips moving, but knew not whether the words had come.
"What do you mean?"
He gained confidence. The look in his little eyes was the filmy
look of those of an animal feasting.
"I came here to see you," he said, "--you." She was staring at him
now, in horror. "And if you don't give me what I want, I cal'late
to see some one else--in there," said Mr. Hopper.
He smiled, for she was swaying, her lids half closed. By a supreme
effort she conquered her terror and looked at him. The look was in
his eyes still, intensified now.
"How dare you speak to me after what has happened! she said. If
Colonel Carvel were here, he would--kill you."It was surrounded by useless shabby barns and
outhouses, it was five times too large for the diminished family,
and, in case of Pa's death--and Pa was nearly seventy--it must fetch
what it might, for between Len's constant need of money for the
Estates, and Lydia's mild helplessness, there could be no holding it
for a fair price.

"For the new High School--for the new High School!" her father said
impatiently. For perhaps twenty years he had had occasional offers
for the property, and had always scornfully refused them.

"Yet I think that's rather touching, Pa," Martie said.

"What's touching?" he asked suspiciously, after a moment in which he
obviously tried to see any touching aspect in the affair.

"Why, to have the Monroe High School on the old Monroe site!" Martie
said innocently. "Of course Mr. Tate and Cliff Frost know what it
means to you, and yet I suppose they realize that the neighbourhood
is changing, and that those shops have come in, this side of the
bridge, and that, even if we lived here ten years more, we couldn't
twenty. I agree with your decision, Pa, of course; but at the same
time, I see that no other plot in Monroe would be so fitting!"

Malcolm stirred his tea, raised the cup, and drank off the hot fluid
with great gusto. A faint frown darkened his brow.

"And, pray, where would the family live?" he asked presently.

"Where we ought to be now," Martie answered promptly. "In the
Estates. I have been thinking lately, Pa, that nothing would give
that development such prestige as to have you there! Put up as
pretty a house as you choose, build a drive, and put in a handsome
fence, but be Malcolm Monroe of the Monroe Estates!"

Always captured by phrases, she saw him tug at his moustache to hide
a smile.

"Well!" he said presently. "Well! You astonish me. But yes, I see
your point. I must candidly admit you have a point there. With
another attractive home there--yes, there is something in that. But
I had supposed that you girls had a sentiment for this old place,"
he added almost reproachfully.

"And so we have!" Martie answered quickly. "But it is one thing to
sell this place in small lots, Pa, and have it chopped into shops
and shanties, and another to have a three-hundred-thousand-dollar
building go in here. The new High School on the old Monroe place;
you'll admit there's a great difference?"

Had her bombastic father always been so easily influenced? Martie
wondered, remembering the old storms and the old stubbornness. It
was true, some persons couldn't do things; other persons could.
Lydia and Ma would have goaded him into an obstinacy that no later
judgment could dispel, and after his death Monroe would have
lamented that he had left next to nothing, for the place had to go
for taxes and interest overdue, and Lydia and Ma would have settled
themselves comfortably on Len for life.

"All the difference in the world," Malcolm said, now deep in
thought.

"You could send a letter to the Zeus," Martie added presently,
"saying that you had never even considered such a step before, but
that to sell for educational purposes was--you know!--was in accord
with the spirit of your father--that sort of thing!"

"And so it was!" he answered warmly.

"A few ready thousands would be the making of the Estates, now,"
said Martie, "but naturally the town need know nothing of that!"

Malcolm shrugged a careless assent, and silently finished his pie.

"Your sister Lydia--" he began suddenly, shaking his head.

"Yes, Lyd will object," Martie assented, as his voice stopped. "Lyd
is a conservative, Pa. She has very little of the spirit that
brought Grandfather Monroe here; she doesn't, in the Estates, see
property that will be just as beautiful and just as valuable as
anything in Monroe in a few years. Why, Pa, you must remember the
days when our trees in the yard here were only saplings?"

"Remember?" he echoed impressively. "Why, I remember Monroe as the
field between two sheep-ranches. There was not a blade of wheat, not
a fruit tree--"

He was well started. Martie listened to an hour's complacent
reminiscence. At eight o'clock he went to his study, but came back a
moment later, with his glasses pushed up on his lead-coloured
forehead, to say that the sum old Tait mentioned would clear the
mortgage, build a handsome house, and perhaps leave a bit over for
Martie and her boy. At nine he appeared again, to say that he would
deed the new house to Lydia, who would undoubtedly take the change a
little hard--a little hard!

"Yes," said old Malcolm thoughtfully, from the doorway, glancing,
with his spectacles still on his forehead, at the pencilled list he
had in his hand. "Yes, I believe I have hit upon the solution! I--
believe--I--have--hit--it!"

Old Mrs. Sark having fulfilled her family's mournful expectations,
Lydia stayed for the funeral, and was so deeply absorbed and
satisfied by her position in the Kilroy house that she returned home
still impressive, consolatory, and crushed in manner.

She sat beside Martie on the front steps, in the warm March
twilight, retailing the events of the last three days, and living
again their moments of grief and stress.

"I know I was a consolation to them, Mart--of course, there's little
enough one can do! But yesterday morning--I sat up both nights; I
declare I don't know where the strength comes from--yesterday
morning, before the funeral, I went up to Louis Kilroy--I never saw
a grown man take a thing so hard--and I said, 'Louis, you must come
and have a cup of hot, strong coffee!' Bessie was there, and I must
say she seemed as devoted to Grandma as if she'd been her own
daughter, and she came and took my hands, and she said, 'Lydia, I
never will forget all you've done for us!' Well," Lydia went on,
with a sad little deprecatory shrug, "I didn't do much. But it was
somebody THERE, you know! Somebody to do the plain little everyday
things that MUST be done, whether death is in the house, or not!"
And Lydia sighed in weary content. "Carrie David says she believes
Tom'll go next--"she was pursuing mournfully, when Martie
interrupted.

"Say, Lyd dear, we've been having great times since you were away--I
didn't have a chance to say a word to you at the funeral--but the
school board, or the city fathers, or some one, has made Pa an offer
for the house!"

"What house?" Lydia asked interestedly.

"THIS one." Martie began to chew the fresh sprout of a yellow
banksia rose.

"This one!" Lydia's mouth remained a little open, her eyes were
wild.

"Yes; this whole tract. They'll fill it in; they want if for the new
High School."

"Well--" Lydia tossed her head loftily. "Of course, Pa told them--?"

"Yes, he did tell them, as he always has--that nothing would
persuade him to part with it!"

"WELL!" said Lydia, breathing again.

"But he's been thinking it over, Lyd, and he's really seriously
reconsidering it. You see the instant Pa dies, the Bank will
foreclose, for neither you nor I have a cent, and Len is tied up for
years with the Estates--"

Martie began to speak eagerly and quickly. But her voice died before
Lydia's look.

"Martie! How can you! Speaking of Pa's death in that callous, cold-
blooded way; when poor Ma hasn't been buried three years--and now
dear old Grandma Sark--"

Lydia fumbled for a handkerchief, and began to sob. After a few
moments, in which Martie only offered a few timid pats on her
shoulder for consolation, she suddenly dried her eyes, and began
with bitter clearness:

"I know who has done this, Mart! I don't say much, but I see. I see
now where all your petting of Pa, and humouring Pa, was leading! Oh,
how can you--how can you--how CAN you! My home, the dear old Monroe
place, that three generations of us--but I won't stand it! I feel as
if Ma would rise up and rebuke me! No, you and Pa can decide what
you please, but no power on earth will make me--and where would we
live, might I ask? We couldn't go to the Poor House, I suppose?"

"Pa'd build a lovely house, smaller and more modern, on the
Estates," Martie explained. Lydia assumed a look of high scorn.

"Oh, indeed!" she said, gulping and wiping her eyes again. "Indeed!
Is that so? Move out there so that Len would prosper, so that there
would be one more house out on that DESOLATE flat field--very well,
you and Pa can go! But I stay here!"

And trembling all over, as she always did tremble when forced into
anything but a mildly neutral position, Lydia went upstairs. The
dinner hour was embittered by a painful discussion and by more
tears.

Malcolm was somewhat inclined to waver toward Lydia's view, but
Martie was firm. When Lydia tearfully protested that, just as it
stood, the house would made an ideal "gentleman's estate," Martie
mercilessly answered that at its present level, without electric
light or garage or baths, it was just so much "old wood and
plaster." Lydia winced at this term as if she had been struck.

"How would you pay taxes and interest, if anything happened to Pa?"
Martie demanded briskly.

"We would have no rent to pay," Lydia countered quickly, red spots
burning in her cheeks, and giving her mild face an unusually wild
look. "Why do people own their homes, if there's no economy in it?"

"Rent doesn't come to three thousand a year!" Martie reminded her.
Lydia looked startled. "We could rent that whole upper floor," she
said hesitatingly.

"But you would rather have this place a school house than a
boarding-house?" argued Martie.

Lydia's wet eyes reddened again.

"DON'T say such horrible things, Martie! The way you put things it's
enough to scare Pa to death! Why shouldn't we live here, as we
always have lived?" She turned to her father. "Pa, it's not RIGHT
for you to consider such a change just because Martie---"

"I'm doing it for you, Lyd," Martie said quickly. "I shall be in New
York--"

They hardly heard her; Martie had talked of New York since she was a
child. But Martie suddenly realized that it was true; she had really
been planning and contriving to go back through all these placid
months.

"I'll discuss it with your brother," Malcolm finally said. "I'll see
what Leonard thinks."

"But, Pa," Martie protested, "what does LEN know about it?"

"I suppose a man may be supposed to know more about business than a
woman!" Lydia exclaimed.

"Yes--yes, this is a man's affair," Malcolm conceded, scraping his
chin. "Your brother has been associated with men in business affairs
for years; he had some college work. I'll see Len."

There was nothing more to say. Martie felt instinctively that Len
would approve of the sale of the old place, and she was right, but
it was galling to have his opinion so eagerly sought by her father,
and to have him so gravely quoted. Len, slow witted and suspicious,
thought that there was "something in the idea," but added pompously
that he could not see that the Monroes, as a family, were under any
need of obliging the Frosts and the Tates, and that the property was
there in any case, and there was no occasion for hurry.

Malcolm repeated these views at the dinner table with great
seriousness, and Lydia triumphantly echoed them over and over. As
she and Martie dusted and made beds the older sister poured forth a
quiet stream of satisfied comment. Such things were for men's
deciding, after all, and she, Lydia, never would and never could
understand how they were able to settle things so quickly and so
wisely.

But Martie was not beaten. She knew that Len was wrong; there was no
time to waste. The old Mussoo tract, down at the other end of the
town, was also under consideration, and the deal might be closed any
day. One quiet, wet day she asked Miss Fanny for leave of absence,
and went to the office of old Charley Tate. Mr. Tate was not there,
Potter Street told her, taking his feet from a desk, and slapping
his book shut. However, if there was anything he could do, Mart--?

No; she thanked him. She would go up to the Bank, and see Mr. Frost.
She met Rose coming out as she went in.

"Hello, Martie!" Rose was all cordiality. "Nice weather for ducks,
isn't it? But fortunately you and I aren't sugar or salt, are we?
Were you going to see Rodney?"

"Clifford Frost," Martie told her. Did Rose's face really brighten a
little--she wondered?

"Oh! Well, he's there! Come soon and see Doris!" Rose got into the
motor car, and Martie went into the Bank.

Clifford was a tall man, close to fifty, thinner than Dr. Ben, more
ample of figure than Malcolm. He wore a thin old alpaca coat in the
Bank in this warm spring weather. A green shade was pushed up
against his high forehead, which shone a little, and as Martie
settled herself opposite him, he took off his big glasses, and dried
them in a leisurely fashion with a rotary motion of his white
handkerchief.

He was reputedly the richest man in town, but rich in country
fashion. Such property as he had, cattle, a farm or two, several
buildings in Main Street, and stock in the Bank, he studied and
nursed carefully, not from any feeling of avarice, but because he
was temperate and conservative in all his dealings.

Martie liked his office, much plainer than Rodney's, but with
something dignified about its well-worn furnishings that Rodney's
shining brass and glass and mahogany lacked. She thought that
perhaps Ruth had given her father the two pink roses that were
toppling in a glass on the desk; she eyed the big photograph of
Colonel Frost respectfully.

"Well, well, Mrs. Bannister, how do you do! I declare I haven't seen
much of you since you came back! How's that boy of yours? Nice boy--
nice little feller."

"He's well, thank you, Clifford; he's never been ill. And how's your
own pretty girl?" Martie smiled, using the little familiarity
deliberately.

When he answered, with a father's proud affection, he called her
"Martie," as she suspected he might. She went to her point frankly.
Pa, she explained, was playing fast and loose with the town's offer
for the property. The man opposite her frowned, nodded, and stared
at the floor.

"You girls naturally feel--" he nodded sympathetically.

"Lydia does. But, Clifford, that's just where I need your help. I
think it would be madness not to sell!"

"Madness NOT to?" It was not clear yet. "Then you WANT to?"

She went over her ground patiently. His face brightened with
comprehension.

"I see! Well, now, that puts a different face on it," he said. "Of
course, I want the deal to go through," he admitted, "and if you can
talk your father over--"

"That's what I want you to do!" Martie assured him gaily.

He laughed in answer.

"He don't pay any attention to me!" he confessed. "I's telling him
only yes'day that it wasn't good business to hang onto that piece. I
told--"

"But Clifford," she suggested, "I want you to take this tack. I want
you to tell him that the town has a sentiment about it--the old
Monroe place, you know. Tell him that people feel it OUGHT to be
public property, and then, when he agrees, whip some sort of paper
out of your pocket, and have him sign it then and there!"

Clifford Frost was not quick of thought, but he was shrewd, and his
smile now was compounded of admiration for the scheme and the
schemer alike.

"I declare you're quite a business woman, Martie!" he said. "It's a
pity Len hasn't got it, too. I b'lieve I can work your Pa that way;
anyway, I'll try it! I supposed you girls were hanging on like grim
death to that piece--"

After this the conversation rambled pleasantly; presently, in the
midst of a discussion of mortgages, he took one of the roses, and
called her attention to it. It had had some special care; Martie
could honestly admire it. Clifford told her to keep it, and her blue
eyes met his friendly ones, behind the big glasses, as she pinned it
on her blouse.

"I declare you've got quite a different look since you came back,
Martie," he said. "You're quite a New Yorker! I said to Ruthie a
while back, that there was a strange lady in town; I'd seen her with
Mrs. Joe Hawkes. 'Why, Papa,' she says, 'that's Mrs. Bannister!' I
assure you I could hardly believe it. You've took off considerable
flesh, haven't you?"

"I've had my share," Martie answered in the country phrase, with a
smile and a sigh.

"Well, I guess that's so, too!" he said quickly with an answering
sigh. "What was the--the cause?" he asked delicately. "He was a big,
strong fellow. I remember him quite well; friend of Rodney's."

He told her circumstantially, in return for her brief confidences,
of his wife's death. How she had not been well, and how she had
refused the regular dinner on a certain night, first mentioned as
"the Tuesday," and then corrected to "the Wednesday," and had asked
Polly to boil her two eggs, and then had not wanted them, either.
With loving sorrow he had remembered it all; frank tears came to his
eyes, and Martie liked him for them.

When they parted, he walked with her to the Bank door, and asked
her, if she was interested in roses, to let him drive her up some
day to see his.

"An old-fashioned garden--an old-fashioned garden!" he said, smiling
from the doorway. Martie, pleasantly stirred, went back to the
Library, to put her rose in water and congratulate herself upon her
mission.

"Poor Clifford! He will never get over his wife's death!" Lydia said
that evening. "Where'd you meet him, Mart?"

"I deposited some money in the Bank," Martie said truthfully. "He's
awfully pleasant, I think."

Lydia paid no further attention. She presently went back to another
topic. "Nelson Prout said he was going to take it up with the
Principal. He says there's no earthly reason in the world why
Dorothy shouldn't have passed this Christmas. Elsa told me Dorothy
has been crying ever since and they're worried to death about her--"

Lydia suspected no treachery. What Len and Pa had settled was
settled. She felt that Martie was merely easing her indignation when
the younger sister spent several evenings attempting to write an
article on the subject of economic independence for women. Martie
had tried to write years ago; it was a safe and ladylike amusement.

"What's it all about?" Lydia asked.

"Oh, it's practically an appeal to give girls the same chance that
boys have!"

Lydia smiled.

"But don't they HAVE it? Girls don't want it, that's all."

"Neither do boys, Lyd."

"So your idea would be to force something they didn't want on girls,
just because it's forced on boys?" Lydia said, quietly triumphant.

Martie, looking up from her scratched sheets, smiled and blinked at
her sister for a few seconds.

"Exactly!" she said then, pleasantly.

She finished the little article, and called it "Give Her A Job!" It
was only what she had attempted to express during her first return
visit to Monroe years ago; during those days and nights of fretting
when the thought of Golda White had ridden her troubled thoughts
like an evil dream. Later, she had re-written the article, just
before Wallace's return from long absence to New York. Now she wrote
it again: it was a relief to have it finally polished and finished,
and sent away in the mail. She had never before despatched it so
indifferently.

Even when the editor's brief, pleasant note was in her hand, three
weeks later, and when she had banked the check for thirty-five
dollars, Martie was not particularly thrilled. It was so small a
drop in the ocean of magazine reading--it was so short a step toward
independence! She told Miss Fanny and Sally about it, and for a
month or two watched the magazine for it. Then she forgot it.


CHAPTER IV


She forgot it for a new dream. For long before the tangled
negotiations that surrounded the sale of the old Monroe place were
completed, Martie's thoughts were absorbed by a new and tremendous
consideration: Clifford Frost was paying her noticeable attention.

Monroe saw this, of course, before she did. Without realizing it,
Martie still kept a social gulf between herself and the Frost and
Parker families. They were the richest and most prominent people in
the village, she was just one of the Monroe girls. She was too busy,
and too little given to thought of herself, to waste time on
speculations of this nature.

More than that, Lydia's deep resentment of the sale of the old home
gave Martie food for thoughts of another nature. Lydia never let the
subject rest for an instant. She came to the table red-eyed and
sniffing. It was no use to plant sweet-peas this year, it was no use
to prune the roses. Whether Lydia was sitting rocking on the side
porch silently, through the spring twilight, or impatiently flinging
a setting hen off the nest, with muttered observations concerning
the senseless scattering of the Monroe family before that setting of
eggs could be hatched, Martie felt her deep and angry disapproval.

It was several weeks, and April had clothed Monroe in buttercups and
new grass, before Martie became aware that the name of Clifford
Frost was frequently associated with Lydia's long protests.

"I suppose it's the new way of doing things," she heard her sister
saying one day. "Delicacy--! They don't know what it is nowadays. Do
as you like--run into a man's office--meet him on the steps after
church--!"

Martie felt a sudden prick. She had indeed gone more than once to
Clifford's office, and last Sunday she had indeed chanced to meet
him after church--!

"Tear away old associations!" Lydia was continuing darkly. "Slash--
chop--nothing matters! I know I am old-fashioned," she added, with a
sort of violent scorn. "But I declare it makes me laugh to remember
how dignified _I_ was--Ma used to say that it was born in me to hold
aloof! A man had to say something PRETTY DEFINITE before I was
willing to fling myself into his arms! And what's the result, I'm an
old maid--and I have myself to thank!"

"Lyddy, darling, WHAT are you driving at?"

The sisters were at supper together, on a warm spring Sunday.
Martie, removing from his greasy little hand a chop-bone that Teddy
had chewed white, looked up to see that her sister's face was pale,
and her eyes reddened with tears. Cornered, Lydia took refuge in
pathos.

"Oh--I don't know! I suppose it's just that I cannot seem to feel
that one of those bare little houses in the Estates EVER will seem
like home," faltered Lydia. "You and Pa must do as you think best,
of course--you're young and bright and full of life, and naturally
you forget--but I suppose I feel that Ma--that Ma--!"

She left the table in tears, Martie staring rather bewilderedly
after her. Teddy gazed steadily at his mother, a question in his
dark eyes. He was not a talkative child, except occasionally, when
she and he were alone, but they always understood each other. To
Martie he was the one exquisite and unalloyed joy in life. His
splendid, warm little person was at once the tie that bound her to
the old days, and to the future. Whatever that future might be, it
would bring her nothing of which she could be so proud. Nobody else
might claim him; he was hers.

He suddenly smiled at her now, and slipping from the table with a
great square of sponge cake in his hand, backed up to his mother to
have his napkin untied. He guarded his cake as best he could when
his mother suddenly beset him with a general rumpling and kissing,
and then slipped out into the yard as silently as a little rabbit.

But Martie sat on, musing, trying to catch the inference that she
knew she had missed from Lydia's tirades. Lydia was furious about
the sale of the house, of course--but this new note--?

In a rush, comprehension came. Alone in the dark old dining room, in
the disorder of the Sunday suppertable, Martie's cheeks were dyed a
bright, conscious crimson. Could Lydia mean--could Lydia possibly be
implying that Cliff--that Cliff--?

For half an hour she sat motionless--thinking. The richest--the most
respected man in Monroe, and herself engaged to him, married to him.
But could it be true?

She began to remember, to recall and dissect and analyze her recent
encounters with Clifford, and as she did so, again the warm girlish
colour flooded her cheeks with June. No questioning it, he had
rather singled her out for his companionship of late. Last Sunday,
and the Sunday before, he had come to call--once, most
considerately, the girls thought, to show Pa the plans for the new
High School, once to take Martie and Sally and the children driving.
Martie had sat next him on the front seat, during the drive, her
black veil blowing free about her wide-brimmed hat, her blue eyes
dancing with pleasure, and her cheeks rosy in the cool foggy air.

Well, she was widowed. She was free to marry again. It seemed
strange to her that in eighteen months she had never once weighed
the possibility. She had pondered every other avenue open to women;
she had considered this work and that, but marriage had not once
crossed her mind.

She said to herself that she would not allow herself to think of it
now, probably Clifford had never thought of it, and if he had, he
was notoriously slow about making up his mind. Her only course was
to be friendly and dignified, and to meet the issue when it came.

But if--but if it were her fortune to win the affections of this
man, to take her place, here among her old friends, as their leader
and head, to entertain in the old house with the cupola, under the
plumy maple and locust trees--? If Teddy might grow to a happy
boyhood, here with Sally's children, and friendly, gentle little
Ruth Frost might find a real mother in her father's young wife--?

Martie's blood danced at the thought. She hardly saw Cliff's
substantial figure and kindly face for the glamour of definite
advantages that surrounded him. She would be rich, rich enough to do
anything and everything for Sally's children, for instance. And what
pleasure and pride such a marriage would bring to Lydia, and Pa, and
Sally! And how stupefied Len would be, to have the ugly duckling
suddenly show such brilliant plumage!

She thought of Rodney and Rose. Rodney was getting stout now, he was
full of platitudes, heavy and a little tiresome. Rose was still
birdlike, still sure that what she had and did and said and desired
were the sum of earthly good. A smile twitched Martie's sober mouth
as she thought of Rose's congratulations.

Rose would give her a linen shower, with delicious damp little
sandwiches, and maple mousse, or a dainty luncheon with silk-clad,
flushed women laughing about the table. And Martie would join the
club--be its president, some day--

Meanwhile, once more she must wait. A woman's life was largely
waiting. She had waited on Rodney's young pleasure, years ago;
waited for Wallace, at rehearsals, or at night; waited for news of
Golda; waited for Teddy; and for Wallace again and again; waited for
Pa's letter and the check. Patience, Martie said to her eager heart.

Bright, sisterly, Rose presently came into the office, to put a
plump little arm about Martie, and give her a laughing kiss. Rose
had discovered that Martie was at home again, and wanted her to come
to dinner.

It was one of many little signs of the impending event. Martie had
not been blind to the whispering and watching all about her. Fanny
had subtly altered her attitude, even Sally was changed. Now came
Rose, to prove that the matter was reaching a point where it must be
taken seriously.

Martie went to the dinner, a little ashamed of herself for doing so.
Rose had ignored her for more than a year. But just now she could
not afford to ignore Rose.

She was ashamed of Lydia's innocent pride in the invitation. Sally,
too, who came to the old house to watch Martie dress, had the old
attitude. There was an unexpressed feeling in the air that Martie
was stepping up, and stepping away from them. The younger sister, in
her filmy black, with her bright hair severely banded, and her quiet
self-possession, had some element in her that they were content to
lack.

Lydia's red, clean little hands were still faintly odorous of
chopped onion, as she moved them from hook to hook. Sally wore an
old plaid coat that hung open and showed her shabby little serge
gown. The very room, where these girls had struggled with so many
inadequate garments, where they had pressed and pieced and turned a
hundred gowns, spoke to Martie of her own hungry girlhood.

A motor horn sounded outside. Rodney had come for her. He came in,
in his big coat, and shook hands with Sally and Lydia. His eyes were
on Martie as she slipped a black cloak over her floating draperies,
and the fresh white of throat and arms.

"What have you done to make yourself so pretty?" he asked gallantly,
when they were in the car.

"Am I pretty?" she asked directly, in a pleased tone.

It was a tone she could not use with Rodney. She was astonished to
have him fling his arm lightly about her shoulders for a minute.

"Just as pretty as when you broke my heart eight years ago!" he said
cheerfully. Martie was too much surprised to answer, and as he
busied himself with the turns of the road, she presently began to
speak of other things. But when they had driven into the driveway of
the new Parker house, and had stopped at the side door, he jumped
from the car, and came around it to help her out.

She felt him lightly detain her, and looked up at him curiously.

"Well, what's the matter--afraid of me?"

"No-o." Martie was a little confused. "But--but hadn't I better go
in?"

"Well--what do I get out of it?" he asked, in the old teasing voice
of the boy who had liked to play "Post-office" and "Clap-in-and-
clap-out" years ago.

But they were not children now, and there was reproach in the glance
Martie gave him as she ran up the steps.

Rose, in blue satin, fluttered to meet her and she was conveyed
upstairs on a sort of cloud of laughter and affection. Everywhere
were lights and pretty rooms; wraps were flung darkly across the
Madeira embroidery and filet-work of Rose's bed.

"Other people, Rose?"

"Just the Ellises, Martie, and the Youngers--you don't know them.
And a city man to balance Florence, and Cliff." Rose, hovering over
the dressing-table exclaimed ecstatically over Martie's hair. "You
look lovely--you want your scarf? No, you won't need it--but it's so
pretty--"

She laid an arm about Martie's waist as they went downstairs.

"You've heard that we've had trouble with the girls?" Rose said, in
a confidential whisper. "Yes. Ida and May--after all Rodney had done
for them, too! He did EVERYTHING. It was over a piece of property
that their grandfather had left their father--I don't know just what
the trouble was! But you won't mention them to Rod--?"

Everything was perfection, of course. There were cocktails, served
in the big drawing room, with its one big rug, and its Potocka and
le Brun looking down from the tinted walls. Martie sat between
Rodney and the strange man, who was unresponsive.

Rodney, warmed by a delicious dinner, became emotional.

"That was a precious friendship of ours, to me, Martie," he said.
"Just our boy-and-girl days, but they were happy days! I remember
waking up in the mornings and saying to myself, 'I'll see Martie to-
day!' Yes," said Rodney, putting down his glass, his eyes watering,
"that's a precious memory to me--very."

"Is Rodney making love to you, Martie?" Rose called gaily, "he does
that to every one--he's perfectly terrible!"

"How many children has Sally now?" Florence Frost, sickly,
emaciated, asked with a sort of cluck.

"Four," Martie answered, smiling.

"Gracious!" Florence said, drawing her shawl about her.

"Poor Sally!" Rose said, with the merry laugh that accompanied
everything she said.

Cliff did not talk to Martie at all, nor to any of the other women.
He and the other men talked politics after dinner, in real country
fashion. The women played a few rubbers of bridge, and Rose had not
forgotten a prize, in tissue-paper and pink ribbon. The room grew
hot, and the men's cigars scented the close air thickly.

Rose said that she supposed she should be able to offer Martie a
cigarette.

"It would be my first," Martie said, smiling, and Rose, giving her
shoulders a quick little impulsive squeeze, said brightly: "Good for
you! New York hasn't spoiled YOU!".

When at eleven o'clock Martie went upstairs for her wraps, Rose
came, too, and they had a word in private, in the pretty bedroom.

"Martie--did Cliff say that you and he were going on a--on a sort of
picnic on Sunday?"

"Why, yes," Martie admitted, surprised, "Sally is going down to the
city to see Joe, and I'll have the children. I happened to mention
it to Cliff, and he suggested that he take us all up to Deegan's
Point, and that we take a lunch."

Innocently commenced, the sentence ended with sudden self-
consciousness. Martie, putting a scarf over her bronze hair saw her
own scarlet cheeks in the mirror.

"Yes, I know!" Rose cocked her head on one side, like a pretty bird.
"Well, now, I have a plan!" she said gaily, "I suggest that Cliff
take his car, and we take ours, and the Ellises theirs, and we all
go--children and all! Just a real old-fashioned family picnic."

"I think that would be fun," Martie said, with a slow smile.

"I think it would be fun, too," Rose agreed, "and I've been sort of
half-planning something of the sort, anyway! And--perhaps, just
now," she added sweetly, "it would be a little wiser that way. You
see, _I_ understand you, Martie, and I know we seem awfully small
and petty here, but--since we ARE in Monroe, why, isn't it better
not to give any one a chance to talk? Well, about the picnic! Ida
and May always bring cake; I'll take the fried chicken; and Mrs.
Ellis makes a delicious salad--"

Martie's heart was beating high, and two little white lines marked
the firm closing of her lips. Rose's brightly flung suggestion as to
the impropriety of her going off for the day with Clifford, Teddy,
and Ruth, was seething like a poison within her. But presently she
was mechanically promising sandwiches, and Rose was so far
encouraged that she could give Martie's arm a little squeeze in
farewell.

It had seemed such a natural thing to propose, when Sally announced
that she was to go down to San Francisco for the day. Martie had
asked for the two older children, and had in all innocence suggested
to Clifford that they make it a picnic. She carried all day a
burning resentment of Rose's interference, and something like anger
at him for consulting Rose.

But she showed nothing. She duly kissed Rose, and thanked her for
the lovely dinner, and Rodney took her home. Undressing, with
moonlight pouring in two cool triangles on the shabby carpet, Martie
yawned. The whole experience had been curiously flat, except for
Rose's little parting impertinence. But there was no question about
it, it had had its heartening significance! It was the future Mrs.
Clifford Frost who had been entertained to-night.

Plans for the picnic proceeded rapidly, and Martie knew, as they
progressed, that she need only give Cliff his opportunity that day
to enter into her kingdom. His eagerness to please her, his
unnecessary calls at the Library to discuss the various details, and
the little hints and jests that fluttered about her on all sides,
were a sure clue.

The morning came when the Frost's big car squeaked down the raw
driveway from Clipper Lane, with little Ruth, in starched pink
gingham, beaming on the back seat. Martie, in white, with a daisy-
crowned hat mashed down over her bright hair, came out from the
shadow of the side porch, the children and boxes were duly
distributed: they were off.

Martie glanced back to see Lydia's slender form, in a severe gray
percale, under one of the lilacs in the side yard. Mary and Jim
Hawkes were with her: they all waved hands. Lydia had shaded her
face with her fingers, and was blinking in the warm June sunlight.
Poor Lydia, Martie thought, she should have been beside Cliff on
this front seat, she should have been the happy mother of a sturdy
Cliff and Lydia, where Ruth and Teddy and the Hawkes children were
rioting in the tonneau.

They went to the Parkers', where the other cars had gathered: there
was much laughing and running about in the bright sunlight. The day
would be hot--ideal picnic weather. Rodney, directing everybody,
managed to get close to Martie, who was stacking coats in the car.

"Like old times, Martie! Remember our picnics and parties?"

Martie glanced at him quickly, and smiled a little doubtfully. She
found nothing to say.

"I often look back," Rodney went on. I'm from Missouri, my boy.

DR. JONATHAN. Then you're a true scientist, Asher, for science, too,
waits to be shown.

(ASHER goes out, lower right. Dr. JONATHAN, evidently in support
and sympathy, goes with him. GEORGE and the committee look after them,
and then GEORGE sits down, and smiles at the men.)
GEORGE.

And we've got to be scientists, too. Are you fellows willing to take
your share in the experiment?

HILLMAN. What experiment's that, Captain?

GEORGE. Now that you've got your union, what's the good of it?

RENCH (after a pause).

Why, I thought we'd made that pretty clear, Captain.

We've got something to fall back on in case the employers don't live
up to their agreements.

I'm not speaking of you--

GEORGE. In other words, you've got a weapon.

RENCH. Well, you might call it that.

GEORGE.

But weapons imply warfare,--don't they?

RENCH. We wouldn't fight with you.

GEORGE. Yes, you would,--if our interests conflicted. When I was in
the trenches I kept thinking of the quotation Lincoln used, "A
house divided against itself cannot stand."

We're going to try to perpetuate that house, just as he did.

HILLMAN. Lincoln had common sense.

GEORGE. Another name for intelligence.

And what we've got to decide is whether the old house will do--for
democracy--industrial democracy? Can we shore up the timbers--or
shall we have to begin to build a new house?

RENCH (glancing at HILLMAN). The old one sure enough looks rotten to
me.
I've said that all along.

GEORGE. It seems to have served its day. Has your union got the
plans of a new house ready--consulted an architect?

RENCH. I'm afraid we don't get you, Captain.

GEORGE.

You belong to the American Federation of Labour, don't you?
Has it got a new house ready to move into?

RENCH. Well, I haven't seen any plans.

GEORGE. If the old structure's too small, one party or the other will
have to be shoved out. The capitalist or the employee. Which will
it be?

RENCH (laughing). If it comes to that--
GEORGE (smiling). There's no question in your mind.

But you hadn't thought about it--your Federation hasn't thought
about it, or doesn't want to think about it, and your employers
don't want to, either.

HILLMAN (stroking his moustache).

That's so

GEORGE. I'll tell you who have thought about it--the Bolshevists and
the I. W. W. And because they have a programme,--some programme, any
programme, they're more intelligent than we, for the time.

RENCH. Those guys?

GEORGE. Exactly,--those guys.

At least they see that the house isn't fit to live in.

They want to pull it down, and go back to living in trees and
caves.

HILLMAN. That's about right.

GEORGE. But you're conservatives, you labour union people--the
aristocrats of labour, which means that you don't think. What you
really object to, when you come down to it, is that men like my father
and me, and the bankers,--we're all in the same boat, most of 'us
own banks, too,--control the conditions of life for you and men
like you.

RENCH. I never heard it put in those words, but by gum, it's so.

GEORGE. And your Confederation, your unions are for the skilled
workers, whose conditions aren't so bad,--and they're getting
better every time you jack up the wages.

You complain that we employers aren't thinking of you, but are you
thinking of the millions of the unskilled who live from hand to
mouth?

The old structure's good enough for you, too. But what will
the miserable men, who don't sit in, be doing while we're squabbling
to see who'll have the best rooms?

RENCH. Blow the house up, I guess.

GEORGE. If they're rough with it, it'll tumble down like a pack of
cards--simply because we're asses. Can't we build a house big enough
for all--for a hundred million people and their descendants?

A house in which, after a while, there will be no capitalists and no
exploiters and no wreckers, only workers--each man and woman on the
job they were fitted for? It's a man-sized job, but isn't it worth
tackling?

RENCH (enthused). It's sure worth tackling, Captain.

GEORGE. And can't we begin it, in a modest way, by making a little
model of the big house right here in Foxon Falls? Dr. Jonathan will
help us.

RENCH. Go to it, Captain. We'll trust him and you.

GEORGE. Trust is all right, but you've got to go to it, too, and use
your headpieces. We've got to sit down together and educate ourselves,
who are now employers and employees, get hold of all the
facts, the statistics,--and all the elements, the human nature
side of it, from the theorists, the students, whom we've despised.

RENCH. Well, it's a fact, I hadn't thought much of them intellectuals.

GEORGE. They're part of the game--their theories are the basis for
an intelligent practice. And what should we be able to do without
their figures?

Look at what we've worked out in large scale production and distribution
in this war! That's a new world problem. Shall we be pioneers here
in Foxon Falls in the new experiment?

RENCH. An experiment in human chemicals, as the doctor would say.
Pioneers! I kind of like that word. You can put me in the wagon,
Captain.

GEORGE. It will be a Conestoga with the curtains rolled up, so that
everybody can see in. No secrets. And it will be a wagon with an
industrial constitution.

FERSEN. Excuse me, Captain,--but what's that?

(RENCH laughs.)
GEORGE (smiling).

Hasn't it struck you, Fersen, that unless a man has a voice and an
interest in the industry in which he works his voice, and interest
in the government for which he votes is a mockery?

(FERSEN nods.)

RENCH.

We'll have to give Larz a little education.

GEORGE. Oh, I guess he'll make a good industrial citizen. But that's
part of the bargain.

RENCH. That's fair. Human nature ain't so rotten, when you give it a
chance.

GEORGE. Well, then, are you willing to try it out, on the
level?

RENCH. I cal'late we'll stick, Captain.

HILLMAN. We sure will.

FERSEN. We'll be pioneers!

GEORGE. That's good American, Fersen, not to be afraid of an
ideal.
Shake! We'll sit down with it in a day or two.

(They all shake. The members of the committee file out of the room,
lower right. GEORGE is left alone for a brief interval, when
MINNIE, in the white costume of a nurse, enters, lower right, with
a glass of medicine in her hand.)
MINNIE (halting).

You're all alone? Where's Dr. Jonathan?

GEORGE. He's gone off with dad.

MINNIE. It's nine o'clock.

(She hands him the glass, he drinks the contents and sets the
glass on the table. Then he takes her hands and draws her to him and
kisses her. She submits almost passively.)
Why are you doing this, George?

GEORGE. Because I love you, because I need you, because I'm going
to marry you.

MINNIE (shaking her head: slowly). No you're not.

GEORGE. Why not?

MINNIE. You know why not, as well as I do.

(She gazes up at him. He is still holding her in his arms.
Suddenly she kisses him passionately, breaks away from him and
starts to fly from the room, when she runs into DR.

JONATHAN, who is entering, lower right.)
DR. JONATHAN. Where are you going, Minnie?

(MINNIE halts, and is silent.

DR. JONATHAN lays a detaining hand on her arm, and looks from one to
the other, comprehendingly.)
GEORGE. I've asked her to marry me, Dr. Jonathan.

DR. JONATHAN. And what are your objections, Minnie?

MINNIE.

You know why I can't, Dr. Jonathan. What kind of a wife would I make
for him, with his family and friends. I'd do anything for him but
that! He wouldn't be happy.

DR. JONATHAN. And what's your answer, George?

GEORGE. I don't want her for my family and friends,--I want her for
myself.

This isn't a snap judgment--I've had time to think it over.

MINNIE. I didn't mean to be here when you got home. I know I'm
not fit to be your wife I haven't had any education.

GEORGE. Neither have I. We start level there. I've lived among people
of culture, and I've found out that culture chiefly consists of
fixed ideas, and obstruction to progress, of hating the
President,--of knowing the right people and eating fish with a
fork.

MINNIE (smiling, though in tears). Well, I never ate fish with a
knife, anyway.

GEORGE. I spent my valuable youth learning Greek and Latin, and I
can't speak or read either of them.

I know that Horace wrote odes, and Cicero made orations, but I
can't quote them. All I remember about biology is that the fittest
are supposed to survive, and in this war I've seen the fittest killed
off like flies. You've had several years of useful work in the
Pindar Shops and the Wire Works, to say nothing of a course in
biological chemistry, psychology and sociology under Dr. Jonathan.
I'll leave it to him whether you don't know more about life than I
do--about the life and problems of the great mass of people in this
country. And now that the strike's over--
MINNIE. The strike's over!

GEORGE. Yes. I've chosen my life. It isn't going to be divided between
a Wall Street office and Newport and Palm Beach. A girl out of a
finishing school wouldn't be of any use to me. I'm going to stay
right here in Foxon Falls, Minnie, I've got a real job on my
hands, and I need a real woman with special knowledge to help me. I
don't mean to say we won't have vacations, and we'll sit down and get
our education together.
Dr. Jonathan will be the schoolmaster.

MINNIE. It's a dream, George.

GEORGE. Well, Minnie, if it's a dream worth dying for it's a dream
worth living for.

Your brother Bert died for it.

CURTAIN

PG EDITOR'S BOOKMARKS:

Economic freedom, without which political freedom is a farce Flaming
flag of a false martyrdom It's money that makes you free Often
times principles is nothing but pride We can't take Christianity
too literally

A TRAVELLER IN WARTIME.

By Winston Churchill

PREFACE
I am reprinting here, in response to requests, certain recent
experiences in Great Britain and France.

These were selected in the hope of conveying to American readers
some idea of the atmosphere, of "what it is like" in these countries
under the immediate shadow of the battle clouds.
It was what I myself most wished to know. My idea was first to send
home my impressions while they were fresh, and to refrain as far
as possible from comment and judgment until I should have had time
to make a fuller survey. Hence I chose as a title for these
articles,--intended to be preliminary, "A Traveller in War-Time."
I tried to banish from my mind all previous impressions gained from
reading. I wished to be free for the moment to accept and record
the chance invitation or adventure, wherever met with, at the Front,
in the streets of Paris, in Ireland, or on the London omnibus. Later
on, I hoped to write a book summarizing the changing social conditions
as I had found them.
Unfortunately for me, my stay was unexpectedly cut short. I was
able to avail myself of but few of the many opportunities offered.
With this apology, the articles are presented as they were written.
I have given the impression that at the time of my visit there was
no lack of food in England, but I fear that I have not done justice
to the frugality of the people, much of which was self-imposed for
the purpose of helping to win the war. On very, good authority I
have been given to understand that food was less abundant during
the winter just past; partly because of the effect of the severe
weather on our American railroads, which had trouble in getting
supplies to the coast, and partly because more and more ships were
required for transporting American troops and supplies for these
troops, to France. This additional curtailment was most felt by
families of small income, whose earners were at the front or away
on other government service. Mothers had great difficulty in getting
adequate nourishment for growing children. But the British people
cheerfully submitted to this further deprivation. Summer is at hand.
It is to be hoped that before another winter sets in, American and
British shipping will have sufficiently increased to remedy the
situation.
In regard to what I have said of the British army, I was profoundly
struck, as were other visitors to that front, by the health and
morale of the men, by the marvel of organization accomplished in
so comparatively brief a time. It was one of the many proofs of the
extent to which the British nation had been socialized. When one
thought of that little band of regulars sent to France in 1914, who
became immortal at Mons, who shared the glory of the Marne, and in
that first dreadful winter held back the German hosts from the
Channel ports, the presence on the battle line of millions of
disciplined and determined men seemed astonishing indeed. And this
had been accomplished by a nation facing the gravest crisis in its
history, under the necessity of sustaining and financing many allies
and of protecting an Empire. Since my return to America a serious
reverse has occurred.
After the Russian peace, the Germans attempted to overwhelm the
British by hurling against them vastly superior numbers of highly
trained men.
It is for the military critic of the future to analyse any tactical
errors that may have been made at the second battle of the
Somme.
Apparently there was an absence of preparation, of specific orders
from high sources in the event of having to cede ground. This much
can be said, that the morale of the British Army remains unimpaired;
that the presence of mind and ability of the great majority of the
officers who, flung on their own resources, conducted the retreat,
cannot be questioned; while the accomplishment of General Carey,
in stopping the gap with an improvised force of non-combatants,
will go down in history.
In an attempt to bring home to myself, as well as to my readers, a
realization of what American participation in this war means or
should mean.

A TRAVELLER IN WAR-TIME 
CHAPTER I
Toward the end of the summer of 1917 it was very hot in New York,
and hotter still aboard the transatlantic liner thrust between the
piers.
One glance at our cabins, at the crowded decks and dining-room, at
the little writing-room above, where the ink had congealed in the
ink-wells, sufficed to bring home to us that the days of luxurious
sea travel, of a la carte restaurants, and Louis Seize bedrooms
were gone--at least for a period. The prospect of a voyage of nearly
two weeks was not enticing.
The ship, to be sure, was far from being the best of those still
running on a line which had gained a magic reputation of immunity
from submarines; three years ago she carried only second and third
class passengers! But most of us were in a hurry to get to the
countries where war had already become a grim and terrible reality.
In one way or another we had all enlisted.
By "we" I mean the American passengers. The first welcome discovery
among the crowd wandering aimlessly and somewhat disconsolately
about the decks was the cheerful face of a friend whom at first I
did not recognize because of his amazing disguise in uniform.Rose,
instantly suspicious, was presently told of it, and Martie's sisters
and Rose planned an announcement luncheon for early July. Martie
thought she would really be glad when the fuss and flurry was over.

Long familiar with money scarcity, she wondered sometimes just what
her financial arrangement with her new husband would be. Clifford
was the richest man in Monroe. Not a shop would refuse her credit;
nor a woman in town feel so sure of her comfort and safety.

But what else? Bitter as her long dependence had been, and widowed
and experienced as she was, she dared not ask. There was something
essentially indelicate in any talk of an allowance now. She would
probably do what was done by almost all the wives she knew: charge,
spend little, and when she must have money, approach her husband at
breakfast or dinner: "Oh, Clifford, I need about ten dollars. For
the man who fixed the surrey, dear, and then if I take all the
children in to the moving pictures, they'll want ice-cream. And I
ought to send flowers to Rose; we don't charge there. Although I
suppose I could send some of our own roses just as well!"

And Clifford, like other husbands, would take less money than was
suggested from his pocket and say: "How's seven? You can have more
if you want it, but I haven't any more here! But if you like, send
Ruth down to the Bank--"

"What a fool I am!" Martie mused. "What does independence amount to,
anyway? If I ever had it, I'd probably be longing to get back into
shelter again.

"Teddy, do you understand that Mother is going to marry Uncle
Cliff?" she asked the child. He rested his little body against her,
one arm about her neck, as he stood beside her chair.

"Yes, Mother," he answered unenthusiastically. After a second's
thought he began to twist a white button on her blouse. "And then
are we going back to New York?" he asked.

"No, Loveliness, we stay here." She looked at the child's downcast
face. "Why, Teddy?" she urged.

Ever since he could speak at all, he had had a fashion of whispering
to her anything that seemed to him especially important or precious,
even when, as now, they were quite alone. He put his lips to her
ear.

"What is it, dearest? I can't hear you!"

"I said," he said softly, his lips almost touching her cheek, "that
I would like to go back to New York just with you, and have you take
me out in the snow again, and have you let me make chocolate
custard, the way you always did--for just our own supper, our two
selves. I like all my aunts and every one here, but I get lonesome."

"Lonesome?" she echoed, trying to laugh over a little pang.

"Lonesome--for you!" he answered simply. Martie caught him to her
and smothered him in her embrace.

"You little troubadour!" she laughed, with her kiss.

The three sisters had never been so much together in their lives as
they were when the time came to demolish the old home. Sally, with a
train of dancing children, came up every morning after breakfast,
and she and Martie and Lydia patiently plodded through store-rooms,
attics, and closets that had not been disturbed for years.

Lydia's constant cry was: "Ah, don't destroy that; I remember that
ever since I was a baby!" Sally was more apt to say: "I believe I
could use this; it's old, but it could be put in order cheaper than
buying new!" Martie was the iconoclast.

"Now here's this great roll of silk from Grandmother Price's wedding
dress; what earthly good is this to any one?" she would demand
briskly. "And here's the patchwork quilt Ma started when Len was a
baby, with all the patches pinned together! Why should we keep these
things? And Lydia's sketch-books, when she was taking lessons, and
the old air-tight stove, and Pa's brother's dentist chair--it's
hopelessly old-fashioned now! And what about these piles and piles
of Harper's and Scribner's, and the broken washstand that was in
Belle's, room and the curtains, that used to be in the back hall? I
move we have a bonfire and keep it going all day--"

"I'd forgotten that the old rocking-horse was here," Sally said one
day, with pleasure. "The boys will love it! And do you know, Lyd, I
was thinking that this little table with the leg mended and painted
white wouldn't be a bit bad in my hall. I really need a table there,
for Joe brings in his case, or the children get the mail--we'd have
lots of use for it. And here's the bedside table, that's an awfully
good thing to have, because in case of illness--"

"Heavens!" said Martie. "She's trying to break something to us; she
suspects that there may be an illness some day in her house--"

"Oh, I do not!" said Sally, flushing and giggling in the old way.

"Len's first little suit," Lydia mused. "Dear me--dear me! And this
old table-cover; I remember when that was new! And here are Aunt
Carrie's things; she sent Ma a great box of them when she died;
look, Sally, the old-fashioned sleeves with fibre-chamois in them!
This box is full of hats; this was my Merry Widow hat; it was always
so pretty I hated to destroy it, but I suppose it really isn't much
good! I wonder if some poor woman could use it. And these are all
old collars of Pa's and Len's--it seems a shame to throw them away.
I wonder if we could find some one who wears this size? Martie,
don't throw that coat over there in the pile for the fire--it's a
good piece of serge, and that cape style may come in again!"

Absorbed and interested, the three worked among memories. Sometimes
for an hour at a time there was silence in the attic. Martie, with a
faded pink gingham dress spread across her lap, would be eight
again, trotting off to school with Sally, and promising Ma to hold
Len's hand when they crossed Main Street. How clean and trim, how
ready for the day, she had felt, when her red braid was tied with a
brown ribbon, and this little garment firmly buttoned down the back,
and pressed with a great sweep of Ma's arms to crush the too stiffly
starched skirt!

Sally observed amusedly, perhaps a little pityingly, that Lydia
wanted everything. There was nothing in the old house for which
Lydia did not expect to have immediate need in the new. This little
table for the porch, this extra chair for the maid's room, this
mirror, this mattress, this ladder. The older sister reserved enough
furniture to fill the new house twice over; she would presently pack
the new rooms with cumbersome, useless possessions, and go to her
death believing herself the happier for having them.


CHAPTER V


The Eastern editor who had taken her first article presently wrote
her again. Martie treasured his letter with burning, secret pride,
and with perhaps a faint, renunciatory pang. She had pushed in her
opening wedge at last, too late! For no trifling literary success
could change the destined course of Mrs. Clifford Frost.

This was the letter:

DEAR MRS. BANNISTER: We are constantly receiving more letters from
women who read "Give Her A Job," and find that what you had to say
upon an apparently well-worn subject struck a most responsive chord.
Can you not give us another two thousand words upon this, or a
similar subject? This type of article is always most welcome.

That was all. But it inspired Martie to try again. After all, even
as a rich man's wife, she might amuse herself in this way as well as
another.

Between the move from the old house, her wedding plans, the claims
of her husband-to-be, and the Library work, she was busy now, every
instant of the day. Yet she found time, as only a busy woman can,
for writing, and put a new ardour into her attempts, because of the
little beginning of encouragement. Hoping and fearing, she presently
sent a second article on its way.

One July evening she stayed rather late at the Library working on a
report. Clifford was delayed in Pittsville, and would not see her
until after dinner; the rare opportunity was too precious to lose.
In a day or two all Monroe would know of her new plans: in six weeks
she would be Clifford's wife.

When the orderly sheets had been put into a long envelope, Martie
pinned on her white hat, and stepped into the level rays of sunset
light that were pouring into Main Street. The little fruit stand
opposite seemed wilted in the heat; hot little summer breezes were
tossing chaff and papers about the street.

Martie's eyes instantly found an unexpected sight: a low, rakish
motor car drawn up to the curb. She had not seen it before in
Monroe, nor did she recognize the man who sat on the seat next the
driver's seat, with his hat pulled over his eyes.

The driver, a handsome big fellow of perhaps forty or more, had just
jumped from the car, and now came toward her. She smiled into a
clever, unfamiliar face that yet seemed oddly recognizable. He asked
her something.

"I beg your pardon?" she had to say, her eyes moving quickly from
him to his companion, who had turned about in the seat, and was
watching them. Her heart stopped beating for a second, then,
commenced to race. Her colour rose in a radiant flood. With three
swift steps she had passed the big man, and was at the curb, and
leaning over the car.

"John--!" she stammered. "My dear--my dear!"

The man in the car turned upon her the smile she knew so well: a
child's half-merry, half-wistful smile, from sea-blue eyes in fair
lashes. Time vanished, and Martie felt that she might have seen it
yesterday; have felt yesterday the muscular grip of John Dryden's
hand. Bewildered at their own emotion, laughing and confused, their
fingers clung together.

"Hello--Martie!" he said, in a shaken voice, his blue eyes suddenly
blazing as he saw her. Martie's eyes were wet, her delight turning
her cheeks to rose. John did not speak, unless his burning eyes
spoke; and Martie for a few minutes was hardly intelligible. It was
the stranger who spoke.

"I'm Dean Silver, Mrs. Bannister--you don't have to be introduced to
me, because I know John here. You're his favourite topic, you know."

"Dean Silver!" Martie smiled bewilderedly at the novelist; she knew
that name! He was a writer with twenty books to his credit. He had a
ranch somewhere in California; he spent his winters there. Some hazy
recollection struggled for recognition.

"But, John!" she laughed. "Here in Monroe! My dear, you'll never
know what it meant to glance up and see you--and you look so well!
And you're famous, too; isn't it wonderful! And, tell me, what
brings you to California!"

The quick, authoritative glance was delightfully familiar, yet
somehow new.

"Why, you brought me, of course, Martie," he said unsmilingly, as if
any other supposition would have been absurd. He had not spoken
before; she knew now that she had hungered for his rather deep,
ready voice. Her colour came up, her heart gave a curious twist, and
she dropped her eyes.

"Dryden and I have been batching it together in New York," said Dean
Silver. "My wife's been here since April with her mother and our
kid. When I came on, I got Dryden here to come, too. They want me to
take a long sea trip: I hope you'll help me persuade him to come,
too. He's trying to double-cross me on it, I think. He said he'd
come as far as California, and then see how things looked. So we
shipped the car last month, and left New York a week ago to-day."

"Well, Monroe is honoured," Martie smiled, amused, fluttered, a
little confused by this open recognition of John's feeling. "But now
that you're here, I don't know quite what to do with you!"

"There's a hotel?" asked the novelist.

"Oh, it's not that. I'm only anxious to make the most of you," said
Martie. "We've more than enough room at our house! But, like poor
Fanny Squeers, I do so palpitate!"

"Palpitate away!" said Dean Silver. "We're in your hands. You can
send us off right now, or let us take you to dinner somewhere, or
direct us to the hotel--for three thousand miles our main idea was
to find you, and we've done it!"

"Well, but JOHN!" Martie was still dazed and exulting. "It's so GOOD
to see you!"

"I had to see you," he said, in his simple way, his eyes never
leaving her.

"But now, let me plan!" she said, with an excited laugh. "If you'll
let me get in the car with you, and--and let me see, we'd better get
something extra for company--"

"Now, that's just what you shan't do," Dean Silver said decisively.
"I don't propose to have you--"

"Oh, she likes it," John assured him, with his dreamy air that was
yet so positive. "Don't waste time, Dean."

Martie laughed; John sat between herself and the novelist in the
wide seat. He turned his head so that she was always under the fire
of his adoring eyes. And in the old way he laughed, thrilled,
exulted in everything she said

Half an hour later, as gaily as if she had known them both all her
life, she introduced them to Pa. Pa, whose youngest daughter was
just now in high favour, was mildly pleased with the invasion. This
impromptu hospitality smacked of prosperity, of worldliness. He went
stiffly into the study with John, to bore the poet with an old
volume about California: "From the Padres to the Pioneers."

Martie, cheerfully setting the dining table, kept a brisk
conversation moving with Dean Silver, who sat smoking on the side
porch.

Presently she came put with an empty glass bowl, which she set down
beside him. He followed her down into the tipsy brick paths, under
the willows, while she gathered velvet wallflowers to fill it.

"You're very clever at this village sort of thing," the writer said.
"And I must say I like it myself. Old-fashioned street full of kids
streaming in for ice-cream, garden with stocks and what-you-call-
'ems all blooming together--you know, I had a sort of notion you
weren't half as nice as you are!"

Martie laughed, pleased at the frank audacity.

"You fit into it all so pleasantly!" he expanded his thought.

"I don't know why you say that," she answered, surprised. "I was
born here. I belong here. I lived for years in New York without
being able to demonstrate that I could do anything better!"

"Dryden has a great idea of what you can do," Silver suggested.

"Oh, well, John!" she laughed maternally. "If you've been listening
to John--"

"I've HAD to listen to him," the novelist said mildly.

"Tell me," she said suddenly, "I don't want to say the awkward thing
to him--has he got his divorce?"

He looked at her, amazed.

"Don't you correspond?"

"Twice a year, perhaps."

Dean Silver flung away his cigarette, and sunk his hands in his
pockets.

"Certainly he's divorced," he said briefly.

Martie's heart thumped. The flowers in her hands, she stood staring
away from him, unseeing.

"I hope you'll forgive me--I feel like a fool touching the thing at
all," Dean Silver said, after a silence. "But I thought that there
was some sort of an understanding between you."

"Oh, no!" Martie half-whispered, with a fluttered breath.

"There isn't?" he asked, in a tone of keen protest.

"Oh, no!"

The novelist whistled a few notes and shrugged his shoulders.

"Well, then, there isn't," he said philosophically. He stooped to
pick a fragrant spike of mignonette, and put it in his buttonhole.
When he began speaking again, he did not look at Martie. "A few of
us have come to know Dryden well, this winter," he said gravely.
"He's a rare fellow, Mrs. Bannister--a big man, and he's got his
field to himself. You wouldn't believe me if I told you what a fuss
they've been making over him--back there, and how little it matters
to him. He's going a long way. You--you've got to be kind to him, my
dear girl."

"I'm a Catholic, and he's a divorced man," Martie said, turning
troubled eyes toward him. "I never thought of him in that way!"

Dean Silver raised his eyebrows.

"People are still believing that sort of thing, are they?"

"Only about a hundred million!" she answered, drily in her turn.

The man laughed shortly.

"Sweet complication!" he observed.

"More than that," Martie said hurriedly, "I'm engaged to be married
to the president of the bank here, in about six weeks!"

Their eyes met steadily for a full minute.

"I devoutly trust you are not serious?" said Dean Silver then.

"Oh, but I am!" she said, with a nervous laugh.

For answer he merely shrugged his shoulders again. In silence they
turned toward the house.

"That is an actual settled fact, is it?" Silver asked, when they
were at the steps.

"Why, yes!" Martie answered, feeling a strange inclination toward
tears. "I've been here for a year and a half," she added lamely.
"I've not seen John--I tell you I never thought of him as anything
but Adele's husband! And Clifford--the man I am to marry--is a good
man, and it means a home for life for my boy and me--and it means
the greatest pleasure to my father and sisters--"

"I think I never heard such a damnable set of reasons for a
beautiful woman's marriage!" Silver said, as she paused.

Martie could find no answer. She was excited, bewildered, thrilled,
all at once. She felt that another word would be too much. Silently
she picked up her bowl and her flowers, and crossed the porch to the
house.

Lydia, coming in late from a meeting of the Fair Committee, was
speechless. In a pregnant silence she lent cold aid to her audacious
sister. The big bed in Len's room was made, the bureau spread with a
clean, limp towel. Pauline was interviewed; she brightened. Dean
Silver was from Prince Edward's Island, too, it seemed. Pauline
could make onion soup, and rolls were set, thanks be! She could open
preserves; she didn't suppose that sliced figs were good enough for
a company dessert.

They had the preserves, and the white figs, too; figs that Teddy and
Martie had knocked that morning from the big tree in the yard. Lydia
noticed with resentment that Pa had really brightened perceptibly
under the unexpected stimulus. It was Lydia who said mildly, almost
reproachfully, "I'm sorry that I have to give you a rather small
napkin, Mr. Dryden; we had company to dinner last night, and I find
we're a little short--"

John hardly heard her; he saw nothing but Martie, and only rarely
moved his eyes from her, or spoke to any one else. He glowed at her
lightest word, laughed at her mildest pleasantry; he frequently
asked her family if she was not "wonderful."

This was the attitude of that old lover of her dreams, and in spite
of amusement and trepidation and nervous consciousness that she was
hopelessly entangling her affairs, Martie's heart began to swell,
and her senses to feel creeping over their alertness a deadly and
delicious languor. She had been powerless all her life: she thrilled
to the knowledge of her power now.

Dean Silver easily kept the conversation moving. They learned that
he had been overworking, had been warned by his physician that he
must take a rest. So he and John were off for the Orient: he himself
had always wanted to sail up the Nile, and to see Benares.

"John, what a year in fairyland!" Martie exclaimed.

"Well, that's what I tell him," said the novelist. "But he isn't at
all sure he wants to go!"

As John merely gave Martie an unmistakable look at this, she tried
hurriedly for a careless answer.

"John, you would be mad not to go!"

"You and I will talk it over after awhile," he suggested, with an
enigmatic smile.

This was terrible. Martie gave one startled look at Lydia, who had
compressed her mouth into a thin line of disapproval. Lydia was
obviously thinking of Cliff, who might come in later. Martie found
herself unable to think of Cliff.

They had coffee in the garden, in the still summer dusk. Teddy
rioted among the bushes, as alert and strategic as was his gray
kitten. John sat silent beside Martie, and whenever she glanced at
him she met his deep smile. Lydia preserved a forbidding silence,
but Malcolm's suspicions of his younger daughter were pleasantly
diverted by the novelist. Dean Silver was probing into the early
history of the State.

"But there must have been silver and gold mines up as far as this,
then; aren't you in the gold belt?"

"In the year 1858," Malcolm began carefully, "a company was formed
here for the purpose of investigating the claims made by--"

John finished his coffee with a gulp, and walked across the dim
grass to Martie, and she rose without a word.

"Martie, isn't it Teddy's bedtime?" asked Lydia. John frowned
faintly at her.

"Can't you put him to bed?" he asked directly. Lydia's cool cheek
flushed.

"Why, yes--I will--" she answered confusedly. Martie called her
thanks over her shoulder as they walked away. She was reminded of
the day she had called on John at his office.

Quick and shaken, the beating of her heart bewildered her; she
hardly knew where they walked, or how they began to talk. The
velvety summer night was sweet with flowers; the moon would be late,
but the sky was high and dark, and thick with stars. In the silver
glimmer the town lights, and the dim eye of the dairy, far up on the
range, burned red. Children were shouting somewhere, and dogs
barking; now and then the other mingled noises were cut across by
the clear, mellow note of a motor car's horn.

They came to the lumber-yard by the river, and went in among the
shadowy piles of planks. The starry dome was arched, infinitely far
and yet friendly, above them; the air here was redolent of the clean
wood. From houses near by, but out of sight beyond the high wall,
they heard occasional voices: a child was called, a wire-door
slammed. But they were alone.

John was instantly all the acknowledged if not the accepted lover.
Once fairly inside the fence, she found her heart beating madly
against his own; as tall as he, she tried to deny him her lips. Her
arms were pinioned. Man and woman breathed fast.

"Martie--my wonderful--my beautiful--girl! I never lived until now!"
he said after a silence.

"But, John--John--" He had taken her off her guard; she was
stammering like a school-girl. "Please, dear, you mustn't--not now.
I want to talk to you--I must. Won't you wait until we have had a
talk--please--you're frightening me!"

His hold was instantly loosed.

"My dearest child, I wouldn't frighten you for anything in the
world. Let us have the talk--here, climb up here! It was only--
realizing--what I've been dreaming about all these months! I'm flesh
and blood, you know, dear. I shall not feel myself alive--you know
that!--until you are in my arms, my own--my wife."

She had seated herself on the top of the pile; now he sat on the
ledge that was a few inches lower, and laid his arms across her
knees, so that his hands were clasped in both her own. Her senses
were swimming, her heart itself seemed turned to liquid fire, and
ran trembling through her body.

"My wife!" John said, eager eyes fairly devouring her. "My glorious
wife, the loveliest woman in the world! Do you know what it means,
Martie? Do you know what it means, after what we both have known?"

The sight of his wistful, daring smile in the starlight, the touch
of his big, eager hands, and the sound of the odd, haunting voice
turned the words to magic. She tightened her fingers on his.

"I bought the Connecticut house on the river," he said presently.
"It belonged to a carpenter, a fine fellow; but the railroad doesn't
go there, and he and his wife wanted to go to a bigger place. Silver
and I went up and saw it, but I didn't want to do anything until you
came. But there are rocks, you know--" Hearing something between a
laugh and a sigh, he stopped short. "Rocks," he repeated, "you know
all those places are rocky!"

"I know, dearest boy!"

The term overwhelmed him. She heard him try to go on; he choked,
glanced at her smilingly, and shook his head. A second later he laid
his face against her hands, and she felt that it was wet.

The clock in the Town Hall struck nine--struck ten, and still they
sat on, sometimes talking, sometimes staring up at the steadily
beating stars. Quiet fell upon Monroe, lights moved in the little
houses and went out. There was a little stir when the crowd poured
out from the moving pictures: voices, shouts, laughter, then silence
again.

Suddenly Martie decreed their return to the house. But the ecstasy
of finding each other, again was too new. They passed the dark old
gateway to the sunken garden, and walked on, talking thirstily,
drinking deep of the joy of words.

Hand in hand they went up the hill, and time and space might have
equally been demolished. That hill had seemed a long climb to Martie
years ago: to-night it seemed a dream hill, she and John were so
soon at its little summit.

Below them lay the dark village and the furry tops of trees flooded
with gray moonlight. The odours of a summer night crept out to meet
them, odours of flowers and dew-wet, sunburned grass. The roadside
fences were wreathed with wild blackberry vines that took weird
shapes in the dark. In the idle fields spreading oaks threw shadows
of inky blackness.

Martie hardly thought of Clifford. Across her spinning senses an
occasional thought of him crept, but he had no part in to-night. To-
morrow she must end this dream of exquisite fulfillment, to-morrow,
somehow, she must send John away. But to-night was theirs.

Their talk was that of lovers, whose only life is in each other's
presence. They leaned on an old fence, above the town, and whether
they were grave, or whether Martie's gay laugh and his eager echoing
laugh rang out, the enchantment held them alike.

It was after one o'clock when they came slowly down the hill, and
let themselves silently into the shadowy garden. Martie fled
noiselessly past the streak of light under Lydia's door, gained her
own room, and blinked at her lighted gas.

The mirror showed her a pale, exalted face, with glittering blue
eyes under loosened bronze hair. She was cold, excited, tired, and
ecstatic. She moved the sprawling Teddy to the inside of the bed,
stooping to lay her cold cheek and half-opened lips to his flushed
little face. She got into a wrapper, her hair falling free on her
shoulders, and sat dreaming and remembering.

Lydia, in her gray wrapper, came in, with haggard, reproachful eyes.
Lydia was pale, too, but it was the paleness of fatigue, and had
nothing in common with Martie's starry pallor.

"Martie, do you know what time it is?"

"Lyd--I know it's late!"

"Late? It's two o'clock."

"Not really?" Martie bunched her splendid hair with a white hand
under each ear, and faced her affronted sister innocently.

"Don't say 'not really!'" Lydia, who happened to hate this
expression, which as a matter of fact Martie only used in moments of
airy rebellion, said sharply: "If that man hasn't any sense, you
ought to have!"

"We used to be intimate friends a few years ago," Martie offered
mildly. "We had a lot to say."

"A lot that couldn't be said before Pa and me, I suppose?" Lydia
asked bitingly. Martie was silent. "What do you propose to tell
Cliff of this delightful friendship?" Lydia pursued. "And how long a
visit do your friends propose to make?"

"Only until to-morrow. Mrs. Silver wants me to visit them, you know,
at Glen Mary."

"Do you intend to go?" Lydia asked stonily.

"Well, I suppose not. But it would be a wonderful experience, of
course. But I suppose not." Martie sighed heavily. "I really hadn't
thought it out," she pleaded.

"I should think you hadn't! I never heard anything like it," Lydia
said. "I should think the time had come when you really might think
it out--I don't know what things are coming to--"

"Oh, Lyddy dear, don't be so tiresome!" Martie said rudely. Lydia at
once left the room, with a short goodnight, but the interrupted mood
of memories and dreams did not return. Martie sat still a long time,
wrapped in the blanket she caught from the bed, staring vaguely into
space.

"I've got to think it all out," she told herself, "I mustn't make--
another mistake."

And yet when she crept in beside Teddy, and flung her arm about him,
she would not let the half-formed phrase stand. The step that had
brought her splendid boy to her arms was not a mistake.

She slept lightly, and was up at five o'clock. Teddy, just shifting
from the stage when nothing could persuade him to sleep in the
morning to the stage when nothing could persuade him to wake, merely
rolled over when she left him. Martie, bathed, brushed, dressed in
white, went into the garden. They had arranged no meeting, but John
came toward her under the pepper trees as she closed the door.

Again they walked, this time in morning freshness. Martie showed him
the school gate, with "Girls" lettered over it, where she had
entered for so many years. They walked past the church, and up
toward the hills. She said she must get home in time to help Pauline
with breakfast for the augmented family, and John went with her into
the old kitchen, and cut peaches and mixed muffins with the
enthusiasm of an expert, talking all the time.

"But tell me about Adele, John!" she said suddenly, when Lydia and
her father had left the breakfast table, and they two were alone
again. "How do you EXPLAIN it?"

"Oh, well!" He brought his mind with an obvious effort to Adele. "We
had sort of a hard time of it--she wasn't well, and I wasn't. Her
sister came on--she's--she's quite a woman!" Evidently still a
little impressed by some memory, he made a wild gesture with his
hands. "She thought I didn't understand Adele?" he went on
questioningly. "After she left, Adele simply went away. She went to
a boarding-house where she knew the woman, and when I went there to
see her she told me that it was all over. That's what she said: it
was all over. I went to see the doctor, and he didn't deny that they
had gone somewhere--Atlantic City, I think it was, together! She
asked for a divorce, and I gave it to her, and her sister came on to
stay with her for the time she got it. She seemed awfully unhappy.
It was just before my book was taken. Her sister said she was
unlucky, and I guess she was--poor Adele!"

"And there was never any fight, or any special cause?"

"Oh, no!" He smiled his odd and charming smile. "But I think I bored
her!" he said. "I do bore most people! But most people don't--don't
understand me, Martie," he went on, with a quality almost like
hunger in his eyes and voice. "And that's why I have been longing
and longing to see you again. YOU understand! And with you I always
feel as if I could talk, as if what I said mattered, as if--well, as
if I had been on a hot desert walk, and came suddenly to trees, and
shade, and a bubbling spring!"

After Christmas Mr. and Mrs. Brinsmade moved out to their place on the
Bellefontaine Road. This was to force Anne to take a rest.

For the girl was worn out with watching at the hospitals, and with
tending the destitute mothers and children from the ranks of
the refugees.

The Brinsmade place was not far from the Fair Grounds,--now a receiving
camp for the crude but eager regiments of the Northern states.

To Mr.
Brinsmade's, when the day's duty was done, the young Union officers
used to ride, and often there would be half a dozen of them to tea.

That house, and other great houses on the Bellefontaine Road with
which this history has no occasion to deal, were as homes to many
a poor fellow who would never see home again.

Sometimes Anne would gather together such young ladies of her
acquaintance from the neighbor hood and the city as their interests
and sympathies permitted to waltz with a Union officer, and there
would be a little dance.

To these dances Stephen Brice was usually invited.

One such occasion occurred on a Friday in January, and Mr.

Brinsmade himself called in his buggy and drove Stephen to the
country early in the afternoon.

He and Anne went for a walk along the river, the surface of which
was broken by lumps of yellow ice.

Gray clouds hung low in the sky as they picked their way over the
frozen furrows of the ploughed fields.
The grass was all a yellow-brown, but the north wind which swayed
the bare trees brought a touch of color to Anne's cheeks. Before
they realized where they were, they had nearly crossed the
Bellegarde estate, and the house itself was come into view, standing
high on the slope above the withered garden. They halted.

"The shutters are up," said Stephen.

"I understood that Mrs. Colfax had come out here not long a--"
"She came out for a day just before Christina," said Anne, smiling,
"and then she ran off to Kentucky.

I think she was afraid that she was one of the two women on the list
of Sixty."

"It must have been a blow to her pride when she found that she was
not," said Stephen, who had a keen remembrance of her conduct upon
a certain Sunday not a year gone.

Impelled by the same inclination, they walked in silence to the
house and sat down on the edge of the porch.

The only motion in the view was the smoke from the slave quarters
twisting in the wind, and the hurrying ice in the stream.

"Poor Jinny!" said Anne, with a sigh, "how she loved to romp! What
good times we used to have here together!"

"Do you think that she is unhappy?"

Stephen demanded, involuntarily.

"Oh, yes," said Anne. "How can you ask? But you could not make her
show it. The other morning when she came out to our house I found
her sitting at the piano.

I am sure there were tears in her eyes, but she would not let me
see them.

She made some joke about Spencer Catherwood running away.

What do you think the Judge will do with that piano, Stephen?"
He shook his head.

"The day after they put it in his room he came in with a great black
cloth, which he spread over it.

You cannot even see the feet."
There was a silence.

And Anne, turning to him timidly, gave him a long, searching look.

"It is growing late," she said.

"I think that we ought to go back."

They went out by the long entrance road, through the naked woods.
Stephen said little.

Only a little while before he had had one of those vivid dreams of
Virginia which left their impression, but not their substance,
to haunt him. On those rare days following the dreams her spirit had
its mastery over his. He pictured her then with a glow on her
face which was neither sadness nor mirth,--a glow that ministered
to him alone. And yet, he did not dare to think that he might
have won her, even if politics and war had not divided them.

When the merriment of the dance was at its height that evening, Stephen
stood at the door of the long room, meditatively watching the
bright gowns and the flash of gold on the uniforms as they flitted
past.
Presently the opposite door opened, and he heard Mr. Brinsmade's
voice mingling with another, the excitable energy of which recalled
some familiar episode. Almost--so it seemed--at one motion, the
owner of the voice had come out of the door and had seized Stephen's
hand in a warm grasp,--a tall and spare figure in the dress of a
senior officer. The military frock, which fitted the man's character
rather than the man, was carelessly open, laying bare a gold-buttoned
white waistcoat and an expanse of shirt bosom which ended in a
black stock tie.

The ends of the collar were apart the width of the red clipped
beard, and the mustache was cropped straight along the line of the
upper lip. The forehead rose high, and was brushed carelessly free
of the hair.

The nose was almost straight, but combative. A fire fairly burned in
the eyes.

"The boy doesn't remember me," said the gentleman, in quick tones,
smiling at Mr.

Brinsmade.

"Yes, sir, I do," Stephen made haste to answer. He glanced at the star
on the shoulder strap, and said. "You are General Sherman."
"First rate!"

laughed the General, patting him. "First rate!"
"Now in command at Camp Benton, Stephen," Mr.

Brinsmade put in. "Won't you sit down, General?"

"No," said the General, emphatically waving away the chair.

"No, rather stand."

Then his keen face suddenly lighted with amusement,--and mischief,
Stephen thought. "So you've heard of me since we met, sir?" "Yes,
General."
"Humph! Guess you heard I was crazy," said the General, in his downright
way.

Stephen was struck dumb.

"He's been reading the lies in the newspapers too, Brinsmade," the
General went on rapidly. "I'll make 'em eat their newspapers for
saying I was crazy.

That's the Secretary of War's doings.

Ever tell you what Cameron did, Brinsmade? He and his party were
in Louisville last fall, when I was serving in Kentucky, and came
to my room in the Galt House.
Well, we locked the door, and Miller sent us up a good lunch and
wine, After lunch, the Secretary lay on my bed, and we talked things
over.

He asked me what I thought about things in Kentucky. I told him.
I got a map.

I said, 'Now, Mr. Secretary, here is the whole Union line from
the Potomac to Kansas.

Here's McClellan in the East with one hundred miles of front. Here's
Fremont in the West with one hundred miles.

Here we are in Kentucky, in the centre, with three hundred miles
to defend.

McClellan has a hundred thousand men, Fremont has sixty thousand.

You give us fellows with over three hundred miles only eighteen
thousand.' 'How many do you want?' says Cameron, still on the bed.

'Two hundred thousand before we get through,' said I.

Cameron pitched up his hands in the air.
'Great God?' says he, 'where are they to come from?' 'The northwest
is chuck full of regiments you fellows at Washington won't
accept,' said I.

'Mark my words, Mr. Secretary, you'll need 'em all and more before
we get done with this Rebellion.'

Well, sir, he was very friendly before we finished, and I thought the
thing was all thrashed out. No, sir! he goes back to Washington and
gives it out that I'm crazy, and want two hundred thousand men in
Kentucky. Then I am ordered to report to Halleck in Missouri here,
and he calls me back from Sedalia because he believes the lies."

Stephen, who had in truth read the stories in question a month or
two before, could not conceal his embarrassment He looked at the
man in front of him,--alert, masterful intelligent, frank to any
stranger who took his fancy,--and wondered how any one who had
talked to him could believe them.

Mr. Brinsmade smiled. "They have to print something, General," he
said.

"I'll give 'em something to print later on," answered the General,
grimly. Then his expression changed. "Brinsmade, you fellows did
have a session with Fremont, didn't you? Anderson sent me over here
last September, and the first man I ran across at the Planters' House
was Appleton. '--What are you in town for?'

says he. 'To see Fremont,' I said. You ought to have heard Appleton
laugh. 'You don't think Fremont'll see you, do you?' says he.
'Why not?' 'Well,' says Tom, 'go 'round to his palace at six
to-morrow morning and bribe that Hungarian prince who runs his
body-guard to get you a good place in the line of senators and
governors and first citizens, and before nightfall you may get a
sight of him, since you come from Anderson.

Not one man in a hundred,' says Appleton, I not one man in a hundred,
reaches his chief-of-staff.'

Next morning," the General continued in a staccato which was often
his habit, "had breakfast before daybreak and went 'round there.
Place just swarming with Californians--army contracts."

(The General sniffed.) Saw Fremont.
Went back to hotel.

More Californians, and by gad--old Baron Steinberger with his nose
hanging over the register."

"Fremont was a little difficult to get at, General," said Mr.

Brinsmade.

"Things were confused and discouraged when those first contracts were
awarded. Fremont was a good man, and it wasn't his fault that the
inexperience of his quartermasters permitted some of those men to
get rich."

"No," said the General. "His fault! Certainly not. Good man! To be
sure he was--didn't get along with Blair. These court-martials
you're having here now have stirred up the whole country.

I guess we'll hear now how those fortunes were made. To listen to
those witnesses lie about each other on the stand is better than the
theatre."
Stephen laughed at the comical and vivid manner in which the General
set this matter forth.

He himself had been present one day of the sittings of the court-martial
when one of the witnesses on the prices of mules was that same
seedy man with the straw-colored mustache who had bid for Virginia's
piano against the Judge.

"Come, Stephen," said the General, abruptly, "run and snatch one
of those pretty girls from my officers.

They're having more than their share."

"They deserve more, sir," answered Stephen.

Whereupon the General laid his hand impulsively on the young man's
shoulder, divining what Stephen did not say.

"Nonsense!" said be; "you are doing the work in this war, not we. We
do the damage--you repair it.

If it were not for Mr.

Brinsmade and you gentlemen who help him, where would our Western
armies be?

Don't you go to the front yet a while, young man. We need
the best we have in reserve."

He glanced critically at Stephen.

"You've had military training of some sort?"
"He's a captain in the Halleck Guards, sir," said Mr.

Brinsmade, generously, "and the best drillmaster we've had in this
city. He's seen service, too, General."
Stephen reddened furiously and started to protest, when the
General cried:-- "It's more than I have in this war. Come, come,
I knew he was a soldier. Let's see what kind of a strategist he'll
make.

Brinsmade, have you got such a thing as a map?" Mr. Brinsmade had, and
led the way back into the library. The General shut the door, lighted
a cigar with a single vigorous stroke of a match, and began to
smoke with quick puffs.

Stephen was puzzled how to receive the confidences the General was
giving out with such freedom.

When the map was laid on the table, the General drew a pencil from his
pocket and pointed to the state of Kentucky.

Then he drew a line from Columbus to Bowling Green, through Forts
Donelson and Henry.

"Now, Stephen," said he, "there's the Rebel line. Show me the
proper place to break it."

Stephen hesitated a while, and then pointed at the centre.

"Good!" said the General. "Very good!" He drew a heavy line across
the first, and it ran almost in the bed of the Tennessee River.

He swung on Mr. Brinsmade. "Very question Halleck asked me the other
day, and that's how I answered it.

Now, gentlemen, there's a man named Grant down in that part of
the country. Keep your eyes on him. Ever heard of him,
Brinsmade?
He used to live here once, and a year ago he was less than I was.
Now he's a general."

The recollection of the scene in the street by the Arsenal that May
morning not a year gone came to Stephen with a shock.

"I saw him," he cried; "he was Captain Grant that lived on the
Gravois Road.

But surely this can't be the same man who seized Paducah and was
in that affair at Belmont."

"By gum!" said the General, laughing. "Don't wonder you're
surprised.
Grant has stuff in him.

They kicked him around Springfield awhile, after the war broke out,
for a military carpet-bagger. Then they gave him for a regiment the
worst lot of ruffians you ever laid eyes on.

He fixed 'em.
He made 'em walk the plank.

He made 'em march halfway across the state instead of taking the cars
the Governor offered.

Belmont! I guess he is the man that chased the Rebs out of Belmont.
Then his boys broke loose when they got into the town. That wasn't
Grant's fault.

The Rebs came back and chased 'em out into their boats on the river.
Brinsmade, you remember hearing about that.

"Grant did the coolest thing you ever saw. He sat on his horse
at the top of the bluff while the boys fell over each other trying
to get on the boat.

Yes, sir, he sat there, disgusted, on his horse, smoking a cigar,
with the Rebs raising pandemonium all around him.

And then, sir," cried the General, excitedly, "what do you think he
did? Hanged if he didn't force his horse right on to his haunches,
slide down the whole length of the bank and ride him across a
teetering plank on to the steamer.

And the Rebs just stood on the bank and stared.

They were so astonished they didn't even shoot the man. You
watch Grant," said the General. "And now, Stephen," he added, "just
you run off and take hold of the prettiest girl you can find. If
any of my boys object, say I sent you."

The next Monday Stephen had a caller. It was little Tiefel, now a
first lieutenant with a bristly beard and tanned face, come to town
on a few days' furlough.

He had been with Lyon at Wilson's Creek, and he had a sad story to
tell of how he found poor Richter, lying stark on that bloody
field, with a smile of peace upon his face. Strange that he should
at length have been killed by a sabre!

It was a sad meeting for those two, since each reminded the other
of a dear friend they would see no more on earth.

They went out to sup together in the German style; and gradually,
over his beer, Tiefel forgot his sorrow. Stephen listened with an
ache to the little man's tales of the campaigns he had been through.
So that presently Tiefel cried out:

"Why, my friend, you are melancholy as an owl. I will tell you a funny
story. Did you ever hear of one General Sherman? He that they say
is crazy?"

"He is no more crazy than I am," said Stephen, warmly--
"Is he not?" answered Tiefel, "then I will show you a mistake. You
recall last November he was out to Sedalia to inspect the camp
there, and he sleeps in a little country store where I am quartered.

Now up gets your General Sherman in the middle of the night,--midnight,--and
marches up and down between the counters, and waves his arms.

So, says he, 'land so,' says he, 'Sterling Price will be here,
and Steele here, and this column will take that road, and so-and-so's
a damned fool. Is not that crazy? So he walks up and down for
three eternal hours. Says he, 'Pope has no business to be at
Osterville, and Steele here at Sedalia with his regiments all over
the place. They must both go into camp at La Mine River, and form
brigades and divisions, that the troops may be handled.'"

"If that's insanity," cried Stephen so strongly as to surprise the
little man; "then I wish we had more insane generals. It just shows
how a malicious rumor will spread. What Sherman said about Pope's
and Steele's forces is true as Gospel, and if you ever took the
trouble to look into that situation, Tiefel, you would see it."

And Stephen brought down his mug on the table with a crash that made
the bystanders jump.

"Himmel!" exclaimed little Tiefel. But he spoke in admiration.

It was not a month after that that Sherman's prophecy of the quiet
general who had slid down the bluff at Belmont came true. The
whole country bummed with Grant's praises. Moving with great
swiftness and secrecy up the Tennessee, in company with the gunboats
of Commodore Foote, he had pierced the Confederate line at the
very point Sherman had indicated.

Fort Henry had fallen, and Grant was even then moving to besiege
Donelson.

Mr. Brinsmade prepared to leave at once for the battlefield, taking
with him too Paducah physicians and nurses. All day long the boat was
loading with sanitary stores and boxes of dainties for the wounded.
It was muggy and wet--characteristic of that winter--as Stephen
pushed through the drays on the slippery levee to the landing.

He had with him a basket his mother had put up. He also bore a
message to Mr. Brinsmade from the Judge It was while he was picking
his way along the crowded decks that he ran into General Sherman.
The General seized him unceremoniously by the shoulder.

"Good-by, Stephen," he said.

"Good-by, General," said Stephen, shifting his basket to shake hands.

"Are you going away?"
"Ordered to Paducah," said the General. He pulled Stephen off the
guards into an empty cabin. "Brice," said he, earnestly, "I haven't
forgotten how you saved young Brinsmade at Camp Jackson.

They tell me that you are useful here. I say, don't go in unless you
have to. I don't mean force, you understand. But when you feel that
you can go in, come to me or write me a letter. That is," he added,
seemingly inspecting Stephen's white teeth with approbation, "if
you're not afraid to serve under a crazy man."
It has been said that the General liked the lack of effusiveness
of Stephen's reply.

CHAPTER VI
ELIPHALET PLAYS HIS TRUMPS

Summer was come again. Through interminable days, the sun beat down
upon the city; and at night the tortured bricks flung back angrily
the heat with which he had filled them. Great battles had been
fought, and vast armies were drawing breath for greater ones to
come.

"Jinny," said the Colonel one day, "as we don't seem to be much use
in town, I reckon we may as well go to Glencoe."

Virginia, threw her arms around her father's neck. For many months
she had seen what the Colonel himself was slow to comprehend--that
his usefulness was gone. The days melted into weeks, and Sterling
Price and his army of liberation failed to come.

The vigilant Union general and his aides had long since closed all
avenues to the South. For, one fine morning toward the end of the
previous summer, when the Colonel was contemplating a journey, he
had read that none might leave the city without a pass, whereupon
he went hurriedly to the office of the Provost Marshal.

There he had found a number of gentlemen in the same plight,
each waving a pass made out by the Provost Marshal's clerks, and
waiting for that officer's signature. The Colonel also procured one
of these, and fell into line. The Marshal gazed at the crowd, pulled
off his coat, and readily put his name to the passes of several
gentlemen going east. Next came Mr.

Bub Ballington, whom the Colonel knew, but pretended not to.

"Going to Springfield?" asked the Marshal, genially.

"Yes," said Bub.

"Not very profitable to be a minute-man, eh?"

in the same tone.

The Marshal signs his name, Mr, Ballington trying not to look indignant
as he makes for the door.

A small silver bell rings on the Marshal's desk, the one word: "Spot!"
breaks the intense silence, which is one way of saying that Mr.
Ballington is detained, and will probably be lodged that
night at Government expense.

"Well, Colonel Carvel, what can I do for you this morning?" asked the
Marshal, genially.

The Colonel pushed back his hat and wiped his brow.

"I reckon I'll wait till next week, Captain," said Mr.

Carvel. "It's pretty hot to travel just now."
The Provost Marshal smiled sweetly.

There were many in the office who would have liked to laugh, but it
did not pay to laugh at some people.
Colonel Carvel was one of them.

In the proclamation of martial law was much to make life less
endurable than ever.

All who were convicted by a court-martial of being rebels were to
have property confiscated, and slaves set free. Then there was a
certain oath to be taken by all citizens who did not wish to have
guardians appointed over their actions.

There were many who swallowed this oath and never felt any ill effects.
Mr. Jacob Cluyme was one, and came away feeling very virtuous. It
was not unusual for Mr. Cluyme to feel virtuous. Mr.

Hopper did not have indigestion after taking it, but Colonel Carvel
would sooner have eaten, gooseberry pie, which he had never tasted
but once.

That summer had worn away, like a monster which turns and gives
hot gasps when you think it has expired. It took the Arkansan just
a month, under Virginia's care, to become well enough to be sent to
a Northern prison He was not precisely a Southern gentleman, and
he went to sleep over the "Idylls of the King."

But he was admiring, and grateful, and wept when he went off to
the boat with the provost's guard, destined for a Northern prison.

Virginia wept too. He had taken her away from her aunt (who would
have nothing to do with him), and had given her occupation.
She nor her father never tired of hearing his rough tales of Price's
rough army.

His departure was about the time when suspicions were growing set.

The favor had caused comment and trouble, hence there was no hope
of giving another sufferer the same comfort.

The cordon was drawn tighter.

One of the mysterious gentlemen who had been seen in the vicinity
of Colonel Carvel's house was arrested on the ferry, but he had
contrived to be rid of the carpet-sack in which certain precious
letters were carried.

Throughout the winter, Mr.

Hopper's visits to Locust Street had continued at intervals of painful
regularity.

It is not necessary to dwell upon his brilliant powers of
conversation, nor to repeat the platitudes which he repeated, for
there was no significance in Mr.

Hopper's tales, not a particle.

The Colonel had found that out, and was thankful. His manners
were better; his English decidedly better.

It was for her father's sake, of course, that Virginia bore with
him.

Such is the appointed lot of women.

She tried to be just, and it occurred to her that she had never
before been just.

Again and again she repeated to herself that Eliphalet's devotion
to the Colonel at this low ebb of his fortunes had something in it
of which she did not suspect him.

She had a class contempt for Mr.

Hopper as an uneducated Yankee and a person of commercial ideals.
But now he was showing virtues,--if virtues they were,--and she
tried to give him the benefit of the doubt.

With his great shrewdness and business ability, why did he not take
advantage of the many opportunities the war gave to make a fortune?

For Virginia had of late been going to the store with the Colonel,--who
spent his mornings turning over piles of dusty papers, and Mr.

Hopper had always been at his desk.

After this, Virginia even strove to be kind to him, but it was
uphill work.

The front door never closed after one of his visits that suspicion
was not left behind.

Antipathy would assert itself.

Could it be that there was a motive under all this plotting?

He struck her inevitably as the kind who would be content to
mine underground to attain an end. The worst she could think of
him was that he wished to ingratiate himself now, in the hope that,
when the war was ended, he might become a partner in Mr. Carvel's
business. She had put even this away as unworthy of her.

Once she had felt compelled to speak to her father on the subject.

"I believe I did him an injustice, Pa," she said.

"Not that I like him any better now. I must be honest about that.
I simply can't like him. But I do think that if he had been as
unscrupulous as I thought, he would have deserted you long ago for
something more profitable.

He would not be sitting in the office day after day making plans
for the business when the war is over."
She remembered how sadly he had smiled at her over the top of his
paper.

"You are a good girl, Jinny," he said.

Toward the end of July of that second summer riots broke out in the
city, and simultaneously a bright spot appeared on Virginia's horizon.
This took the form, for Northerners, of a guerilla scare, and an
order was promptly issued for the enrollment of all the able-bodied
men in the ten wards as militia, subject to service in the state,
to exterminate the roving bands.

Whereupon her Britannic Majesty became extremely popular, --even
with some who claimed for a birthplace the Emerald Isle.

"Martie--you don't--CARE, too?" she asked fearfully.

"With every fibre of my soul and body!" Martie answered, in a low,
moody voice from the doorway. "Sally--Sally--Sally--to be free!" she
went on, speaking, as Sally was vaguely aware, more for the relief
of her own heart than for any effect on her sister. "To have him
free! We always liked each other--loved each other, I think. What a
life--what joy we would have! Oh, I can't bear it. I can't bear to
have the days go by, and the years go by, and never--never see him
or hear him again! I can't help Cliff; I can't help John's wife; I
can't help it if he seems odd and boyish and different to other
people--! That's what makes him John--what he is!"

"I never dreamed it," Sally marvelled.

"I never dreamed it myself, a week ago. I always had a sort of
special feeling toward John, and I knew he had toward me. But I've
been a romantic sort of fool all my life--my Prince Charming had to
come dashing up on a white horse--I didn't recognize him because he
was a little clerk in a furniture store, and married to the
stupidest woman the Lord ever made!"

Sally laughed in spite of herself. Martie turned from the dimness of
the doorway, and came into the hot, clean little room. She sat down
at the table, and spread her arms across it, locking her white
hands.

"It's all so funny. Sally," she said childishly. "A week ago, I was
sailing along, humbly grateful and happy because Cliff loved me. To-
day John Dryden sails for a year in the Orient. And between those
few days he drifts in here just long enough to bring my plans all
tumbling about my ears."

"I'm sorry!" Sally, busily setting bread, could say nothing more
significant. But as Martie remained silent, brooding eyes on her own
fingers, the older sister added timidly: "Do--do you think perhaps
you'll get over that--that feeling?"

"That is my only hope!" Martie said courageously.

"And after all," Sally went on, eagerly, "what could he offer you?
Cliff is--he's devoted to you, and he's steadiness itself! And I do
believe you would be perfectly contented if you just put the other
thing out of your mind, and tried to make the greatest happiness
possible out of your new life! Lydia and Pa, and all of us, and Ruth
and Teddy are all so happy about it And you know there's no safety
like the safety of being married to a good man!"

Martie laughed.

"You're quite right, Sally! But," she added, her face growing
serious again, "the terrible thing is this: If I marry Cliff, I do
it--just a LITTLE--with other things in view. The children, as you
say, and the good opinion of the town, and Pa's happiness, and Len's
prosperity, and the pleasure of being mistress of the old house, and
dear knows what! Of course I LIKE Cliff--but I tell you frankly that
I'm looking even now to the time when our honeymoon shall be over,
and the first strangeness of--well, of belonging to him is over!"

Sally's face was flaming. She had stopped working, and both sisters
faced each other consciously.

"In other words," smiled Martie, "I wish I had been married to him
ten years ago, and by this time had little Sally and Cliffy--"

"Oh, dearest, I do hope there are children!" Sally said eagerly.

"I hope so, too!" Martie said simply. And with suddenly misting eyes
Sally heard her say softly, half to herself, "I want another girl!"
Then her lip trembled, and to the older sister's consternation she
began to cry, with her shining head laid on her arms. "I don't know
w-w-what to do, Sally!" she sobbed. "I don't know what is right! I
know I'm desperately tired of worrying and fretting and being
criticised! I don't see why it should be my life that is always
being upset and disorganized, while other women go on placidly
having children and giving dinners!"

"Perhaps because you are so different from other? women?" Sally
suggested, somewhat timidly. She was not sure that Martie would like
this.

But Martie gave her a grateful glance, and immediately dried her
eyes with a brisk evidence of returning self-control.

"Well!" she said sensibly. "It is that way, anyhow, and I have to
make the best of it. I married foolishly, in some ways, and I paid
the price--nobody knows what it was! Then I came back here, and had
really worked out a happy life for myself, when Cliff came along,
and no sooner was I adjusted to Cliff--to the thought of marriage
again, when John upset it all!"

"The happiness of the woman who marries Cliff ought to be pretty
safe," offered Sally.

"Yes, I know it. But Sally," Martie said, looking at her sister
questioningly, "sometimes I feel that I don't dare risk it! I can't
marry John, but I can't seem to--to let him go, either. I know what
madness that visit was, and yet--and yet every minute that we were
together was like--I don't know--like swimming in a sea of gold! I
didn't know what I wore or ate in those days! Pa and Lyd--other
people didn't seem to exist! I never believed before that any one
could feel as strange--as bewildered and excited and happy--as I did
then. It was like being hungry and satisfied at the same time. It
was just like being under a spell! His voice, Sally, and the way he
speaks of men and books--so surely, and yet in that boyish way--and
his hands, and the way he smiles through his lashes--I can't forget
one instant of it! We got breakfast together; I can't go into the
kitchen now without remembering it, and longing to have him there
again, whipping eggs and hunting about for the butter, while all the
time we were laughing and talking so wonderfully! It's that--loving
that way, that makes life worth while, Sally. Nothing else counts!
Nothing that we did together seemed insignificant, and nothing that
I do without him is worth while--I can't--can't--can't let him go!"

Sally was frightened as her sister's head went down again. She could
think of nothing to say. "I can't help thinking that our life would
be that," Martie went on presently, raising her sombre face to rest
it on one hand, her elbows propped on the table. "Everything would
be wonderful, just because we love each other so! He writes, and I
would write---"

"Feeling as you do," Sally said after a troubled silence, "I would
really say that you oughtn't to marry any one else, Mart. But even
if Cliff gave you up, how could you marry a divorced man?"

"Oh, Sally--don't keep reiterating that it's impossible!" Martie
said with a flash of impatience. "I know it--I know it--but that
doesn't make it any easier to bear! You women who have so much can't
realize---"

"You have Teddy," Sally suggested, in the silence.

"Yes, I have Teddy--God bless him!" his mother said, with a sudden
tender smile. And she seemed to see a line of little Teddies,
playing with Grandma Curley's spools, glancing fearfully at the
"Cold Lairs," walking sturdily beside Margar's shabby coach,
chattering to a quiet, black-clad mother on the overland train. She
had her gallant, gay little Teddy still. "I don't know why I talk so
recklessly, Sally," she said sensibly. "It's only that I am so
worried--and troubled. I don't know what I ought to do! Suppose I
tell Cliff frankly, and we break the engagement? Then John will come
back, and there'll be all that to go over and over!"

"But that's--just selfishness," said Sally, spreading a checked blue
towel neatly over her pan of dough, and adding last touches to the
now orderly kitchen.

"Oh, men are all selfish!" Martie conceded. "Every one's selfish!
Cliff quite placidly broke Lydia's heart years ago; Rose and Rodney
between them nearly broke mine. But now Cliff wants something from
me, and Rose realizes that she has something to gain, and it's
roses, roses all the way."

"Well, that's life, Mart," submitted the older sister.

"If I had it all to do over again," Martie mused, "I wouldn't come
back after Wallace's death. Teddy and I could have made our way
comfortably in New York. By coming, I have more or less obliged
myself to accept the Monroe point of view---"

"Oh, but Mart, we've had such wonderful times together, and it means
so much to me to have you like Joe and the children!" said Sally.

"Yes," Martie's arm went about her sister, "that's been the one
definite gain, Sally, to see you so happy and prosperous, and to
realize that life is going so pleasantly for you. As the years go
by, Joe'll gain steadily; he's that sort; and Dr. Hawkes's children
won't have to envy any children in Monroe. But, oh, Sis--if I could
get away!"

The old cry, Sally thought, as she anxiously studied the beautiful,
discontented face.

Presently Clifford came, to take his future wife home, and Joe came
back from the hospital in the Ford, and there was much friendly talk
and laughter. But Sally watched her sister a little wistfully that
evening; didn't Martie think this was all pleasant--all worth while?


CHAPTER VII


Rose's little daughter, pawn that she was in the game of Martie's
fortunes, was pushed into play the following day. For Rose
telephoned Martie at the Library, in the foggy early morning, that
Doris was not well: there was a rather suspicious rash on the baby's
chest, and if it really were measles, there must be no announcement
luncheon to-day.

Martie had been eagerly awaiting that luncheon, when a dozen of the
prominent young matrons of Monroe should learn of her engagement.
She put up the telephone thoughtfully. Another delay. Another
respite, when she might still say to herself over and over: "I COULD
end it now. It isn't too late yet!"

In her hand to-day was a brief note brought to land by the tender of
the Nippon Maru. Dean Silver and John had duly sailed, they were far
out on the ocean now. That was settled. Now there was nothing to do
but go on serenely with her interrupted plans.

And yet the restless excitement caused by his coming was still about
her, she could not make herself forget. Everything that his odd and
vibrant personality had touched was changed to her. The wallflowers
he had twisted unseeingly in his nervous fingers, the kitchen where
their eager, ardent talk had gone on over the boiling of coffee and
the mixing of muffins, the hill they had climbed in gray, warm
moonlight, these things belonged to him now. Martie touched the
books he had praised tenderly, hearing his words again.

He had not written her: she knew why. She must be all or nothing to
John now. He had not spoken of her to Dean, he was trying in his
blundering boyish way to forget.

The novelist's note was short, and written in a tone of
disappointment and reproach. Martie read it, and winced as she
crumpled it in her hand. Presently she straightened it out, and read
it again. She flattened it on the desk before her, and studied it
resolutely, with reddened cheeks, and with a little pang at her
heart.

Sally came in, full of happy plans. There was talk now of making Joe
resident physician at the hospital, with a little house up there
right near the big building. It would be so dignified, bubbled
Sally, setting little Mary on the desk, where she and Aunt Mart
could each tie a small, dragging shoe-lace.

"Of course, this won't be for a year or two, Mart--but think of the
fun! A pretty house with a big porch, to match the main building, I
suppose--"

"But you'll be a mile out of town, Sis!"

"Oh, I know--but I can run the children in to school in the Ford,
and you'll have your own car, and that's all I really care about!
This is only a possibility, you know. What are you thinking about,
Mart?"

Martie laughed guiltily.

"I don't know what I was thinking," she confessed. Sally flushed,
studying her with bright eyes.

"Have you heard--"

"From John? No, but he sailed. I have a note from Mr. Silver here.
He was anxious to get him away, and they left suddenly. The sailing
list was in the paper, too, with a little notice of them both. It's
better so, I'm glad it's settled. But I wish I was a little more
sure of what the next step should be."

"I don't believe Rose's Doris has the measles at all," Sally said
thoughtfully, "and in that case, the luncheon will be in a day or
two, and won't that be rather--rather a relief to you? Oh, and
Mart," she broke off suddenly to say, "I have a letter for you here-
-Teddy and Billy called for the mail yesterday, and they left this
with mine."

Martie took the big envelope, smiling. The smile deepened as she
read. After a minute she turned the letter about on the desk, so
that Sally might read it too.

"From the editor of the magazine that took my other article," Martie
explained. "I sent them another, two weeks ago."

Sally read:

MY DEAR MRS. BANNISTER:

Your second article has been read with much interest in this office,
and we are glad to use it. Enclosed is a check for $100, which we
hope will be satisfactory to you. Our readers have taken so
continued an interest in your first article that we are glad to give
them something more from your pen.

If you are ever in New York, will you favor us with a call? It is
possible that we might interest you with an offer of permanent work
on our staff. We make a special feature, as perhaps you know, of
articles of interest to growing girls, and when we find a writer
whose work has this appeal, we feel that she belongs to us.

In any case, let us hear from you soon again.

"A hundred dollars!" Sally said proudly, handing the letter back.
"You smart thing! That's a nice letter, isn't it? Don't you think it
is? I do. Listen, Mart, don't say anything about Joe's plans, will
you? That's all in the air. I've got to go now, it's eleven. And
Mart, don't worry too much about anything. It will all seem
perfectly natural and pleasant once it's DONE. Good-bye, dear, I
wish I could have been some help to you about it all!"

"You have been, Sally--I believe you've been the greatest help in
the world!" Martie answered enigmatically, kissing Mary's soft
little neck where the silky curls showed under the little scalloped
bonnet. "Good-bye, dear--don't walk too fast in this sun!"

When Sally had tripped away, Martie sat on at the Library desk,
staring vaguely into space. Outside, the village hummed with the
peaceful sounds of a mild autumn morning. A soft fog had earlier
enveloped it; it was rising now; every hour showed more of the
encircling brown hills; by noon the school children would rush into
a sunshiny world. Shopping women pushed baby-carriages over the
crossings; a new generation of boys and girls would swarm to
Bonestell's in the late afternoon. Time was always moving, under it
all; in a few weeks the Clifford Frosts would be home again; in a
few months the High School would stand on the ground where little
Sally and Martie Monroe had played dolls' house a few years ago.

This was her last week at the Library; Daisy David was coming in to
take her place. Already Miss Fanny suspected the truth, and her
manner had changed toward Martie a little, already she was something
of a personage in Monroe.

Women and children and old men came out and in, their whispers
sounding in the quiet, airy space. Len's wife came in, with the
third daughter who should have been a son. Teddy and Billy came in;
they wanted five cents for nails; they had run out of nails. Measles
had closed the little boys' classes, and they were wild with the joy
of unexpected holiday.

Martie presently found herself telling Miss Fanny that she would
like a few hours' freedom that afternoon: she had shopping to do.
She ate her basket lunch as usual, then she walked out into the
glaring afternoon light of Main Street. A summer wind was blowing,
the warm air was full of grit and dust.

The Bank first, then Clifford's office, then a long, silent hour
praying, in the empty little church, where the noises of Main Street
were softened, as was the very daylight that penetrated the cheap
coloured windows. Then Martie went to Dr. Ben's, and last of all to
Sally's house.

She was to take Teddy home and Sally came with them to the gate. It
was sunset and the wind had fallen. There was a sweet, sharp odour
of dew on the dust.

"Be good to my boy, Sally!"

"Martie--as if he was mine!" Sally's eyes filled with tears at her
sister's tone: she was to have Teddy during the honeymoon.

Martie suddenly kissed her, an unusually tender kiss.

"And love me, Sis!"

"Martie," Sally said troubled, "I always DO!"

"I know you do!"

Martie laughed, with her own eyes suddenly wet, caught Teddy's
little hand, and walked away. Sally watched the tall, splendid
figure out of sight.

At the supper-table she was unusually thoughtful. Her eyes travelled
about the familiar room, the room where her high-chair had stood
years ago, the room where the Monroes had eaten tons of
uninteresting bread and butter, and had poured gallons of weak cream
into strong tea, and had cut hundreds of pies to Ma's or Lydia's
mild apologies for the crust or the colour. How often had the
windows of this room been steamy with the breath of onions and
mashed potatoes, how many; limp napkins and spotted tablecloths had
had their day there! Martie remembered, as long as she remembered
anything, the walnut chairs, with their scrolls and knobs, and the
black marble fireplace, with an old engraving, "Franklin at the
Court of France," hanging above it. Mould had crept in and had
stained the picture, which was crumpled in deep folds now, yet it
would always be a work of art to Pa and to Lydia.

She looked at Lydia; gentle, faded, dowdy in her plum-coloured cloth
dress, with imitation lace carefully sewed at neck and sleeves; at
Lydia's flat cheeks and rather prim mouth. She was like her mother,
but life had perforce broadened Ma, and it was narrowing Lydia.
Lydia was young no longer, and Pa was old.

He sat chewing his food uncomfortably, with much working of the
muscles of his face; some teeth were missing now, and some replaced
with unmanageable artificial ones. The thin, oily hair was iron-
gray, and his moustache, which had stayed black so much longer, was
iron-gray, too, and stained yellow from the tobacco of his cigars.
His eyes were set in bags of wrinkles; it was a discontented face,
even when Pa was amiable and pleased by chance. Martie knew its
every expression as well as she knew the brown-and-white china, and
the blue glass spoon holder, and the napkin-ring with "Souvenir of
Santa Cruz" on it. She could not help wondering what they would make
of the new house when they got into it, and how the clumsy, shabby
old furniture would look.

"Pa and Lyd," she said suddenly in a silence. Her tone was
sufficiently odd to arrest their immediate attention. "Pa--Lyd--I
went in to see Clifford this afternoon, and told him that I wanted
to--to break our engagement!"

An amazed silence followed. Teddy, chewing steadily on raisin
cookies, turned his eyes smilingly to his mother. He didn't quite
understand, but whatever she did was all right. Malcolm settled his
glasses with one lean, dark hand, and stared at his daughter. Lydia
gave a horrified gasp, and looked quickly from her father to her
sister: a look that was intended to serve the purpose of a fuse.

"How do you mean?" Malcolm asked painfully, at last.

"Well!" said Lydia, whose one fear was that she would not be able to
fully express herself upon this outrage.

"I mean that I--I don't truly feel that I love him," Martie said,
fitting her phraseology to her audience. "I respect him, of course,
and I like him, but--but as the time came nearer, I COULDN'T feel--"

Her voice dropped in an awful silence.

"You certainly waited some time to make up your mind, Martie," said
her father then, catching vaguely for a weapon and using it at
random.

"But, Martie, what's your REASON?" Lydia overflowed suddenly. "What
earthly reason can you have--you can't just say that you don't want
to, now--you can't just suddenly--I never heard of anything so--so
inconsiderate! Why, what do you suppose everybody--"

"This is some of your heady nonsense, Martie," said her father's
heavy voice, drowning down Lydia's clatter. "This is just the sort
of mischief I expected to follow a visit from men as entirely
irresponsible as these New York friends of yours. I expected
something of this sort. Just as you are about to behave like a
sensible woman, they come along to upset you--"

"Exactly!" Lydia added, quivering. "I never said a word to you, Pa,"
she went on hurriedly, "but _I_ noticed it! I think it's perfectly
amazing that you should; of COURSE it's that! Martie listened to
him, and Martie walked with him, and several people noticed it, and
spoke to me about it! It's none of my business, of course, and I'm
not going to interfere, but all I can say is THIS, if Martie Monroe
plays fast and loose with a man like Cliff Frost, it will hurt us in
this village more than she has ANY idea! What are people going to
think, that's all! I certainly hope you will use your authority to
bring her to her senses--just a few days before the wedding, with
everybody expecting--"

"Perhaps you will tell me what Clifford thinks of this astonishing
decision?" Malcolm asked, again interrupting Lydia's wild rush of
words.

"Cliff was very generous, Pa. He feels that it is only a passing
feeling, and that I must have time to think things over if I want
it," Martie began.

"Ha! I should think so!" Lydia interpolated scornfully.

"At first he was inclined to laugh about it, and to think that it
was nothing," Martie said almost timidly, glancing from one to the
other, and keeping one hand over Teddy's hand.

"What makes you feel that you HAVEN'T given the thing due
consideration, Martie?" her father asked darkly, with the air of
humouring a child's fantastic whims.

"Yes! You've been engaged for months!" Lydia shot in.

"Well, it's only lately, Pa," Martie confessed mildly.

"Exactly! Since somebody came along to upset you!" said Lydia. "All
I can say is, that I think it would break Ma's heart!" she added
violently. "You give up a fine man like Cliff Frost, and now I
suppose we'll have some of your divorced friends hanging about--"

"Lyd, dear, don't be so bitter," Martie said gently, almost
maternally. "Mr. Dryden has gone off for a long tour; he may not be
back for years. What I plan to do now is go to New York. I told
Cliff that--that I wanted to go."

"May I ask how you intend to live there?" Malcolm asked, with
magnificent and obvious restraint.

"By writing, Pa."

"You plan to take your child, and reenter--"

"I think I would leave Teddy, Pa, for a while at least." They had
all left the table now, and gone into the parlour, and Martie,
sinking into a chair, rested her chin on her hand, and looked
bravely yet a trifle uncomfortably at her interlocutors. Teddy had
dashed out into the yard.

"Now, I think we have heard about enough of this nonsense, Martie,"
said her father, in a changed and hostile tone. Lydia gave a
satisfied nod; Pa was taking a stand at last. "You didn't have to
say that you would marry Clifford," he went on sternly. "You did so
as a responsible woman, of your own accord! Now you propose to make
him and your family ridiculous, just for a whim. I sent you money to
come on here, after your husband's death, and all your life I have
tried to be a good father to you. What is my reward? You run away
and marry the first irresponsible scamp that asks you; you show no
sign of repentance or feeling until you are in trouble; you come
back, at my invitation, and are made as welcome here as if you had
been the most dutiful daughter in the world, and then--THEN--you
propose to bring fresh sorrow and disgrace upon the parent who
lifted you out of your misery, and offered you a home, and forgot
and forgave the past! I am not a rich man, but what I have has been
freely yours, your child has been promised a home for my lifetime.
What more can you ask? But no," said Malcolm, pacing the floor, "you
turn against me; yours is the hand that strikes me down in my age!
Now I tell you, Martie, that things have gone far enough. If you
follow your own course in this affair, you do so at your own risk.
The day you break your engagement, you are no longer my daughter.
The day you let it be known that you are acting in this flighty and
irresponsible way, that DAY your welcome here is withdrawn! I will
not be made the laughing-stock of this town!"

Lydia was in tears; Martie pale. But the younger woman did not
speak. She had been watching her father with slightly dilated eyes
and a rising breast, while he spoke.

"Cliff generous?" Malcolm went on. "Of course he's generous! He
probably doesn't know what to make of it; responsible people don't
blow hot and cold like this! The idea of your going in to him with
any such cock-and-bull story as this! You'll break your engagement,
eh?--and go on to New York for a while, eh?--and then come smiling
back, I suppose, and marry him when it suits your own sweet will?
Well, now, I'll tell you something, young lady," he added, with a
sort of confident menace, "you'll do nothing of the kind! You sit
down now and write Clifford a note, and tell him you were a fool.
And don't let me ever hear another word of this New York nonsense!
Upon my word, I don't know how I ever came to have such children!
Other people's children seem to have some sense, and act like
reasonable human beings, but mine--however, you know what I feel
now, Martie. Going into the Bank indeed, and telling the man you're
going to marry that you are 'afraid' this and you 'fancy' that! I'll
not have it, I tell you!"

"I told him that I knew I was acting badly," Martie said, "I said
that I felt terribly about it. I even cried--I'm not proud of
myself, Pa! And he asked me to think it over, and not to worry about
postponing the wedding, and--I think he was tremendously surprised,
but he didn't say one unkind word!"

"Well, he should have, then," Malcolm said harshly. "And you are a
fortunate woman if, when it suits your high-and-mightiness to come
to your senses, he doesn't take his turn to jilt YOU! On my word, I
never heard anything like it! What possesses you is more than I can
understand. You deliberately bring unhappiness down on your family,
and act as if you were proud of yourself! I don't pretend to be
perfect, but all my life I have given my children generously--"

"Pa," Martie said suddenly, "I wonder if you believe that!" She
stood up now, facing him, her breath coming quickly. It seemed to
Martie that she had been waiting all her life to say this: hoping
for the opportunity, years ago, dreading the necessity now. "I
wonder if you believe," she said, trembling a little, "that you--and
half the other fathers and mothers in the world--are really in the
right! I didn't ask to be born; Sally didn't ask to be born. We
didn't choose our sex. We came and we grew up, and went to school,
and we had clothing and food enough. But then--THEN!--when we must
really begin to live, you suddenly failed us. Oh, you aren't
different from other fathers, Pa. It's just that you don't
understand! What help had we then in forming human relationships?
When did you ever tell us why this young man was a possible husband,
and that one was not? I wanted to work, I wanted to be a nurse, or a
bookkeeper--you laughed at me! I had a bitter experience--an
experience that you could have spared me, and Lydia before me, if
you had cared!--and I had a girl's hell to bear; I had to go about
among my friends ASHAMED! You didn't comfort me; you didn't tell me
that if I learned a little French, and brushed up my hair, and
bought white shoes, the NEXT young man wouldn't throw me over for a
prettier and more accomplished woman! You were ashamed of me! Sally,
just as ignorant as Teddy is this minute, dashed into marriage; she
was afraid, as I was, of being a dependent old maid! She married a
good man--but that wasn't your doing! I married a bad man, a man
whose selfishness and cruelty ruined all my young days, crushed the
youth right out of me, and he might be living yet, and Teddy and I
tied to him yet but for a chance! I suffered dependence and hunger--
yes, and death, too," said Martie, crying now, "just because you
didn't give me a livelihood, just because you didn't make me, and
Sally, and Lydia, too, useful citizens! You did Len; why didn't you
give us the same chance you gave Len? Len had college; he not only
was encouraged to choose a profession, but he was MADE to! Our
profession was marriage, and we weren't even prepared for that! I
didn't know anything when I married. I didn't know whether Wallace
was fit to be a husband or a father! I didn't know how motherhood
came--all those first months were full of misgivings and doubts! I
knew I was giving him all I had, and that financially I was just
where I had been--worse off than ever, in fact, for there were the
children to think of! Why didn't I have some work to do, so that I
could have stepped into it, when bitter need came, and my children
and I were almost starving? What has Len cost you, five thousand
dollars, ten thousand? What did that statue to Grandfather Monroe
cost you? Sally and I have never cost you anything but what we ate
and wore!"

Malcolm had risen, too, and they were glaring at each other. The old
man's putty-coloured face was pale, and his eyes glittered with
fury.

"You were always a headstrong, wicked girl!" he said now, in a
toneless dry voice, hardly above a whisper. "And heartless and
wicked you will be to the end, I suppose! How dare you criticise
your father, and your sainted mother? You choose your own life; you
throw in your fortune with a ne'er-do-well, and then you come and
reproach me! Don't--don't touch me!" he added, in a sort of furious
crow, and as Martie laid a placating hand on his arm: "Don't come
near me!"

"No, don't you dare come near him!" sobbed Lydia. "Poor, dear Pa,
always so generous and so good to us! I should think you'd be
afraid, Martie--I should think you'd actually be afraid to talk so
wickedly!"

She essayed an embrace of her father, but Malcolm shook her loose,
and crossed the hall; they heard the study door slam. For a few
minutes the sisters stared at each other, then Martie went to the
side door, and called Teddy in as quiet a voice as she could
command, and Lydia vanished kitchenward, with only one scared and
reproachful look.

But the evening was not over. After Teddy was in bed, Martie,
staring at herself in the mirror, suddenly came to a new decision.
She ran down to the study, and entered informally.

"Pa!" She was on his knee, her arms about him. "I'm sorry I am such
a problem--so little a comfort!--to you. Forgive me, Pa, for I
always truly loved you--"

"If you truly want my forgiveness," he said stiffly, trying to
dislodge the clinging young arms, "you know how to deserve it--"

The old phraseology, and the old odour of teeth and skin! Martie
alone was changed.

"But forgive me, Pa, and I'll truly try never to cross you again."
Reluctantly, he conceded a response to her kiss, and she sat on the
arm of his chair, and played with the thin locks of his hair while
she completed the peace. Then she went into the kitchen, where Lydia
was sitting at the table, soaking circles of paper in brandy for the
preservation of the glasses of jelly ranged before her.

"Lyd, I just went and told Pa that I was sorry that I am such a
beast, and we've made it up--"

"I don't think you ought to talk as if it was just a quarrel," Lydia
said. "If Pa was angry with you, he had good cause--"

"Darling, I know he did! But I couldn't bear to go to sleep with ill
feeling between us, and so I came down, and apologized, and did the
whole thing handsomely--"

"You couldn't talk so lightly if you really CARED, Mart!"

"I care tremendously, Lyd. Why don't you use paraffin?"

"I know," Lydia said with interest, "Angela does. But somehow Ma
always did it this way."

"Well, I'll mark 'em for you!" Martie began to cut neat little
labels from white paper, and to write on them, "Currant Jelly with
Rasp. 1915." Presently she and Lydia were chatting pleasantly.

"I really put up too much one year," Lydia said, "and it began to
spoil, so I sent a whole box of it out to the Poor House; I don't
suppose they mind! But Mrs. Dolan there never sent my glasses back!
However, this year I'll give you some, Mart; unless Polly put some
up."

"Unless I go to New York!" Martie suggested.

Lydia's whole face darkened.

"And if I do, you and Sally will be good to Teddy?" his mother
asked, her tone suddenly faltering.

"Martie, what POSSESSES you to talk about going to New York now?"

"Oh, Lyddy, you'd never understand! It's just the longing to do
something for myself, to hold my own there, to--well, to make good!
Marrying here, and being comfortably supported here, seems like--
like failure, almost, to me! If it wasn't for Teddy, I believe that
I would have gone long ago!"

"And a selfish feeling like that is strong enough to make you
willing to break a good man's heart, and desert your child?" asked
Lydia in calm tones.

"It won't break his heart, Lyd--not nearly so much as he broke
yours, years ago! And when I can--when I could, I would send for my
boy! He'd be happier here--" Martie, rather timidly watching her
sister's face, suddenly realized the futility of this and changed
her tone. "But let's not talk about it any more to-night, Lydia,
we're both too tired and excited!"

"I don't understand you," Lydia said patiently and wearily, "I never
did. I should think that SOMETIMES you'd wonder whether you're
right, and everybody else in the world is wrong--or whether the rest
of us know SOMETHING--"

Martie generously let her have the prized last word, and went
upstairs again.

To her surprise she found Teddy awake. She sat down on the edge of
the bed, and leaned over the small figure.

"Teddy, my own boy! Haven't you been asleep?"

"Moth'," he said, with a child's uncanny prescience of impending
events, "if I were awfully, awfully bad--"

"Yes, Ted?" she encouraged him, as he paused.

"Would you ever leave me?" he asked anxiously.

The question stabbed her to the heart. She could not speak.

"I'm enough for you, aren't I?" he said eagerly. Still she did not
speak. "Or do you need somebody else?" he asked urgently.

A pang went through her heart. She tightened her arm about him.

"Teddy! You are all I have, dear!"

His small warm hand played with the ruffle of her blouse.

"But--how about Uncle Cliff, and Uncle John, and all?" he asked.
Martie was silent. "Are you going to marry them?" he added, with a
child's hesitation to say what might be ridiculous.

"No, Ted," she answered honestly.

"Well, promise me," he said urgently, sitting up to tighten his arms
about her throat, "promise me that you will never leave me! I will
never leave you, if you will promise me that! PROMISE!"

He was crying now, and Martie's own tears started thick and fast.

"I might have to leave you--just for a while--" she began.

"Not if you promised!" he said jealously.

"Even if I went away from Aunt Sally and the children, Ted, and we
had to live in a little flat again?" she stammered.

"Even THEN!" he said, with a shaken attempt at a manly voice. "I
remember the pears in the carts, and the box you dropped the train
tickets into," he said encouragingly, "and I remember Margar's
bottles that you used to let me wash! You'd take me into the parks,
and down to the beach, wouldn't you, Moth'?"

"Oh, Teddy, my little son! I'd try to make a life for you, dear!"

"And WE'D be our family, just you and me!" he said uncertainly.

"We'd be a family, all by ourselves," she promised him, laughing and
crying. And she clung to him hungrily, kissing the smooth little
forehead under the rich tumble of hair, her tears falling on his
face. Ah, this was hers, this belonged to her alone, out of all the
world. "I'm glad you told me how you felt about this, Teddy," she
said. "It makes it all clearer to me. You and I, dear--that's the
only real life for us. I owe you that. I promise you, we'll never be
separated while Mother can help it."

His wet little face was pressed against hers.

"And you'll NEVER talk about it any more!" he said violently.
"Because I cry about it sometimes, at night--"

"Never again, my own son!" He lay back on his pillow with a breath
of relief, but she kept her arms about him.

"Because you don't know how a boy feels about his own mother!" he
assured her. Kneeling there, Martie wondered how she had come to
forget his rights, forget his point of view for so long! He would
always seem a baby to her, but he was a person now, and he had his
part in, and his influence upon, her life. Suppose she had left him
to cry out this secret hunger of his uncomforted; suppose, while she
thought him contentedly playing with Billy and 'Lizabeth, he had
been judging and blaming his mother?

While she knelt, thinking, he went to sleep. But Lydia wondered what
was keeping Martie awake. The light in Martie's room was turned up,
and fell in a yellow oblong across the gravel; Lydia dozed and
awakened, but the light was always there.

Morning broke softly in a fog which did not lift as the hours went
by. Malcolm was at home until after lunch, to which meal Teddy and
Martie came downstairs unusually well dressed, Martie observing that
she had errands down town. Teddy kissed Grandpa good-bye as usual,
and his mother kissed Grandpa, too, which was not quite usual, and
clung with her white hands to his lapel.

"Teddy and I have shopping to do down town, Pa, and I've written
Cliff a note!" she said. Her father brightened.

"I'm glad you're inclined to act sensibly, my dear!" he said,
departing. "I thought we'd hear a different story this morning!"

"What are you going down town for?" asked Lydia. "I ought to have
some rubber rings from Mallon's."

"I'm taking a lot of things down--I have to pass the cleaner's
anyway," answered Martie. "I'll get them, and send them."

"Oh, bring them; they'll go in your pocket," Lydia said. "Well, Ted,
what'll you do when these measles are over, and you have to go back
to school? You've put an awful good suit on him, Mart, just to play
in."

"He'll change before he plays," Martie answered, nervously smiling.
"Come, dear!"

"Don't forget your things for the cleaner's!" Lydia said, handing
her her suitcase. Martie surprised the older sister with a sudden
kiss.

"Thanks, Lyd, dear!" she said. "Good-bye! Come, Ted!"

They went down through the quiet village, shabby after the burning
of the summer. Fog lay in wet, dark patches on the yellow grass, and
in the thinning air was the good smell of wood fires. Grapes were
piled outside the fruit stores and pasted at a slant on Bonestell's
window was a neatly printed paper slip, "Chop Suey Sundae, 15c." Up
on the brown hills the fog was rising.

They went to see Dr. Ben in his old offices opposite the Town Hall,
and he gave Teddy a pink "sucker pill," as he had given Martie years
ago.

At the grocery they met Sally, with all four children, and two small
children more, and Aunt Mart had her usual kisses. Sally was afraid
that Grace's baby boy had the measles, she confided to her sister,
and had taken the twins for a time.

"Martie, how smart you look, and Ted all dressed up!" said Sally.
"And look at my tramps in their old clothes! Mart, do go past Mason
and White's and see the linen dress patterns in the window; there's
a blue-and-tan there, and an all-white--they're too lovely!"

"Why don't you let me send you one, Sally?" Martie asked
affectionately. "I'm rich! I drew my two hundred and eleven dollars'
bank account yesterday, and cashed a check from my editor, and
Cousin Allie's wedding check!" Sally flamed into immediate protest.

"Martie, I'll be wild if you do--you mustn't! I never would have
spoken of it--"

Martie laughed as she kissed her sister, and presently Sally wheeled
Mary's carriage away. But Teddy and his mother went into Mason and
White's, nevertheless, and both the tan-and-blue and the all-white
dress were taken out of the window and duly paid for and sent away.
Teddy shouted to his mother when they were in the street again that
there was Uncle Joe in the car, and he could have taken the dresses
to Aunt Sally.

No, his mother told him, that was to be a surprise! But she crossed
the street to talk in a low tone to Uncle Joe. Uncle Joe said more
than once, "I'm with you--I think you're right!" and finally kissed
Teddy, and suddenly kissed his mother, before he drove away.

Teddy was bursting with the thought of the surprise. But this
afternoon was full of surprises. They were strolling along,
peacefully enough, when suddenly his mother took his small arm and
guided him into the station where they had arrived in Monroe nearly
two years before.

A big train came thundering to a stop now as then, and Teddy's
mother said to him quickly and urgently: "Climb in, Love. That's my
boy! Get in, dear; mother'll explain to you later!"

She took a ticket from her bag, and showed it to the coloured
porter, and they went down the little passage past the dressing
room, and came to the big velvet seats which he remembered
perfectly. His mother was breathing nervously, and she was quite
pale as she discussed the question of Teddy's berth with the man who
had letters on his cap.

She would not let Teddy look out of the windows until the train
started, but it started in perhaps two minutes, and then she took
off his hat and her own, and smoothed back his hair, and laughed
delightfully like a little girl.

"Where are we goin'?" asked Teddy, charmed and excited.

"We're going to New York, Loveliness! We're going to make a new
start!" she said.


CHAPTER VIII


From that hour Martie knew the joy of living. She emerged from the
hard school in which she had been stumbling and blundering so long;
she was a person, an individuality, she was alive and she loved
life.

Her heart fairly sang as she paid for Teddy's supper, the lovely
brown hills of California slipping past the windows of the dining
car. The waiter was solicitous; would the lady have just a salad?
No, said the lady, she did not feel hungry. She and Teddy went out
to breathe the glorious air of the mountains from the observation
car, and to flash and clatter through the snow sheds.

And what a delight it was to be young and free and to have this
splendid child all for her own, thought Martie, her heart swelling
with a wonderful peace. Everybody liked Teddy, and Teddy's touching
happiness at being alone with his adored mother opened her eyes to
the feeling that had been hidden under a child's inarticulateness
all these months.

The two hundred dollars between her and destitution might have been
two million; she was rich. She could treat the troubled, pale little
mother and the two children from the next section to lemonades every
afternoon, and when they reached Chicago, hot and sunshiny at last,
she and Teddy spent the day loitering through a big department
store. Here Teddy was given a Boy Scout suit, and Martie bought
herself a cake of perfumed soap whose odour, whenever she caught it
in after times, brought back the enchanting emotion of these first
days of independence.

Tired, dirty, they were sitting together late in the afternoon of
the fifth day, when she felt a sudden tug at her heart. Outside the
car window, slipping steadily by, were smoke-stained brick
factories, and little canals and backwaters soiled with oil and
soot, and heaps of slag and scrap iron and clinkers. Then villages
swept by--flat, orderly villages with fences enclosing summer
gardens. Then factories again--villages--factories--no more of the
flat, bare fields: the fields were all of the West.

But suddenly above this monotonous scene Martie noticed a dull glow
that grew rosier and steadier as the early evening deepened. Up
against the first early stars the lights of New York climbed in a
wide bar of pink and gold, flung a quivering bar of red.

She was back again! Back in the great city. She belonged once more
to the seething crowds in the Ghetto, to the cool arcades between
the great office buildings, to Broadway with its pushing crowds of
shoppers, to the Bronx teeming with tiny shops and swung with the
signs of a thousand apartments to let. The hotels, with their
uniformed starters, the middle Forties, with their theatrical
boarding-houses, the tiny experimental art shops and tea shops and
gift shops that continually appear and disappear among the basements
of old brown-stone houses--she was back among them all!

Tears of joy and excitement came to her eyes. She pressed her face
eagerly beside the child's face at the window.

"Look down, Ted, that's the East Side, dear, with all the children
playing; do you remember? And see all the darling awnings flapping!"

"I shouldn't wonder if we should have an electric storm!" said
Teddy, finding the old phrase easily, his warm little cheek against
hers.

"We're back in New York, Teddy! We're home again!" She was gathering
her things together. A thought smote her, and she paused with
suddenly colouring cheeks. This might so easily have been her
wedding-trip; she and Clifford might have been together now.

Poor Clifford, with his stiffly moving brain and his platitudes! She
hoped he would marry some more grateful woman some day. What a
Paradise opening for Lydia if he could ever fancy her again! Martie
spent a moment in wonder as to what the story given Monroe would be.
She had mailed a letter to Lydia, and one to Clifford, during that
last, quiet, foggy morning--letters written after the packing had
been done on that last night. She had suggested that Monroe be given
a hint that business had taken Mrs. Bannister suddenly eastward. It
would be a nine days' wonder; in six months Monroe would only
vaguely remember it. Gossips might suspect the truth: they would
never know it. Clifford himself, in another year, would be placidly
implying that there never had been anything in the rumour of an
engagement. Rose would dimple and shake her head; Martie was always
just a little ODD. Lydia would confide to Sally that she was just
sick for fear that Dryden man--and Sally, sternly inspecting Jimmy's
little back for signs of measles, would quote Joe. Joe ALWAYS
thought Martie would make good, and Joe wasn't one bit sorry she had
done as she had. Dr. Ben would defend her, too, for on that sudden
impulsive call she had let her full heart thank him for all his
fatherly goodness to her beloved Sally, and had told him what she
was doing.

"Mark ye, if you was engaged to me, ye wouldn't jump the traces like
this!" the old man had assured her.

"Dr. Ben, I wouldn't want to!" she had answered gaily. "You're older
than Cliff; I know that. But you're broad, Dr. Ben, and you're
simple, and you aren't narrow! You've grown older the way I want to,
just smiling and listening. And you know more in your little finger
than--than some people know in their whole bodies!" And she put her
arms about his neck, and gave him a daughter's laughing kiss.

"Looky here," said the old man, warming, "a man's got to be dead
before he can stand for a thing like this! You haven't got a
waiting-list, I suppose, Miss Martie?"

"No, sir!" she answered positively. "But if ever I do I'll let you
know!"

She and Teddy ate their first meal at Childs'. Little signs bearing
the single word "strawberries" were pasted on the window; Martie
felt a real thrill of affection for the place as she went in. After
a while "Old Southern Corn Cakes" would take the place of the
strawberries, and then grape-fruit "In Season Now."

"After a while we'll be too rich to come here, Ted!" she said as
they went out.

"Wull we?" Teddy asked regretfully. They went into the pushing and
crowding of the streets; heard the shrill trill of the crossing
policeman's whistle again; caught a glimpse of Broadway's lights,
fanning lower and higher, and as the big signs rippled up and down.

Martie drank it in eagerly, no faintest shadow of apprehension fell
upon this evening. She and Teddy walked to their little hotel; to-
morrow she would see her editor, and they would search for cheaper
quarters. She would get the half-promised position or another; it
mattered not which. She would board economically, or find diminutive
quarters for housekeeping; be comfortable either way. If they kept
house, some kindly old woman would be found to give Teddy bread and
butter when he came in from school. And on hot summer Sundays she
and Teddy would pack their lunch, and make an early start for the
beach; theoretically, it would be an odd life for the child, but
actually--how much richer and more sympathetic she would make it
than her own had been! Children are natural gypsies, and Teddy would
never complain because his mother kept him up later than was quite
conventional in the evening, and sometimes took him to her office,
to draw pictures or look at books for a quiet hour.

And she would have friends: women who were working like herself, and
men, too. She was as little afraid of the other as of the one now.
There would be visits to country cottages; there would be winter
dinners, down on the Square. And some day, perhaps, she would have
the studio with the bare floors and the dark rugs. Over and over
again she said the words to herself: she was free; she was free.

Dependence on Pa's whim, on Wallace's whim, was over. She stood
alone, now; she could make for herself that life that every man was
always free to make; that every woman should be offered, too. She
had suffered bitterly; she might live to be an old, old woman, but
she knew that the sight of a fluffy-headed girl baby must always
stab her with unendurable pain. She had been shabby, hungry,
ashamed, penniless, humiliated. She had been ill, physically
handicapped for weary weeks upon weeks.

And she had emerged, armed for the fight. The world needed her now,
Cliff and Pa needed her, even Dr. Ben and Sally and Len would have
been proud to offer her a home. Miss Fanny was missing her now; a
dozen persons idling into the Library in sleepy little Monroe's
summer fog, to-morrow morning, would wish that Miss David was not so
slow, would wish that Mrs. Bannister was back.

The editor himself was out of town; but his assistant was as
encouraging as a somewhat dazzled young man could be.

"She's a corker," said the assistant later. "She's pretty and she
talks fast and she's full of fun; but it's not that. She's got a
sort of PUSH to her; you'll like her. I bet she'll be just the
person. I told her that you'd be here this morning, and she said
she'd call again."

"I hope she does!" the editor said. Her card was handed him a moment
later.

In came the tall, severely gowned woman with the flashing smile and
blue eyes, and magnificent bronze hair. She radiated confidence and
power. He had hoped for something like this from her letters; she
was better than his hopes. She wanted a position. She hoped, she
said innocently, that it was a good time for positions.

It was always a good time for certain people, the editor reflected.
They talked for half an hour, irrelevant talk, Martie thought it,
for it was principally of her personal history and his own. Then a
stenographer interrupted; the little boy was afraid that his mother
had gone away through some other door!

The little boy came in, and shook hands with Mr. Trowbridge, and
subsided into his mother's lap. Then the three had another half-
hour's talk. Mr. Trowbridge had boys, too, but they were up in the
country now.

He himself escorted them over the office, through large spaces
filled with desks, past closed doors, through a lunch-room and a
library. Respectful greetings met them on all sides. Martie was glad
she had on her wedding suit, and the new hat that had been in a
department store on Sixth Avenue yesterday afternoon. Mr. Trowbridge
called Mrs. Bannister's attention to a certain desk. When they went
back to the privacy of his own office, he asked her if she would
like to come to use that desk, say on Monday?

"There's a bunch of confidential letters there now, for you to
answer," he said. "Then there are always articles to change, or cut,
or adapt. Also our Miss Briggs, in the 'My Own Money Club,' needs
help. We may ask you sometimes to take home a bunch of stories to
read; we may ask you to do something else!"

"I'll address envelopes or stoke the furnace!" said Martie, bright
tears in her smiling eyes. "I don't know whether I'm worth all that
money," she added, "for it doesn't seem to me that anybody in the
world really EARNS as much as twenty dollars a week, but I'll try to
be! I'm twenty-eight years old, and I've been waiting all my life
for this chance!"

"Well, even at that age, you may have a year or two of usefulness
left, if your health is spared you." the editor said. They parted
laughing, and Martie went out into the wonderful, sunny, hospitable
city as gay as Teddy was. Oh, how she would work, how she would
work! She would get down to the office first of all; she would wear
the trimmest suits; she would never be cross, never be tired, never
rebel at the most flagrant imposition! She would take the cold baths
and wear the winter underwear that kept tonsilitis at bay; she would
hire a typewriter, and keep on with her articles. If ever a woman in
the world kept a position, then Martie would keep hers!

And, of course, women did. There was that pretty, capable woman who
came into Mr. Trowbridge's office, and was introduced as the
assistant editor. Coolly dressed, dainty and calm, she had not
suggested that the struggle was too hard. She had smilingly greeted
Martie, offered a low-voiced suggestion, and vanished unruffled and
at peace.

"Why, that's what this world IS," Martie reflected. "Workers needing
jobs, and jobs needing workers." And suddenly she hit upon the
keynote to her new philosophy. "MEN don't worry and fidget about
keeping their jobs, and _I_'M not going to. I'm just as necessary
and just as capable as if I were--say, Len. If Len came on here for
a job I wouldn't worry myself sick about his ever getting it!"

What honeymoon would have been half so thrilling, she reflected, as
this business of getting herself and Teddy suitably established? Her
choice, not made until Sunday afternoon, fell upon a quiet boarding-
house on West Sixty-first Street. It was kept by a kindly Irishwoman
who had children younger and older than Teddy, and well-disposed
toward Teddy, and it was only half a block from the Park. At first
Mrs. Gilfogle said she would charge nothing at all for the child; a
final price for the two was placed at fifteen dollars a week. Martie
suspected that the young Gilfogles would accompany Teddy and herself
on their jaunts occasionally, and would help him scatter his stone
blocks all over her floor on winter nights. But the luncheon for
which they stayed was exceptionally good, and she was delighted with
her big back room.

"I'm alone wid the two of thim to raise," said Mrs. Gilfogle. "I
know what it is. He died on me just as I got three hundred dollars'
worth of furniture in, God rest him. I didn't know would I ever pay
for it at all, with Joe here at the breast, and Annie only walking.
Yet the kind of faith required is no longer a blind faith, but one
founded on sane and carefully evolved theories. Democracy has
become a scientific experiment.

In this connection, as one notably inspired by emulation, by
the joy of creative work and service, the medical profession comes
first to mind.

The finer element in this profession is constantly increasing
in numbers, growing more and more influential, making life less
easy for the quack, the vendor of nostrums, the commercial proprietor
of the bogus medical college. The doctor who uses his talents for
gain is frowned upon by those of his fellow practitioners whose
opinion really counts.

Respected physicians in our cities give much of their time to
teaching, animating students with their own spirit; and labour
long hours, for no material return, in the clinics of the poor.

And how often, in reading our newspapers, do we learn that some
medical scientist, by patient work, and often at the risk of life
and health, has triumphed over a scourge which has played havoc
with humanity throughout the ages!

Typhoid has been conquered, and infant paralysis; gangrene and tetanus,
which have taken such toll of the wounded in Flanders and
France; yellow fever has been stamped out in the tropics; hideous
lesions are now healed by a system of drainage.

The very list of these achievements is bewildering, and latterly
we are given hope of the prolongation of life itself. Here in truth
are Christian deeds multiplied by science, made possible by
a growing knowledge of and mastery over Nature.

Such men by virtue of their high mission are above the vicious social
and commercial competition poisoning the lives of so many
of their fellow citizens. In our democracy they have found their
work, and the work is its own reward. They give striking testimony
to the theory that absorption in a creative or contributive task is
the only source of self-realization. And he has little faith in
mankind who shall declare that the medical profession is the only
group capable of being socialized, or, rather, of socializing
themselves--for such is the true process of democracy.

Public opinion should be the leaven.

What is possible for the doctor is also possible for the lawyer, for
the teacher.
In a democracy, teaching should be the most honoured of the
professions, and indeed once was,--before the advent of industrialism,
when it gradually fell into neglect,--occasionally into deplorable
submission to the possessors of wealth. Yet a wage disgracefully
low, hardship, and even poverty have not hindered men of ability
from entering it in increasing numbers, renouncing ease and luxuries.

Adele was asking. "We haven't. I was kept
by the girl at the milliner's--"

It was one o'clock on a Saturday afternoon. Martie was free to lunch
where she pleased. She was free even to sit down with a woman whose
name was under a cloud. They all crowded into an express elevator,
and sat down at a table in the restaurant on the twelfth floor.

Presently the unreality of it faded from Martie's uppermost
consciousness and she began to enjoy herself. To sit with the wife
of a Mystic Shriner, and the woman who had done what Adele had done,
and whose husband incidentally was deeply devoted to herself, was
not according to Monroe. But she was in New York!

"I guess I was a silly girl, misled by a man of the world," Adele
was saying in her old, complaining, complacent voice. "I know I was
a fool, Martie, but don't men do that sort of thing all the time,
and get over it? Why should us women pay all the time? You know as
well as I do that John Dryden was just as queer as Dick's hatband; I
was hungering, as a girl will, for pleasure and excitement--"

"It was a dirty crime, the way that doctor acted," Mrs. Baker
contributed, her tone much pleasanter than her words. "He must have
been a skunk, if you ask me. Adele here was wrong, Mrs. Bannister;
you and I won't quarrel about that. But Adele wasn't nothing but a
child at heart--"

"I believed anything he told me!" Adele drawled, playing with her
knife and fork, her lashes dropped.

"Dryden," the loyal sister continued majestically, "threw her over
the second he got a chance; that's what she got for putting up with
HIM for all those years! And then, if you please, this other feller
discovers that he can't get rid of his wife. I came on then," she
said warmly as Martie murmured her sympathy, "and I says to Adele,
throw the whole crowd of them down. Billy Baker and I have plenty,
and my daughter--Ruby, she's a lovely girl and she's married an
elegant feller whose people own about all the lumber interests in
our part of the country--she doesn't need anything from us. But if
you ask me, it's just about killed Adele," she went on frankly,
glancing at her sister, "she looks like a sick girl to me. We came
on two or three days ago, to see a specialist about her, and I
declare I'll be glad to get her back."

"What has become of Dr. Cooper?" Martie felt justified in asking.

"He lost all the practice he ever had, they say," Mrs. Baker said
viciously. "And good enough for him, too! His wife won't even see
him, and he lives at some boarding-house; and serve him right!"

"And Jack's book such a success!" Adele said, widening her eyes at
Martie. "Do you ever see him?"

"He's got a great friend in Dean Silver, the novelist," Martie
answered composedly. "I believe they're abroad."

"The idea!" Adele said lifelessly. She was playing with her
bracelets now, and looked about her in an aimless way.

"Well, if this little girl has any sense she'll let the past be the
past," remarked the optimistic Mrs. Baker. "There's a fellow out our
way, Joe Chase; he's got a cattle ranch. You never heard of him?
He's a di'mond in the rough, if you ask me, but he's been crazy
about Adele ever since she first visited me. He'd give her anything
in God's world."

"But I think I'd die of loneliness winters!" Adele said, with the
smile of a petted child.

So there was a third man eager to sacrifice his life to her, Martie
marvelled. Adele would consider herself a martyr if she succumbed to
the wiles of the rough diamond; she would puzzle and distress him in
his ranch-house; she would Fret and exact and complain. Probably one
of the Swedish farmers thereabout could give him a daughter who
would make him an infinitely better wife, and bear him children, and
worship him blindly. But no; he must yearn for this neurotic,
abnormal little creature, with her ugly history and her barren brain
and body.

"Isn't it funny how unlucky I am, Martie?" Adele asked at parting.
"If you'll tell me why one woman has to have so much bad luck, and
others just sail along on the top of the wave, I'll be obliged to
you!" She came close to Martie, her faded, bitter little face
flushing suddenly. "Now this Mrs. Cooper," she said in a low tone,
"her father was a shoe manufacturer, and left her half a million
dollars. Of course, it's a SNAP for her to say she'll do this, and
say she'll do that! She says it's for the children she refuses the
divorce, but the real reason is she wants him back. She can live in
New York--"

Adele's voice trailed off disconsolately. Martie felt a genuine pang
of sympathy for the unhappy little creature whose one claim had been
of sex, and who had made her claim so badly.

"Write me now and then!" she said warmly.

"Oh, I will!" Adele stretched up to kiss the taller woman, and Mrs.
Baker kissed her, too. Martie went away smiling; over all its waste
and suffering life was amusing, after all.

Would John, with his irregular smile and his sea-blue eyes and his
reedy voice, also come back into her life some day? She could not
say. The threads of human intercourse were tangled enough to make
living a blind business at best, and she had deliberately tangled
the web that held them even more deeply than life had done. Before
he himself was back from long wandering, before he learned that she
was in the city, and that there had been no second marriage, months,
perhaps years, must go by.

Martie accepted the possibility serenely. She asked nothing better
than work and companionship, youth and health, and Teddy. Every day
was a separate adventure in happiness; she had never been happy
before.

And suppose this was only the beginning, she wondered. Suppose real
achievement and real success lay ahead? Suppose she was one of the
women to whom California would some day point with pride? Deep in
her singing heart she suspected that it was true. How it was to come
about she could only guess. By her pen, of course. By some short
story suddenly inspired, or by one of her flashing articles on the
women's problems of the day. She was not a Shakespeare, not a George
Eliot, but she had something for which the world would pay.

Nine years since the September when Rodney Parker had flashed into
her world; a long nine years. Sitting under her green-shaded reading
lamp, Martie reviewed them, for herself, and for Sally. She and
Sally had thought of Dr. Ben as only an amiable theorist then, but
there had been nothing theoretical about the help he had given Sally
and Joe with their problem.

Martie had solved her own alone. Rodney, Pa, Wallace, and John had
all entered into it, but no one of them had helped her. It was in
spite of them rather than because of them that she was sitting here
poised, established, needed at last. She saw her life to-night as a
long road, climbing steadily up from the fields and valleys,
mounting, sometimes in storm, and sometimes in fog, but always
mounting toward the mountains. Rose and Adele and Lydia were content
with the lowlands, the quiet, sunny plains below. She must have the
heights.

There were other women seeking that rising road; perhaps she might
help them. Love and wifehood and motherhood she had known, now she
would know the joy of perfected expression, the fulfillment of the
height. _--Benches less crowded than hitherto during week of
tumultuous interest. Explanation forthcoming in fact that something
like a hundred Members belonging to Territorial Service have buckled
on their armour and responded to call of mobilisation.

