"So sorry . . . so sorry, Maggie dear . . . so sorry," the words ran
up and down. "I hadn't meant to take you away before the service was
over. Elizabeth could have . . . sometimes my pain is very bad and I
have to lie down, you know. But it's nothing--nothing really--only
I'm glad, rather, that you should share all our little troubles,
because then you'll know us better, won't you? Dear Maggie, there's
been something between us all this time, hasn't there? Ever since
our first meeting--and it's partly been my fault. I wasn't good at
first, I wanted to be kind, but I was stiff and shy. You wouldn't
think that I'm shy? I am, terribly. I always have been since I was
very little, and just to enter a room when other people are there
makes me so embarrassed . . . I remember once when mother was alive
her scolding me because I wouldn't come in to a tea-party. But I
couldn't; I stood outside the door in an agony, doing everything to
make myself go in--but I couldn't . . . But now I've come to love
you, dear, although of course you have your faults. But they are
faults of your age, carelessness, selfishness. They are nothing in
the eyes of God, who understands all our weaknesses. And you must
learn to know Him, dear. That is my only prayer now. If I am taken,
if I go before the great day--if it be His will--then I pray always,
now that I may leave you in my place, waiting for Him as I have
waited, trusting Him as I have trusted . . . you saw to-night what
it means to us, what it must mean to any one who has listened. There
were times, years ago, when I had not turned to God, when I did
not care, when I thought of earthly love . . . God drew me to
Himself . . . You too must come, Maggie--you must come. You mustn't
stay outside--you are asked, you are invited--perhaps you will be
compelled . . ."

The voice sank: Maggie's teeth chattered in her head from the cold,
and her foot had gone to sleep. She felt obstinate and rebellious
and frightened, she could not think clearly, and the words that came
from her, suddenly, seemed to her not to be her own.

"Aunt Anne, I want to do everything that you and Aunt Elizabeth
think I should, but I must be myself, mustn't I? I'm grown up now;
I've got my three hundred pounds and I don't think I want to be
religious. I'm very grateful to you and Aunt Elizabeth, but I'm not
a help to you much, I'm afraid. I know I'm very careless, I do want
to be better, and that's all the more reason, perhaps, why I should
go out and earn my own living. I'd learn more quickly then. But I do
love you and Aunt Elizabeth . . ."

She broke off; she did not love them. She knew that she did not. The
only human being in all the world whom she loved was Martin.
Nevertheless there did come to her suddenly then a new tenderness
for her aunt; the actual sight of her pain in the Chapel had deeply
touched her and now her eagerness for escape was mingled with a
longing to be affectionate and good.

But Aunt Anne did not seem to have heard.

"Are you sure you're not cold, dear?"

"No, aunt."

Their hands touched.

"But you are. Put that rug over you. That one at the end of the bed.
I'm quiet now. I think perhaps I shall sleep a little."

"Is there anything I can do?"

"Perhaps turn the lamp down, dear. That's it. A little more. Now, if
you'd just raise my pillow. There, behind my head. That's the way!
Why, what a good nurse you are!"

Maggie, as tenderly as she could, turned the pillow, patted it,
placed it beneath her aunt's head. She was close against her aunt's
face, and the eyes seemed suddenly so fierce and urgent, so
insistent and powerful, that seeing them was like the discovery of
some blazing fire in an empty house. Most of all, they were
terrified eyes. Maggie went back to her chair. After that, she sat
there during the slow evolution of Eternity; Eternity unrolled
itself before her, on and on and on, grey limitless mist and space,
comfortless, lifeless, hopeless. She had been for many weeks leading
a thoroughly unwholesome life in that old house with those old
women. She did not herself know how unhealthy it had been, but she
knew that she missed the wide fields and downs of Glebeshire, the
winds that blew from the sea round Borhedden, the air that swirled
and raced up and down the little stony strata of St. Dreot. Now she
had been kept indoors, had had no fun of any kind, had looked
forward to Mr. Magnus as her chief diversion. Then Martin had come,
and suddenly she had seen how dangerously her life was hemming her
in. She was losing courage. She would soon be afraid to speak for
herself at all; she would soon . . .

In a panic at these thoughts, and feeling as though some one was
trying to push her down into a coffin whilst she was still alive,
she began hurriedly to speak, although she did not know whether her
aunt were asleep or no.

"I think I ought to tell you, Aunt Anne, that I wrote a letter some
days ago and posted it myself. It was to a lady who knew Father once
in Glebeshire, and she said that if ever I wanted help I was to
write to her, and so--although perhaps I oughtn't to have done it
without asking you first, still I was afraid you mightn't want me
to--so I sent it. I wouldn't like to hurt your feelings, Aunt Anne,
and it isn't that I'm not happy with you and Aunt Elizabeth, but I
ought to be earning my own living, oughtn't I? And I've only got my
three hundred pounds, haven't I? I'm not complaining, but I don't
know about anything yet, do I? I can't even find my way when I'm out
with Aunt Elizabeth. And I'm afraid I'll never be really good enough
to be religious. Perhaps if Father'd wanted me to be I might be now,
but he never cared . . . I hope you won't be angry, Aunt Anne, but I
didn't like to-night--I didn't really. When I was there I thought
that soon I'd begin to cry like the others, but it was only because
every one else was crying--not because I wanted to. I hope you won't
be angry, but I'm afraid I'll never be religious as you and Aunt
Elizabeth want me to be; so don't you think it will be better for me
to start learning something else right away?"

Maggie poured all this out and then felt immense relief. At last she
was honest again; at last she had said what she felt, and they knew
it and could never say that she hadn't been fair with them. She felt
that her speech had cleared the air in every kind of way. She waited
for her aunt's reply. No sound came from the bed. Had her aunt
heard? Perhaps she slept. Maggie waited. Then timidly, and softly
she said:

"Aunt Anne . . . Aunt Anne . . ."

No reply. Then again in a whisper:

"Aunt Anne . . . Aunt Anne . . ."

Supposing Aunt Anne . . . Maggie trembled, then, commanding herself
to be calm, she bent towards the bed.

"Aunt Anne, are you asleep?"

Suddenly Aunt Anne's face was there, the eyes closed, the mouth, the
cheeks pale yellow in the faint reflection from the lamp. There was
no stir, no breath.

"Aunt Anne, Aunt Anne," Maggie whispered in terror now. Then she saw
that her aunt was sleeping; very, very faintly the sheets rose and
fell and the fingers of the hand on the coverlet trembled a little
as though they were struggling to wake.

Then Aunt Anne had heard nothing after all. But it might be that she
was pretending, just to see what Maggie would say.

"Aunt Anne," whispered Maggie once more and for the last time. Then
she sat back on her seat again, her hands folded, staring straight
in front of her. After that she did not know for how long she sat
there in a state somewhere between dream and reality. The room,
although it never lost its familiarity, grew uncouthly strange;
shapes grey and dim seemed to move beneath the windows, humping
their backs, spinning out into long limbs, hands and legs and
gigantic fingers. The deadest hour of the night was come; the
outside world seemed to press upon the house, the whole world cold,
thick, damp, lifeless, like an animal slain and falling with its
full weight, crushing everything beneath it. Perhaps she slept--she
did not know. Martin seemed to be with her, and against them was
Aunt Anne, her back against the door, her hands spread, refusing to
let them pass. The room joined in the struggle, the floor slipped
beneath their tread, the curtain swayed forward and caught them in
its folds, the lamp flickered and flickered and flickered . . .

She was awake suddenly, quite acutely aware of danger. She rubbed
her eyes, turned, and in the dim shadow saw her aunt sitting up in
bed, her body drawn up to its intensest height, her hands pressing
down, flat upon the bed. Her eyes stared as though they would break
down all boundaries, but her lips trembled like the lips of a little
child.

"Aunt Anne, what is it?" Maggie whispered.

"It's the pain--" Her voice was far away as though some one were
speaking from the passage outside the door. "It's the pain . . . I
can't . . . much more . . ."

Maggie remembered what Martha had told her about the drops. She
found the little green bottle, saw the glass by the side of it.

Suddenly she heard Aunt Anne: "Oh no . . . Oh no! God I can't . . .
God, I can't . . . I can't."

Maggie bent over the bed; she put her hand behind her aunt's back
and could feel the whole body quivering, the flesh damp beneath the
night-dress. She steadied her, then put the glass to her lips.

The cry was now a little whisper. "No more . . . I can . . . no
more." Then more softly still: "Thy will, oh Lord. As thou wilt--Our
Father, which art in Heaven, Hallowed . . . Hallowed . . . Hallowed
. . ."

She sank down on to her pillows.

"Is it better?" Maggie asked.

Her aunt caught her hand.

"You mustn't leave me. I shan't live long, but you must stay with me
until I go. Promise me! Promise me!"

"No, I can't promise," said Maggie.

"You must stay. You must stay."

"No I can't promise." Then suddenly kneeling down by the bed she put
her hand on the other's arm: "Aunt Anne, I'll do anything for you--
anything--to make you better--if I can help . . . but not a promise,
I can't promise."

"Ah, but you will stay," Aunt Anne's whisper trembled with its
certainty.

That seemed the climax of the night to Maggie then. She felt that
she was indeed held for eternity by the house, the Chapel, and
something beyond the Chapel. The scent of the medicine, the
closeness of the room, the darkness and the sickness, seemed to
close all about her . . .  She was at the bottom of a deep well, and
she would never get out, she would never get out . . .

The door slowly, very softly opened, and old Martha looked in.

"She's been very bad," whispered Maggie.

"Ay, I heard something. That's why I came. You gave her the drops?"

"Yes."

"She'll sleep a bit now. I'll take your place, Miss Maggie. It's
time you went back to your bed."

Maggie crept away.

She came down to breakfast to find the house bathed in sunlight and
the parrot singing hoarsely "And her golden hair was hanging down
her back." Aunt Elizabeth was there, cheerful and almost merry in
her bird-like fashion. The world was normal, ghosts out of fashion,
and this morning was the day on which the silver was cleaned. This
last was Maggie's business, and very badly she did it, never being
"thorough," and having a fatal habit of thinking of other things.
Porridge, eggs and bacon, marmalade--

"And--her golden hair was hanging--" croaked Edward.

"Your aunt won't come down this morning, Maggie. She's much better.
The sun's shining. A little walk will be a good thing. I'll buy the
calico that Anne talked about. Your aunt's better."

Maggie felt ashamed of herself. What desperate silly feelings had
she allowed last night? How much she had made of that service, and
how weak she was to give way so easily!

"I'll clean the silver," she thought. "I'll do it better than ever"-
-but unfortunately she had a hole in her stocking, and Aunt
Elizabeth, like a sparrow who has found a worm, told her about it.

"Mr. Crashaw's coming to tea this afternoon," she concluded.

"That's why Anne's staying in bed--to be well enough." The stocking
and Mr. Crashaw dimmed a little of the morning's radiance, but
behind them was the thought, "Martin must come to-day. It was like a
message his look last night." She even sang to herself as she
scrubbed at the silver.

They spent a domestic morning. Aunt Elizabeth did not go for her
walk, but instead stayed in the dining-room and, seated at the end
of the long dining-table, her head just appearing above the worn and
soiled green table-cloth, tried to discipline the week's household
accounts. She worked sucking one finger after another and poking her
pencil into her ears.

"One pound, three shillings--ham, ham, ham--?"

At one moment she invited the cook to assist her, and that lady,
crimson from the kitchen fire, bared arms akimbo, stated that she
was not only the most economical woman in London, but was also,
thanks to her upbringing, one of the most sober and virtuous, and if
Miss Cardinal had anything to say against--

Oh no! Aunt Elizabeth had nothing to say against, only this one
pound, three shillings--

Well, the cook couldn't help that; she wasn't one to let a penny out
of her fingers where it shouldn't go.

So the morning hummed along; luncheon-time came, the silver was all
cleaned, the stockings changed, and there was roast chicken. Thomas,
with his wicked eyes, came slowly, majestically upon the scene--but
even he was not sinister to-day, being interested in his own greed
rather than other persons' sins.

All this time Maggie refused to think. Martin would come, then she
would see.

Martin . . .  Martin . . .  Martin . . .  She went up into her
bedroom and whispered the name over and over to herself whilst she
tried to mend her stocking. She flung the stocking down and gazed
out of the window on to a world that was all golden cloud and racing
watery blue. The roofs swam like floating carpets in the sun,
detached from the brick and mortar beneath them, carried by the
racing clouds. It was only at that sudden gaze that she realised
that she was a prisoner. All her alarm came back to her.

"Why can't I go out? I'll put on my hat and just walk out. No one
can stop me. No one . . ."

But she knew that she could not. Something more must happen first.
She turned from the window with a little shudder, finished very
clumsily her stocking, and as the cuckoo clock struck halfpast three
went down to the drawing-room.

There to her surprise, she found Caroline Smith. The events of the
last few days had, a little, dimmed Caroline from her memory. She
had not seen Caroline for a fortnight. She did not know that she
especially wanted to see Caroline now. However, it was very certain
that Caroline wanted to see her. The young woman was dressed in
rose-coloured silk that stood out from her slim body almost like a
crinoline, and she had a straw funnel-shaped hat with roses perched
on the side of her lovely head. She kissed Maggie many times, and
then sitting down with her little sharp black shoes poked out in
front of her, she ran on:

"It's been too bad, Maggie, dear; it's simply ages since we had a
moment, isn't it, but it hasn't been my fault. Father's been ill--
bronchitis--and I've had to help Mother. Father's been so happy,
he's just been able to lie in bed for days and think about God. None
of those tiresome people at the Bank to interrupt him, and chicken
and jelly as much as he liked. He was so unhappy yesterday when he
had to go back to work, poor dear . . . But, Maggie, I hear you were
at the service last night. How did you like it?"

"Like it?" said Maggie. "I don't know that it's a thing one likes,
exactly."

"Doesn't one? I don't know. I'm not one of the Inside Saints, you
know, and I wouldn't be if they wanted me to he. But you're one now,
they say, and I never would have thought it. You don't look a bit
like one, and I shouldn't have dreamt that you'd ever stand that
sort of thing. You look so matter-of-fact."

Maggie was on the point of bursting out that she was not an Inside
Saint, and would never be one, when caution restrained her. She had
learnt already that her gay young companion was not as trustworthy
as best friends ought to be.

"It was the first time, last night," she said.

"Yes, I know, and Miss Cardinal was ill and had to come away in the
middle, didn't she? It must have been a simply awful meeting,
because Mother came back as limp as anything. She'd been crying
buckets, and has a dreadful headache to-day. I suppose Mr. Crashaw
gave it them. I've never heard him, but I've seen him. Horrid old
monkey--I hope Miss Cardinal's better to-day."

"Yes, thank you," said Maggie. "She's better."

"Well, that's a good thing. I'm so glad. And you, you darling, what
did you think of it all? I'm sure you didn't cry buckets. I can see
you sitting there as quiet as anything, like a little Quaker. I'd
like to have gone just to have seen you. I hear Martin Warlock was
there too. Was he?"

"He was," said Maggie.

"Fancy that! I wonder what he went for. His father made him, I
expect. You know they say he's getting on awfully badly at home and
that there are quarrels all the time. I don't know, of course, but
his sister can't stand him. She's always showing her feelings--not
very good taste, I think, but Mr. Thurston eggs her on. They'll be
making a match of it one day, those two . . . I say, Maggie--"
Caroline drew her chair close. "I'll give you a secret. You won't
tell any one, will you?"

"Certainly not--if you tell me not to," said Maggie.

"Well, Martin Warlock and I--ever since he came back. Oh! I don't
say it's anything really. But he's attracted by me and would like to
go farther. He'll be asking me to marry him one of these days, and
then I'll have fun. He would have done the other day if I'd let him.
I like him rather, don't you? He's getting a bit fat, of course, but
he's got nice eyes, and then he's a real man. I like real men. But
there, you'll be thinking me coarse, I know you will. I'm not coarse
really, only impulsive. You don't like me, honestly, if it were
known. Oh no! you don't! I can tell. I always know. But I don't
care--I love you. You're a darling--and what I say is if you love
some one, just love them. Never mind what they think. Don't you
agree with me? But you wouldn't. You wouldn't think of loving
anybody. But I'm not really bad--only careless, Mother says--"

What Mother said could not be known, because the door opened and
Martha announced Mr. Crashaw. The old man, leaning on a walking
stick, came forward and greeted Maggie and Caroline with good-temper
and amiability. He was indeed in day-time a very mild old man, and
it was difficult for Maggie to believe that this was the same who
last night had frightened her out of her wits and led her to the
edge of such strange suspicions. He was more than ever like a
monkey, with his bony brown forehead, protuberant eyes and large
mottled nose, and he sat there all huddled up by his rheumatism, a
living example of present physical torments rather than future
spiritual ones. It was apparent at once that he liked pretty young
women, and he paid Caroline a number of flattering attentions,
disregarding Maggie with a frankness that witnessed to a life that
had taught one lesson at least, never on any occasion to waste time.
Maggie did not mind--it amused her to see her terror of the night
before transformed into a mere serenading crippled old gentleman,
and to see, too, the excited pleasure with which Caroline accepted
even such decayed attentions as these. But what was it that had
persuaded her last night? Why did she now spend her time half in one
world and half in another? Which world was the real one?

Aunt Anne very soon joined them, and this quiet, composed figure
only added to Maggie's scorn of her last night's terrors. Was this
the same who had struggled with such agony, who had made Maggie feel
that she was caught in a trap and imprisoned for ever?

The sun beat hotly upon the carpet. Caroline's rose-coloured silk
shone and glowed, the tea was poured out, and there was chatter
about the warm winter that it was and how time passed, and how
fashions changed, and how you never saw a four-wheeler now, and what
they were turning Kingsway into, and what they were turning the Law
Courts out of, and even once, by Mr. Crashaw, a word about the
Lyceum Theatre, where some one was playing the Merchant of Venice,
which was a fine play and could do no one any harm.

"But I daresay," said Mr. Crashaw, "that this young lady here goes
to nothing but plays every night of her life."

"Why, Mr. Crashaw," said Caroline, tossing her head. "If that's the
kind of life you fancy I lead you're completely mistaken. Theatres
indeed! Never do I put so much as the tip of my nose inside one.
Father thinks they're wrong and so does Mother say she does,
although I know she likes them, really; but any way that doesn't
matter because I never have a moment to myself--sitting at home
sewing, that's the way I spend my days, Mr. Crashaw."

It was the very last way she really spent them, as Maggie perfectly
well knew. It is not to be supposed that Mr. Crashaw either was
deceived. However, he gave a wicked wink with the eye that was least
rheumatic and said something about "a beautiful young lady like Miss
Smith wasted on sewing and darning," and Caroline smiled and said
something about "one day perhaps"--and Aunt Anne looked remotely
benevolent. What did she think of all this, Maggie wondered? What
did she think of her great preacher, her prophet, wasting the few
hours of life that remained to him over such a business? They had
some secret understanding, perhaps, as though they said to one
another, "We know, you and I, what are our real intentions beneath
all this. We only do what we must."

Understanding or no, Mr. Crashaw sprang up with unexpected activity
when Caroline departed and announced his intention of conducting her
to her door. He made his adieus and then hobbled along after the
rose-coloured silk as though this was his last chance of warming his
hands at the flame of life.

When they were gone, Aunt Anne said:

"I am going back to bed, Maggie, dear. Martha will send me up some
supper later. Elizabeth has gone to Lambeth to see a friend, so make
yourself busy until seven, dear. If I want anything I'll ring."

When she was left alone in the darkening room she stood there
thinking. Why should she not go out and find Martin? She did not
care what any one thought. She would go to his house and ask for
him. She had waited and waited . . . She wanted him so, she wanted
him so desperately!

Then Martha opened the door and announced him, yes, really announced
him, saying: "It's young Mr. Warlock, Miss, and he says if your
aunts isn't in you'll do."

"Ask him to come up, Martha," said Maggie, and then held herself
there, rooted, where she stood so that she should not run to him and
fling her arms round his neck. She felt at once with that quick
perception that was hers, in spite of her ignorance of life, that
this was no moment for love-making, and that he wanted something
quite other from her.

He closed the door behind him, looked round the room, didn't come to
her, but stayed where he was.

"I've been trying to see you all day," he said. "How long have we
got alone do you think?" She never took her eyes from his face.
"Until seven probably. Aunt Elizabeth's in Lambeth and Aunt Anne's
in bed."

"That's luck." He drew a breath of relief, then moved over to the
fireplace. "Maggie, I've come to say we mustn't see one another any
more."

Some one, some vast figure shadowy behind her, moved suddenly
forward and caught her in his arms and his embrace was deadly cold.
She stood where she was, her hands at her side, looking steadfastly
at him.

"Why?" she said. "Because--because--the fact is, I've been wrong
altogether. Maggie, I'm not the sort of man for you to have anything
to do with. You don't know much about life yet, do you? I'm about
the first man you've ever met, aren't I? If you'd met another man
before me, you'd have cared for him as much."

She said nothing and he seemed to be confused by her steady gaze,
because he looked down and continued to speak as though to himself:

"I knew at once that there was danger in our meeting. With other
girls they can look after themselves. One hasn't any responsibility
to them. It's their own affair, but you believe every word a fellow
says. And if we'd been friends it wouldn't have mattered, but from
the very first we weren't that--we were something more."

"You were so different from any other girl. I've wanted to be good
to you from the beginning, but now I see that if we go on I shall
only be bad. It all comes in the end to my being bad--really bad--
and I want you to know it." "I don't know," said Maggie, "that I've
thought very much whether you're good or bad. And it doesn't matter.
I can look after myself."

"No, you can't," he said vehemently, making a step towards her and
then suddenly stopping. "That's just it--you can't. I've been
thinking all the time since the other evening when we were together,
and I've seen that you believe every word I say and you trust me. I
don't mean to tell lies--I don't know that I'm worse than most other
men--but I'm not good enough for you to trust in all the same. I've
been knocking about for years, and I suppose I've had most of my
idealism knocked out of me. Anyway I don't believe in most people,
and you still do. I'm not going to be the one to change you."

"Perhaps I know more about life than you think," said Maggie.

"No, how can you? You've never had a chance of seeing any of it.
You'd get sick of me in no time. I'm moody and selfish and bad-
tempered. I used to drink a bit too. And I can't be faithful to
women. I might think I was going to be faithful to you and swear I
would be--and then suddenly some one would come along. I thought for
a bit I'd just go on with you and see what came of it. You're so
unusual, you make me want to be straight with you; but I've seen it
wouldn't be fair. I must just slip out of your path and you'll
forget me, and then you'll meet a much better man than I and be
happy. I'm queer--I have funny moods that last for days and days
sometimes. I seem to do every one harm I come in touch with. There's
my father now. I love him more than any one in the world, and yet I
make him unhappy all the time. I'm a bad fellow to be with--"

He stopped suddenly, looked at her and laughed. "It isn't any good,
Maggie . . . You haven't any idea what a sweep I am. You'd hate me
if you really knew."

She looked steadily back at him. "We haven't much time," she said,
speaking with steady, calm conviction as though she had, for years,
been expecting just such a conversation as this, and had thought out
what she would say. "Aunt Elizabeth can come back earlier than she
said. Perhaps I shall say something I oughtn't to. I don't care. The
whole thing is that I love you. I suppose it's true that I don't
know anything about men, but I'd be poor enough if my love for you
just depended on your loving me back, and on your being good to me
and all the rest of it. I've never had any one I could love until
you came, but now that you have come it can't be anything that you
can do that can alter it. That is the use you would let the powers of
your Society be put to? That is not what Janecki, what Rausch,
what Falevitch looked forward to."
The taunt was quite lost on him; he was calmly regarding Natalie.

She had not stirred. After that one outburst of despairing appeal
there was no more for her to say or to do. She could wait, mutely,
and hear what the fate of her lover was to be.

"Unfortunately," said the general, turning and looking up at the
vast pink frontage of the villa, "There are no papers here that
one can appeal to.

I only secured the temporary use of the villa, as being a more
fitting place than some to receive the signorina your daughter. But
it is possible the Secretary may remember something; he has
a good memory. Will you excuse me, Natalie, for a few moments?"
He strode away toward the house. The mother went over to her daughter,
and put a hand on her shoulder.

"Courage, Natalushka!

You must not despair yet. Ah, my old friend Stefan has a kind heart;
there were tears in his eyes when he turned away from your appeal
to him. He does not forget old associates."

Von Zoesch almost immediately returned, still looking preoccupied.
He drew Natalie's mother aside a few steps, and said,
"This much I may tell you, Natalie: in the proceedings four were
concerned--your husband, Mr.

Brand, Beratinsky, Reitzei. What do you know of these last two?"
"I? Alas, Stefan, I know nothing of them!"
"And we here little. They are your husband's appointment.

I may also tell you, Natalie, that the Secretary is also of my
opinion, that it is very unlikely your husband would be so audacious
as to repeat his offence of former years, by conspiring to fix this
duty on this man to serve his own interests.

It would be too audacious, unless his temper had outrun his reason
altogether."
"But you must remember, Stefan," she said, eagerly, "that there
was no one in England who knew that former story. He could
not imagine that I was to be, unhappily, set free to go to my
daughter--that I should be at her side when this trouble fell
on her--"
"Nevertheless," said he, gently interrupting her, "you have appealed
to us: we will inquire. It will be a delicate affair. If there has
been any complicity, any unfairness, to summon these men hither would
be to make firmer confederates of them than ever. If one could
get at them separately, individually--"
He kept pressing his white mustache into his teeth with his forefinger.

"If Calabressa were not such a talker," he said, absently. "But he
has ingenuity, the feather-brained devil."
"Stefan, I could trust everything to Calabressa," she said.

"In the mean time," he said, "I will not detain you.

If you remain at the same hotel we shall be able to communicate
with you.

I presume your carriage is outside?"
"It is waiting for us a little way off."

He accompanied them into the tessellated court-yard, but not to the
gate.

He bade good-bye to his elder friend; then he took the younger
lady's hand and held it, and regarded her.

"Figliuola mia," he said, with a kindly glance, "I pity you if you
have to suffer.

We will hope for better things: if it is impossible, you have a
brave heart."

When they had left he went up the marble staircase and along the
empty corridor until he reached a certain room.

"Granaglia, can you tell me where our friend Calabressa may happen
to be at this precise moment?"
"At Brindisi, I believe, Excellenza."

"At Brindisi still. The devil of a fellow is not so impatient as
I had expected. Ah, well.

Have the goodness to send for him, friend Granaglia, and bid him
come with speed."

"Most willingly, Excellenza."

CHAPTER XLIX.

AN EMISSARY.

One warm, still afternoon Calabressa was walking quickly along
the crowded quays of Naples, when he was beset by a more than
usually importunate beggar--a youth of about twelve, almost
naked.

"Something for bread, signore--for the love of God--my father taken
to heaven, my mother starving--bread, signore--"
"To the devil with you!" said Calabressa.

"May you burst!" replied the polite youth, and he tried to kick
Calabressa's legs and make off at the same time.

This feat he failed in, so that, as he was departing, Calabressa
hit him a cuff on the side of the head which sent him rolling. Then
there was a howl, and presently there was a universal tumult of
women, calling out, "Ah, the German! ah, the foreigner!" and so
forth, and drawing threateningly near. Calabressa sought in his pockets
for a handful of small copper coins, turned, threw them high in
the air, and did not stay to watch the effect of the shower on the
heads of the women, but walked quietly away.

However, in thus suddenly turning, he had caught sight--even with
his near-sighted eyes--of an unwholesome-looking young man, pale,
clean-shaven, with bushy black hair, whom he recognized. He appeared
to pay no attention, but walked quickly on. Taking one or two
unnecessary turnings, he became convinced that the young man, as he
had suspected, was following him: then, without more ado, and even
without looking behind him, he set out for his destination, which
was Posilipo.

In due course of time he began to ascend the wooded hill with its
villas and walls and cactus-hedges. At a certain turning, where he
could not be observed by any one behind him, he turned sharp off to
the left, and stood behind a wooden gate; a couple of minutes
afterward the young man came along, more rapidly now, for he no
doubt fancied that Calabressa had disappeared ahead.

Calabressa stepped out from his hiding-place, went after him, and
tapped him on the shoulder. He turned, stared, and endeavored
to appear angry and astonished.

"Oh yes, to be sure," said Calabressa, with calm sarcasm, "at your
disposition, signore. So we were not satisfied with selling
photographs and pebbles to the English on board the steamer;
we want to get a little Judas money; we sell ourselves
to the weasels, the worms, the vermin--"
"Oh, I assure you, signore--" the shaven-faced youth exclaimed,
much more humbly.

"Oh, I assure you too, signore," Calabressa continued, facetiously.
"And you, you poor innocent, you have not been with the weasels
six weeks when you think you will try your nose in tracking me.
Body of Bacchus, it is too insolent!"
"I assure you, signore--"
"Now, behold this, my friend: we must give children like you a
warning.
If you had been a little older, and not quite so foolish, I should
have had you put on the Black List of my friends the Camorristi--you
understand? But you--we will cure you otherwise. You know the
Englishman's yacht that has come into the Great Harbor--"
"Signore, I beg of you--"
"Beg of the devil!" said Calabressa, calmly. "Between the Englishman's
yacht and the Little Mole you will find a schooner moored--her name.
_La Svezia_; do not forget--_La Svezia_. To-morrow you will go on
board of her, ask for the captain, go down below, and beg him to
be so kind as to give you twelve stripes--" 
"Signore--"
"Another word, _mouchard_, and I make it twenty.

He will give you a receipt, which you will sign, and bring to
me; otherwise, down goes your name on the list. Which do you
prefer? Oh, we will teach some of you young weasels a lesson! I have
the honor to wish you a good morning."
Calabressa touched his hat politely, and walked on, leaving the young
man petrified with rage and fear.

By-and-by he began to walk more leisurely and with more
circumspection, keeping a sharp lookout, as well as his
near-sighted eyes allowed, on any passer-by or vehicle he happened
to meet. At length, and with the same precautions he had used on a
former occasion, he entered the grounds of the villa he had sought
out in the company of Gathorne Edwards, and made his way up to the
fountain on the little plateau.

But now his message had been previously prepared; he dropped it
into the receptacle concealed beneath the lip of the fountain, and
then descended the steep little terraces until he got round to the
entrance of the grotto.

Instead of passing in by this cleft in the rockwork, however, he
found awaiting him there the person who had summoned him--the so-called
General Von Zoesch. Calabressa was somewhat startled, but he said,
"Your humble servant, Excellenza," and removed his cap.

"Keep your hat on your head, friend Calabressa," said the other,
good-naturedly; "you are as old as I am."
He seated himself on a projecting ledge of the rockwork, and
motioned to Calabressa to do likewise on the other side
of the entrance. They were completely screened from observation
by a mass of olive and fig trees, to say nothing of the far-stretching
orange shrubbery beyond.

"The Council have paid you a high compliment, my Calabressa," the
general said, plunging at once into the matter. "They have resolved
to intrust you with a very difficult mission."
"It is a great honor."

"You won't have to risk your neck, which will no doubt disappoint
you, but you will have to show us whether there is the stuff of a
diplomatist in you."
"Oh, as for that, Excellenza," Calabressa said confidently, "one can
be a _bavard_ at times, for amusement, for nonsense; and one
can at times be silent when there is necessity."

"You know of the affair of Zaccatelli. The agent has been found,
as we desired in England. I understand you know him; his name is
Brand."
Calabressa uttered an exclamation.

"Excellenza, do you know what you have said? You pierce my heart.
Why he of all those in England?

He is the betrothed of Natalie's daughter--the Natalie Berezolyi,
Excellenza, who married Ferdinand Lind--"
"I know it," said the other, calmly.

"I have seen the young lady. She is a beautiful child."

"She is more than that--she is a beautiful-souled child!" said
Calabressa, in great agitation, "and she has a tender heart. I tell
you it will kill her, Excellenza! Oh, it is infamous! it is not
to be thought of!"

He jumped to his feet and spoke in a rapid, excited way. "I say it
is not to be thought of. I appeal--I, Calabressa--to the
honorable the members of the Council: I say that I am ready to be his
substitute--they cannot deny me--I appeal to the laws of the
Society--"'
"Calm yourself--calm yourself," said the general; but Calabressa
would not be calm.

"I will not have my beautiful child have this grief put upon
her!

--you, Excellenza, will help my appeal to the Council--they cannot
refuse me--what use am I to anybody or myself? I say that the
daughter of my old friend Natalie shall not have her lover taken
from her; it is I, Calabressa, who claim to be his substitute!"

"Friend Calabressa, I desire you to sit down and listen. The story
is brief that I have to tell you.

This man Brand is chosen by the usual ballot. The young lady does
not know for what duty, of course, but believes it will cost him
his life.

She is in trouble; she recollects your giving her some instructions;
what does she do but start off at once for Naples, to put her head
right into the den of the black bear Tommaso!"

"Ah, the brave little one! She did not forget Calabressa
and the little map, then?"
"I have seen her and her mother."
"Her mother, also? Here, in Naples, now?"

"Yes."
"Great Heaven!

What a fool I was to come through Naples and not to know--but I was
thinking of that little viper."
"You will now be good enough to listen, my Calabressa."
"I beg your Excellency's pardon a thousand times."
"It appears that both mother and daughter are beset with the suspicion
that this duty has been put upon their English friend by unfair
means.

At first I said to myself these suspicions were foolish; they now
appear to me more reasonable.

You, at all events, are acquainted with the old story against Ferdinand
Lind; you know how he forfeited his life to the Society; how it was
given back to him. You would think it impossible he would risk
such another adventure. Well, perhaps I wrong him; but there is a
possibility; there are powerful reasons, I can gather, why he
should wish to get rid of this Englishman."
Calabressa said nothing now, but he was greatly excited.

"We had been urging him about money, Calabressa mio--that I will explain
to you.

It has been coming in slowest of all from England, the richest of the
countries, and just when we had so much need. Then, again, there
is a vacancy in the Council, and Lind has a wish that way. What
happens?
He tries to induce the Englishman to take an officership and give us
his fortune; the Englishman refuses; he says then, 'Part from my
daughter, and go to America.'

The daughter says, 'If he goes, I follow.' You perceive, my friend,
that if this story is true, and it is consecutive and minute as I
received it, there was a reason for our colleague Lind to be angry,
and to be desirous of making it certain that this Englishman who
had opposed him should not have his daughter."

"I perceive it well, Excellenza. Meanwhile?"
"Meanwhile, that is all. Only, when an old friend--when one
who has such claims on our Society as a Berezolyi naturally has--comes
and tells you such a story, you listen with attention and respect.
You may believe, or you may not believe; one prefers not to believe
when the matter touches upon the faith of a colleague who has
been trustworthy for many years.
But at the same time, if the Council, being appealed to, and being
anxious above all things that no wrong should be done, were to find
an agent--prudent, silent, cautious--who might be armed with
plenary powers of pardon, for example, supposing there were an
accomplice to be bribed--if the Council were to commission
such a one as you, my Calabressa, to institute inquiries, and perhaps
to satisfy those two appellants that no injustice has been done,
you would undertake the task with diligence, with a sense of
responsibility, would you not?"
"With joy--with a full heart, Excellenza!" Calabressa exclaimed.

"Oh no, not at all--with prudence and disinterestedness; with calmness
and no prejudice; and, above all, with a resolution to conceal
from our friend and colleague Lind that any slight of suspicion
is being put upon him."

"Oh, you can trust me, Excellenza!"

Calabressa said, eagerly.

"Let me do this for the sake of the sweetheart of my old age--that is
that beautiful-souled little one; and if I cannot bring her
peace and security one way--mind, I go without prejudice--I swear
to you I go without bias--I will harm no one even in intention--but
this I say, that if I fail that way there is another."

"You have seen the two men, Beratinsky and Reitzei, who were of
the ballot along with Lind and the Englishman. To me they are but
names.

Describe them to me."

"Beratinsky," said Calabressa, promptly, "a bear--surly, pig-headed;
Reitzei, a fop--sinuous, petted."
"Which would be the more easily started, for example?" the tall man
said, with a smile.

"Oh, your Excellency, leave that to me," Calabressa answered. "Give
me no definite instructions: am I not a volunteer?

--can I not do as I please, always with the risk that one may knock
me over the head if I am impertinent?"

"Well, then, if you leave it to your discretion, friend Calabressa,
to your ingenuity, and your desire to have justice without bias,
have you money?"

"Not at all, Excellenza."

"The Secretary Granaglia will communicate with you this
evening.

You can start at once?"
"By the direct train to-morrow morning at seven. Excellenza."

Then he added, "Oh, the devil!"
"What now?"

"There was a young fellow, Excellenza, committed the imprudence
of dogging my footsteps this afternoon. I know him. I stopped
him and referred him to the captain of the schooner _La Svezia_:
he was to bring me the receipt to morrow."
"Never mind," said the general, laughing; "we will look after him
when he goes on board. Now do you understand, friend Calabressa, the
great delicacy of the mission the Council have intrusted to you?

You must be patient, sure, unbiassed; and if, as I imagine, Lind and
you were not the best of friends at one time in your life, you
must forget all that.
You are not going as the avenger of his daughter; you are going as
the minister of justice--only you have power behind you; that you
can allow to be known indirectly. Do you understand?"
"It is as clear as the noonday skies. Confide in me, Excellenza."
The other rose.

"Use speed, my Calabressa. Farewell!"
"One word, Excellenza. If it is not too great a favor, the hotel
where my beautiful Natalushka and her mother are staying?"
The other gave him the name of the hotel; and Calabressa, saluting
him respectfully, departed, making his way down through the terraces
of fruit-trees under the clear twilight skies.
Calabressa walked back to Naples, and to the hotel indicated, which
was near the Castello dell' Ovo."You'll see it in time. It's the best thing that could
'appen. And we've got more in common than you'd ever suppose. We
'ave, really. You're a religious man, really--can't escape your
destiny, you know. There's religious and non-religious and it
doesn't matter what your creed is, whether you're a Christian or a
'Ottentot, there it is. And if you're religious, you're religious. I
may be the greatest humbug on the market, but I'm religious. It's
like 'aving a 'are lip--you'll be bothered with it all your life."

But what more Thurston may have said Martin did not hear: he had
left the room, banging the door behind him. On what was his
indignation based? Injured pride. And was he really indignant? Was
not something within him elated, because by this he had been offered
his freedom? Thurston marry his sister? . . .  He could go his own
way now. Even his father could not expect him to remain.

And he wanted Maggie--urgently, passionately. Standing for a moment
there in the dark passage he wanted her. He was lonely, disregarded,
despised.

They did not care for him here, no one cared for him anywhere--only
Maggie who was clear-eyed and truthful and sure beyond any human
being whom he had ever known. Then, with a very youthful sense of
challenging this world that had so grossly insulted him by admitting
Thurston into the heart of it, he joined the tea-party. There in the
pink, close, sugar-smelling, soft atmosphere sat his mother, Amy,
Mrs. Alweed and little Miss Pyncheon. His mother, with her lace cap
and white hair and soft plump hands, was pouring tea through a
strainer as though it were a rite. On her plate were three little
frilly papers that had held sugary cakes, on her lips were fragments
of sugar. Amy, in an ugly grey dress, sat severely straight upon a
hard chair and was apparently listening to Miss Pyncheon, but her
eyes, suspicious and restless, moved like the eyes of a newly
captured animal. Mrs. Alweed, stout in pink with a large hat full of
roses, smiled and smiled, waiting only for a moment when she could
amble off once again into space safe on the old broad back of her
family experiences, the only conversational steed to whose care she
ever entrusted herself. She had a son Hector, a husband, Mr. Alweed,
and a sister-in-law, Miss Alweed; she had the greatest confidence in
the absorbed attention of the slightest of her acquaintances.
"Hector, he's my boy, you know--although why I call him a boy I
can't think--because he's twenty-two and a half--he's at Cambridge,
Christs College--well, this morning I had a letter . . ." she would
begin. She began now upon Martin. His mind wandered. He looked about
the little room and thought of Thurston. Why was he not more angry
about it all? He had pretended to be indignant, he had hated
Thurston as he stood there . . . But had he? Half of him hated him.
Then with a jerk Thurston's words came back to him: "There's two of
each of us, that's the truth of it." "Two of each of us . . ."
Sitting there, listening to Mrs. Alweed's voice that flowed like a
river behind him, he saw the two figures, saw them quite clearly and
distinctly, flesh and blood, even clothes and voices and smile. And
he knew that all his life these two figures had been growing,
waiting for the moment when he would recognise them. One figure was
the Martin whom he knew--brown, healthy, strong and sane; a figure
wearing his clothes, his own clothes, the tweeds and the cloths, the
brogues and the heavy boots, the soft untidy hats; the figure was
hard, definite, resolute, quarrelling, arguing, loving, joking,
swearing all in the sensible way. It was a figure that all the world
had understood, that had been drunk often enough, lent other men
money, been hard-up and extravagant and thoughtless. "A good chap."
"A sensible fellow." "A pal." "No flies on Warlock." That was the
kind of figure. And the life had been physical, had never asked
questions, had never known morbidity, had lived on what it saw and
could touch and could break . . . And the other figure! That was,
physically, less plainly seen. No, there it was, standing a little
away from the other, standing away, contemptuously, despising it,
deriding it. Fat, soft, white hanging cheeks, wearing anything to
cover its body, but shining in some way through the clothes, so that
it was body that you saw. A soft body, hands soft and the colour of
the flesh pale and unhealthy. But it was the eyes that spoke: the
mouth trembled and was weak, the chin was fat and feeble, but the
eyes lived, lived--were eager, fighting, beseeching, longing,
captive eyes!

And this figure, Martin knew, was a prey to every morbid desire,
rushed to sensual excess and then crept back miserably to search
for some spiritual flagellation. Above all, it was restless, as
some one presses round a dark room searching for the lock of the
door, restless and lonely, cowardly and selfish, but searching
and sensitive and even faithful, faithful to something or to some
one . . . pursued also by something or some one. A figure to whom
this world offered only opportunities for sin and failure and
defeat, but a figure to whom this world was the merest shadow
hiding, as a shade hides a lamp, the life within. Wretched enough
with its bad health, its growing corpulence, its weak mouth, its
furtive desires, but despising, nevertheless, the strong, healthy
figure beside it. Thurston was right. Men are not born to be free,
but to fight, to the very death, for the imprisonment and
destruction of all that is easiest and most physically active and
most pleasant to the sight and touch . . .

"And so Hector really hopes that he'll be able to get down to us for
Christmas, although he's been asked to go on this reading party. Of
course, it's simply a question as to whether he works better at home
or with his friends. If he were a weak character, I think Mr. Alweed
would insist in his coming home, but Hector really cares for his
work more than anything. He's never been very good at games; his
short sight prevents him, poor boy, and as he very justly remarked,
when he was home last holidays, 'I don't see, mother, how I am going
to do my duty as a solicitor (that's what he hopes to be) if I don't
work now. Many men regard Cambridge as a time for play. Not so I.'"

"But I hope that if Hector comes home this Christmas he'll attend
the Chapel services. The influence your father might have on such a
boy as Hector, Mr. Warlock, a boy, sensitive and thoughtful . . . I
was saying, Miss Pyncheon, that Hector--"

Miss Pyncheon was the soul of good-nature--but she was much more
than that. She was by far the most sensible, genial, and worldly of
the Inside Saints; it was, in fact, astonishing that she should be
an Inside Saint at all.

Of them all she impressed Martin the most, because there was nothing
of the crank about her. She went to theatres, to the seaside in the
summer, took in The Queen, and was a subscriber to Boots'
Circulating Library. She dressed quietly and in excellent taste--in
grey or black and white. She had jolly brown eyes and a dimple in
the middle of her chin. She was ready to discuss any question with
any one, was marvellously broad-minded and tolerant, and although
she was both poor and generous, always succeeded in making her
little flat in Soho Square pretty and attractive.

Her chief fault, perhaps, was that she cared for no one especially--
she had neither lovers nor parents nor sisters nor brothers, and to
all her friends she behaved with the same kind geniality, welcoming
one as another. She was thus aloof from them all and relied upon no
one. The centre of her life was, of course, her religion, but of
this she never spoke, although strangely enough no one doubted the
intensity of her belief and the reality of her devotion.

She was a determined follower of Mr. Warlock; what he said she
believed, but here, too, there seemed to be no personal attachment.
She did not allow criticism of him in her own presence, but, on the
other hand, she never spoke as though it would distress her very
greatly to lose him. He was a sign, a symbol . . . If one symbol
went another could be found.

To Martin she was the one out-standing proof of the reality of the
Chapel. All the others--his sister, Miss Avies, Thurston, Crashaw,
the Miss Cardinals, yes, and his father too, were, in one way or
another, eccentric, abnormal, but Miss Pyncheon was the sane every-
day world, the worldly world, the world of drinks and dinners, and
banks and tobacconists, and yet she believed as profoundly as any of
them. What did she believe? She was an Inside Saint, therefore she
must have accepted this whole story of the Second Coming and the
rest of it. Of course women would believe anything . . .
Nevertheless . . .

He scarcely listened to their chatter. He was forcing himself not to
look at his sister, and yet Thurston's news seemed so extraordinary
to him that his eye kept stealing round to her to see whether she
were still the same. Could she have accepted him, that bounder and
cad and charlatan? He felt a sudden cold chill of isolation as
though in this world none of the ordinary laws were followed. "By
God, I am a stranger here," he thought. It was not until after
dinner that night that he was alone with his father. He had resolved
on many fine things in the interval. He was going to "have it out
with him," "to put his foot down," "to tell him that such a thing as
Thurston's marriage to his sister was perfectly impossible." And
then, for the thousandth time since his return to England he felt
strangely weak and irresolute. He did wish to be "firm" with his
father, but it would have been so much easier to be firm had he not
been so fond of him. "Soft, sentimental weakness," he called it to
himself, but he knew that it was something deeper than that,
something that he would never be able to deny.

He went into his father's study that night with a strange dismal
foreboding as though he were being drawn along upon some path that
he did not want to follow. What was his father mixed up with all
this business for? Why were such men as Thurston in existence? Why
couldn't life be simple and straightforward with people like his
father and himself and that girl Maggie alone somewhere with nothing
to interfere? Life was never just as you wanted it, always a little
askew, a little twisted, cynically cocking its eye at you before it
vanished round the corner? He didn't seem to be able to manage it.
Anyway, he wasn't going to have that fellow Thurston marrying his
sister.

He found his father lying back in his arm-chair fast asleep, looking
like a dead man, his long thin face pale with fatigue, his eyelids a
dull grey, his mouth tightly closed as though in a grim
determination to pursue some battle. And at the sight of him thus
worn out and beaten Martin's affection flooded his heart. He stood
opposite his father looking at him and loving him more deeply than
he had ever done before.

"I will take him away from all this," was his thought, "these
Thurstons and all--out of all this . . . We'll go off abroad
somewhere. And I'll make him fat and happy."

Then his father suddenly woke up, with a start and a cry: "Where am
I?" . . . Then he suddenly saw Martin. "Martin," he said, smiling.

Martin smiled back and then began at once: "Father, this isn't true
about Thurston, is it?"

He saw, as he had often done before, that his father had to call
himself up from some world of vision before he could realise even
his surroundings. Martin he recognised intuitively with the
recognition of the spirit, but he seemed to take in the details of
the room slowly, one by one, as though blinded by the light.

"Ah--I've been dreaming," he said, still smiling at Martin
helplessly and almost timidly. "I'm so tired these days--suddenly--I
usen't to be . . ." He put his hand to his forehead, then laid it on
Martin's knee, and the strength and warmth of that seemed suddenly
to fill him with vigour.

"You're never tired, are you?" he asked as a child might ask an
elder.

"Very seldom," answered Martin, "I say, father, what is all this
about Thurston?"

"Thurston . . . Why, what's he been doing?"

"He says he's engaged to Amy." The disgust of the idea made Martin's
words, against his will, sharp and angry.

"Does he? . . . Yes, I remember. He spoke to me about it."

"Of course it's simply his infernal cheek . . ."

Mr. Warlock sighed. "I don't know, I'm sure. Amy seemed to wish it."

Martin felt then more strongly than before the Something that drove
him. It said to him: "Now, then . . . here's a thing for you to make
a row about--a big row. And then you can go off with Maggie." But,
on the other hand, there was Something that said: "Don't hurt him.
Don't hurt him. You may regret it all your life if . . ."

If what? He didn't know. He was always threatened with regretting
things all his life. The blow was always going to fall. And that
pleasant very British phrase came back to him, "He would put his
foot down"--however--he was very angry--very angry.

He burst out: "Oh, but that's absurd, father. Impossible--utterly.
Thurston in the family? Why, you must see yourself how monstrous it
would be. Amy's got some silly, sentimental whim and she's got to be
told that it won't do. If you ask me, I don't think Amy's improved
much since I was away. But that's not the question. The idea of
Thurston's disgusting. You can't seriously consider it for a minute
. . ."

"Why is Thurston disgusting, my boy?"

Martin hated to be called "my boy"--it made him feel so young and
dependent.

"You've only got to look at him!" Martin jumped up, disregarding his
father's hand, and began to stamp about the room. "He's a cad--he's
not your friend, father. He isn't, really. He'd like to out you from
the whole thing if he could. He thinks you're old-fashioned and
behind the times, and all he thinks about is bringing in
subscriptions and collecting new converts. He's like one of those
men who beat drums outside tents in a fair . . . He's a sickening
man! He doesn't believe in his religion or anything else. I should
think he's crooked about money, and immoral probably too. You're
much too innocent, father. You're so good and trustful yourself that
you don't know how these fellows are doing you in. There's a regular
plot against you and they'd be most awfully pleased if you were to
retire. They're not genuine like you. They simply use the Chapel for
self-advertisement and making money. Of course there are some
genuine ones like the Miss Cardinals, but Thurston's an absolute
swindler . . ."

He stopped short at that. He had said more than he had intended and
he was frightened suddenly. He swung round on his heel and looked at
his father.

"Come here, Martin." He came across the room. "Closer. Now, tell me.
We're good friends, aren't we?"

"Of course, father."

He put his hand on his son's shoulder. "Do you know that I love you
more than anything in the whole world? More, I'm sometimes terribly
afraid, than God Himself. I can't help myself. I love you, Martin,
so that it's like hunger or thirst . . . It's the only earthly
passion that I've ever had. And I'll tell you another thing. It's
the one terror of my earthly life that you'll leave me. Now that
I've got you back I'm afraid every time you go out of the house that
you'll run away, round the corner, and never come back again. I love
you and I'm not going to let you go again.--Not until--until--the
Time has come . . . What does it matter to you and me what Thurston
and Amy do? God will come and He will find us both together--you and
I--and He will take us up and keep us together and we shall never be
separated any more . . . I love your strength, Martin, your
happiness, your youth--all the things I've never had. And you're not
going to leave me, not though Amy married a hundred Thurstons . . ."

Mr. Warlock's grip on his son's shoulder was iron.

Martin bent down and sat on the arm of his dusty leather chair to
bring himself on to the same level. He put his arm round his father
and drew him close to him. Maggie, Life, Money, Adventure--
everything seemed to draw away from him and he saw himself, a little
boy, pattering on bare feet down the aisle towards the font--just as
though a spell had been cast over him.

They sat close together in silence. Then slowly the thought of
Thurston came back again. Martin drew away a little.

"All the same, father," he said, "Thurston mustn't marry Amy."

"They're only engaged. There's no question of marriage yet."

"Then they are engaged?" Martin drew right away, standing up again.

"Oh, yes, they're engaged."

"Then I'm not going to stand it. I tell you I won't stay here if
Thurston marries Amy."

Mr. Warlock sighed. "Well then, let's leave it, my boy. I daresay
they'll never marry."

"No. I won't have it. It's too serious to leave."

His father's voice was sharper suddenly.

"Well, we won't talk about it just now, Martin, if you don't mind."

"But I must. You can't leave a thing like that. Thurston will simply
own the place . . ."

"I tell you, Martin, to leave it alone." They were both angry now.

"And I tell you, father, that if you let Thurston marry Amy I leave
the house and never come back again."

"Isn't that rather selfish of you? You've been away all these years.
You've left us to ourselves. You come back suddenly without seeing
how we live or caring and then you dictate to us what we're to do.
How can you expect us to listen?"

"And how can you expect me to stay?" Martin broke into a torrent of
words: "I'm miserable here and you know that I am. Mother and Amy
hate me and you're always wrapped up in your religion. What kind of
a place is it for a fellow? I came back meaning that you and I
should be the best pals father and son have ever been, but you
wouldn't come out with me--you only wanted to drag me in. You tell
me always to wait for something. To wait for what? I don't know. And
nobody here does seem to know. And I can't wait for ever. I've got
to lead my own life and if you won't come with me I must go off by
myself--"

He was following his own ideas now--not looking at his father at
all. "I've discovered since I've been home that I'm not the sort of
fellow to settle down. I suppose I shall go on wandering about all
my days. I'm not proud of myself, you know, father. I don't seem to
be much good to any one, but the trouble is I don't want to be much
better. I feel as though it wouldn't be much good if I did try. I
can't give up my own life--for nobody--not even for you--and however
rotten my own life is I'd rather lead it than some one else's."

He stopped and then went on quietly, as though he were arguing
something out with himself: "The strange thing is that I do feel
this place has got a kind of a hold on me. When you remind me of
what I was like as a kid I go right back and feel helpless as though
you could do anything with me you like. All the same I don't believe
in this business, father--all this Second Coming and the rest of it.
We're in the Twentieth Century now, you know, and everybody knows
that that kind of thing is simply impossible. Only an old maid or
two . . . Why, I don't believe you believe in it really, father.
That's why you're so keen on making me believe. But I don't; it's no
use. You can't make me. I don't believe there's any God at all. If
there were a God he'd let a fellow have more free will . . ."

He was interrupted by an extraordinary cry. He turned to see his
father standing, one hand pressed back on the chair, his face white,
his eyes black and empty, like sightless eyes.

"Martin! That's blasphemy! . . . Take care! Take care! . . . Oh, my
son, my son! . . ."

Then he suddenly collapsed backwards, crouching on to the chair as
though he were trying to flee from some danger. Martin sprang
towards him. He caught him round the body, holding him to him--
something was leaping like a furious animal inside his father's
breast.

"What is it?" he cried, desperately frightened.

"It's my heart," Warlock answered in a voice very soft and distant.
"Bad . . . Excitement . . . Ring that bell . . . Amy . . ."

A moment later Amy entered. She came quickly into the room, she said
nothing--only gave Martin one look.

She gave her father something from a little bottle, kneeling in
front of him.

At last she turned to her brother. "You'd better go," she said. "You
can do nothing here."

Miserable, repentant, feeling as though he had no place in the world
and yet eager too to defend himself, he left the room.


CHAPTER VII

THE OUTSIDE WORLD


Maggie had a week.

She did not need it. From the first half-hour after Martin's leaving
her her mind was made up. This question of marriage did not, on
further reflection, very greatly disturb her. She had known, in her
time, a number of married people and they had been invariably
unhappy and quarrelsome. The point seemed to be that you should be,
in some way, near the person whom you loved, and she had only loved
one person in all her life, and intended never to love another. Even
this question of love was not nearly so tangled for her as it would
be for any more civilised person. She knew very little about
marriage and only in the most sordid fashion about sexual relations
which were definitely connected in her mind with drunken peasants
and her father's cook. They had nothing at all to do with Martin.

The opinion of the world was an unknown factor in her vision, she
only knew of the opinion of her aunts and Miss Warlock and with
these she was already in rebellion.

She would have been in great trouble had she supposed that this
woman still loved Martin and needed him, but that, from what Martin
had said, was obviously not so. No, it was all quite clear. They
would escape together, out of this tangle of unnatural mysteries and
warnings, and live happily for ever after in the country.

As to Martin's self-portrait, that did not greatly distress her. She
had never supposed that he or any one else was "good." She had never
known a "good" person. Nor did it occur to her, in her pristine
state of savagery, that you loved any one the less for their
drawbacks. She would rather be with Martin at his worst than with
any one else at their best--that was all.

Half-an-hour was enough time to settle the whole affair. She then
waited patiently until the end of the week. She did not quite know
how she would arrange a meeting, but that would, she expected,
arrange itself.

Two events occurred that filled her mind and made the week pass
quickly. One was that she received an answer to her adventurous
letter, the other was a remarkable conversation with Miss Caroline
Smith. The answer to her letter was lying on her plate when she came
down to breakfast, and Aunt Elizabeth was watching it with an
excited stare.

It read as follows:

14 BRYANSTON SQUARE.

Dear Miss CARDINAL,

Of course I remember you perfectly. I wondered whether you would
write to me one day. I am married now and live most of the year in
London. Would you come and see me at Bryanston Square? I am nearly
always at home at tea-time. If you are free would you perhaps come
next Friday?

It will be so nice to see you again.

Yours sincerely,

KATHERINE MARK. "You've got a letter, dear. Your aunt isn't quite so
well this morning, I'm afraid. Scrambled eggs."

"Yes," she looked her aunt in the face without any confusion. How
strangely her decision about Martin had altered her relationship now
to every one! What did it matter whether any one were angry? "I
ought to have told you, Aunt Elizabeth. I wrote about a fortnight
ago to a lady who came once to see us at home. She was a Miss
Trenchard then. She said that if ever I wanted any help I was to
write to her. So I have written--to ask her whether she can find me
any work to do, and she has asked me to go and see her."

"Work," said Aunt Elizabeth. "But you won't go away while your
aunt's so ill."

Wouldn't she? Maggie didn't know so much about that.

"I want to be independent," said Maggie, trying to fix Aunt
Elizabeth's eyes. "It isn't fair that I should be a burden to you."

"You're no burden, dear." Aunt Elizabeth looked uneasily round the
room. "Your aunt depends on you."

"Depends on me for what?"

"For everything."

"Then she oughtn't to, Aunt Elizabeth, I've said it again and again.
I'm not fit for any one to depend on. I'm forgetful and careless and
untidy. You know I am. And I'm different from every one here. I'm
very grateful to Aunt Anne, but I'm not good enough for her to
depend on."

Aunt Elizabeth blinked nervously.

"She's got very little. You mustn't take away all she has."

"I'm not all she has," answered Maggie, knowing that she was
becoming excited and cross. "I don't belong to any one except
myself." "And Martin" her soul whispered. Then she added, suddenly
moved by remorse as she looked at Aunt Elizabeth's meek and
trembling face, "You're so good to me, both of you, and I'm so bad.
I'll give you anything but my freedom."

"You talk so strangely, dear," said Aunt Elizabeth. "But there are
so many things I don't understand."

Maggie took the letter up to her bedroom and there read it a number
of times. It all seemed wonderful to her, the stamped blue address,
the rich white square notepaper, and above all the beautiful
handwriting. She thought of her own childish scrawl and blushed, she
even sat down, there and then, at her dressing-table and, with a
pencil, began to imitate some of the letters.

On Friday! To-day was Tuesday. Bryanston Square. Wherever was
Bryanston Square, and how would she find it? She determined to ask
Caroline Smith.

She had not long to wait for her opportunity. On Wednesday evening
about half-past five Miss Smith poked her head into the Cardinal
drawing-room to discover Maggie sitting with her hands on her lap
looking down on to the street.

"Are your aunts anywhere?" asked Caroline.

"No," said Maggie. "Aunt Anne's in bed and Aunt Elizabeth's at Miss
Pyncheon's."

"That's right," said Caroline, "because I haven't seen you, darling,
for ages."

"The day before yesterday," said Maggie.

"You're a literal pet," said Caroline kissing her. "I always
exaggerate, of course, and it's so sweet of you to tell me about
it." She rushed off to the fire and spread out her blue skirt and
dangled her feet.

"Isn't it cold and dark? You funny dear, not to have the blinds down
and to sit staring into the beastly street like that . . . I believe
you're in love."

Maggie came to herself with a start, got up and slowly went over to
the fire.

"Caroline, where's Bryanston Square?"

"Oh, you pet, don't you know where Bryanston Square is?"

cried Caroline suddenly fixing her bright eyes upon Maggie with
burning curiosity.

"If I did I wouldn't ask," said Maggie.

"Quite right--neither you would. Well, it's near Marble Arch."

"But I don't know where the Marble Arch is."

"Lord!" cried Caroline. "And she's been in London for months. You
really are a pet. Well, what you'd better do is to get into the
first taxi you see and just say 'Bryanston Square.'"

How stupid of her! She might have thought of that for herself.

"Is there a park near Bryanston Square?" she asked.

"Yes. Of course--Hyde Park."

"And is it open at six?"

"Of course. You can't shut Hyde Park."

"Oh!"

Maggie pursued her thoughts. Caroline watched her with intense
curiosity.

"What do you want with a Park, you darling?" she asked at last.

"Oh, nothing," said Maggie, slowly. Then she went on, laughing:
"I've been asked out to tea--for the first time in my life. And I'm
terribly frightened."

"How exciting!" said Caroline clapping her hands. "Who's it with?"

"It's a Mrs. Mark. She was a Miss Trenchard. She used to live in
Glebeshire. She's going to find me some work to do."

"Work!" cried Caroline. "Aren't you going to stay with your aunts
then?"

"I want to be independent," said Maggie slowly.

"Well!" said Caroline, amazed.

Could Maggie have seen just then into Miss Smith's mind and could
she only have realised that, with Miss Smith, every action and
intention in the human heart pivoted upon love-affairs and love-
affairs only, she might have been warned and have saved much later
trouble. She was intent on her own plans and was thinking of
Caroline only as a possible agent.

"Caroline," she asked, "would you take a note for me to some one?"

"Of course," said Caroline. "Who is it?"

"Martin Warlock," said Maggie.

At the name she suddenly blushed crimson. She knew that Caroline was
looking at her with eager curiosity. She suspected then that she had
done something foolish and would have given anything to recall her
words, but to recall them now seemed only to make it the more
suspicious.

"It's only something his sister wanted to know," she said casually.
"I thought you'd be seeing him soon. I hardly ever do."

"Yes, I'm going up there to-night," said Caroline staring at Maggie.
"Well, I'll give it you before you go," then she went on as casually
as she could. "What's been happening lately?"

"Of course you know all about the excitement," said Caroline sitting
back in the faded arm-chair with her blue dress spread all about her
like a cloud.

"What excitement?" said Maggie, pulling herself up, with a desperate
struggle, from her own private adventures.

"What! you don't know ?" Caroline exclaimed in an awed whisper.

"Know what?" Maggie asked, rather crossly, repenting more and more
of asking Caroline to carry her note.

"Why, where DO you live? . . . All about Mr. Warlock and his
visions!"

"I've heard nothing at all," said Maggie.

This was unexpected joy to Caroline, who had never imagined that
there would be any one so near the Inner Saints as Maggie who yet
knew nothing about these recent events.

"Do you really know nothing about it?"

"Nothing," said Maggie.

"Aren't you wonderful?" said Caroline. "What happened was this.
About three weeks ago Mr. Warlock had a vision in the middle of the
night. He saw God at about three in the morning."

"How did he see God?" asked Maggie, awed in spite of herself.

Caroline's voice dropped to a mysterious whisper. "He just woke up
and there God was at the end of the bed. Of course he's not spoken
to me about it, but apparently there was a blaze of light and
Something in the middle. And then a voice spoke and told Mr. Warlock
that on the last night of this year everything would be fulfilled."

"What did He mean?" asked Maggie.

"Different people think He meant different things," said Caroline.
"Of course there's most fearful excitement about it. Mr. Warlock's
had two since."

"Two what?" asked Maggie.

"Two visions. Just like the first. The blazing light and the voice
and telling him that the last night of the year's to be the time."
Caroline then began to be carried away by her excitement. She talked
faster and faster. "Oh! You don't know what a state every one's in!
It's causing all sorts of divisions. First there are all his own
real believers. Miss Pyncheon, your aunts, and the others. My
father's one. They all believe every word he says. They're all quite
certain that the last day of this year is to be the time of the
Second Coming. They won't any of them, look a minute further than
that. Father doesn't care a bit now what mother does with the money
because, he says, we shan't want any next year. Mother isn't so sure
so she's taking as much care of it as ever, and of course it's nice
for her now to have it all in her own hands. They're all of them
doing everything to make themselves ready. It doesn't matter how
aggravating you are, father never loses his temper now. He's so
sweet that it's maddening. Haven't you noticed how good your aunts
are?"

"They're always the same," said Maggie.

"Well. I expect they're different really. Then there's the middle-
class like Mr. Thurston and Miss Avies who pretend to believe all
that Mr. Warlock says, but of course, they don't believe a word of
it, and they hope that this will prove his ruin. They know there
won't be any Second Coming on New Year's Eve, and then they think he
will be finished and they'll be able to get rid of him. So they're
encouraging him to believe in all this, and then when the moment
comes they'll turn on him!"

"Beasts!" said Maggie suddenly.

"Well, I daresay you're right," said Caroline. "Only it does make me
laugh, all of it. Thurston and Miss Avies have all their plans made,
only now they're quarrelling because Thurston wants to marry Amy
Warlock and Miss Avies meant him to marry her!"

"Is Mr. Thurston going to marry Miss Warlock?" cried Maggie.

"So they say," said Caroline again watching Maggie curiously. "Well,
anyway, Miss Avies is the strongest of the lot really. I'd back her
against anybody. I'm terrified of her myself, I tell you frankly.
She'd wring any one's neck for twopence. Oh yes, she would! . . .
Then there are the third lot who simply don't believe in Mr.
Warlock's visions at all and just laugh at him. People like Miss
Smythe and Mrs. Bellaston. A lot of them are leaving the chapel. Mr.
Warlock won't listen to anybody. He's getting stranger and stranger,
and his heart's so bad they say he might die any day if he had a
shock. Then he's always quarrelling with Martin."

Caroline suddenly stopped. She looked at Maggie.

"Martin's a terrible trial to his father," she said.

But Maggie was secure now.

"Is he?" she asked indifferently. Then she added slowly, "What do
you believe, Caroline?"

"What do I believe?"

"Yes, about Mr. Warlock's visions."

"Oh, of course, it's only because he's ill and prays for hours
without getting off his knees, and won't eat enough, that he sees
things. And yet I don't know. There may be something in it. If I
were on my knees for weeks I'd never see anything. But I'll be
terribly sorry for Mr. Warlock if the time comes and nothing
happens. He'll just have to go."

They sat a little longer together and then Caroline said: "Well,
darling, I must be off. Where's that note?" She hesitated, looking
at Maggie with a wicked gleam in her pale blue eyes. "You know,
Maggie, I can't make up my mind. I've had an offer of marriage."

"I'm so glad, Caroline," said Maggie.

"Yes, but I don't know what to do. It's a man--Mr. Purdie. His
father's ever so rich and they've got a big place down at Skeaton."

"Where's that?" asked Maggie.

"Oh, don't you know? Skeaton-on-Sea. It's a seaside resort. I've
known William for a long time. His father knows father. He came to
tea last week, and proposed. He's rather nice although he's so
silent."

"Why don't you marry him then?" asked Maggie.

"Well, I know Martin Warlock's going to ask me. It's been getting
closer and closer. I expect he will this week. Of course, he isn't
so safe as William, but he's much more exciting. And he's got quite
a lot of money of his own."

Strange, the sure, confident, happy security that Maggie felt in her
heart at this announcement.

"I should wait for Martin Warlock," she said. "He'd be rather fun to
marry."

"Do you think so?" answered Caroline. "Do you know, I believe I
will. You're always right, you darling . . . Only suppose I should
miss them both. William won't wait for ever! Got that note, dear?"

Maggie was defiant. She would just show the creature that she wasn't
afraid of her. She'd give her the note and she might imagine what
she pleased.

She got a pencil and a piece of paper and wrote hurriedly.

The week is up on Friday. Will you meet me that evening at a quarter
past six under the Marble Arch? MAGGIE.

The boldness, the excitement of this inflamed her. It was so like
her to challenge any action once she was in it by taking it to its
furthest limit. She put it in an envelope and wrote Martin's name
with a flourish.

"There!" she said, giving it to Caroline.

"Thank you," said Caroline, and with a number of rather wet and
elaborate kisses (Maggie hated kissing) departed.

But her afternoon was not yet over; hardly had Caroline left when
the door was opened and Miss Avies was shown in. Maggie started up
with dismay and began to stammer excuses. Miss Avies brushed them
aside.

"It doesn't matter," she said. "You'll do as well--even, it may be,
better."

A strange woman Miss Avies! Maggie had, of course, seen her at
Chapel, but this was the first time that they had been alone
together. Miss Avies was like a thin rod of black metal, erect and
quivering and waiting to strike. Her long sallow face was stiff, not
with outraged virtue, or elaborate pride, or burning scorn, but
simply with the accumulated concentration of fiery determination.
She was the very symbol of self-centred energy, inhuman, cold,
relentless. Her hair was jet black and gleamed like steel, and she
had thick black eyebrows like ink-marks against her forehead of
parchment. Her eyes were dead, like glass eyes, and she had some
false teeth that sometimes clicked in her mouth. She wore a black
dress with no ornament and thin black gloves.

She did not seem, however, to Maggie unkindly, as she stood there,
looking about the room rather short-sightedly. (She would not wear
glasses. Could it have been vanity?) She was not hostile, nor
scornful, nor even patronising . . . but had Maggie been struck
there, dead at her feet she would not have moved a step to help her.
Her voice was ugly, with a crack in it, as though it needed oil.
Maggie, as she looked at her, did not need to be told that she did
not believe in Mr. Warlock's mysticism. She came across and shook
Maggie's hand. Her touch was cold and stiff and a little damp like
that of a wet stone.

"Sorry your Aunt's out," she said, "but I can talk to you for a
while." She looked at Maggie for a moment. Then she said:

"Why don't you clear out of all this?"

The voice was so abrupt and the words so unexpected that Maggie
jumped.

"Why don't I?" she repeated.

"Yes, you," said Miss Avies. "You've no place here in all this
business. You don't believe in it, do you?"

"No," said Maggie.

"And you don't want to use it for something you do believe in?"

"No," said Maggie. "Well then, clear out."

Maggie, colouring a little, said:

"My aunts have been very good to me. I oughtn't to leave them."

"Fiddlesticks," said Miss Avies. "Your life's your own, not your
aunts'."

She sat down and stayed bolt upright and motionless near the fire;
she flung a thin dark shadow like a stain on the wall. There was a
long pause between them. After that abrupt opening there seemed to
be nothing to say. Maggie's thoughts also were elsewhere. She was
wishing now passionately that she had not given that note to
Caroline.

Suddenly Miss Avies said, "What do you do with yourself all day?"

Maggie laughed. "Try and make myself less careless, Miss Avies."

Miss Avies replied, "You'll never make yourself less careless. We
are as we are."

"But don't you think," said Maggie, "that one can cure one's
faults?"

"One gets rid of one only to make room for another . . . But that
doesn't matter. The point is that one should have an ambition.
What's your ambition, child?"

Maggie didn't answer. Her ambition was Martin, but she couldn't tell
Miss Avies so.

At last, after a long pause, as Miss Avies still seemed to be
waiting, she answered:

"I suppose that I want to earn my living--to be independent."

"Well, leave this place then," said Miss Avies. "There's no
independence here." Then added, as though to herself. "They think
they're looking for the face of God . . . It's only for themselves
and their vanity they're looking."

Maggie said, to break another of the long pauses that seemed to be
always forming between them:

"I think every one ought to earn their own living, don't you?"

Miss Avies shook her head. "You're very young--terribly young. I've
got no advice to give you except to lead a healthy life somewhere
away from these surroundings. We're an unnatural lot here and you're
a healthy young creature . . . Have you got a lover?"

Maggie smiled. "I've got a friend," she said. Miss Avies sighed.
"That's more than I've got," she said.

"Not that I've time for one," she added. She got up. "I won't wait
for your aunt," she said, "I've left a note downstairs . . . You
clear out as soon as you can, that's my advice to you."

She said good-bye, looking into Maggie's clear eyes. She was
suddenly less inhuman, the touch of her hand was warmer.

"Don't you cheat yourself into believing in the Deity," she said,
and was gone.

When Friday arrived Maggie had not seen Caroline again, and she
could not tell whether the note had been safely delivered or no. She
was not sure what she had better do. Caroline might hare done
anything with the note, torn it up, burnt it, lost it, forgotten it
altogether. Well, that was a risk that Maggie must take. If he did
not appear she would wait a little while and then come away. They
must soon meet in any case. They had all their lives before them.

Aunt Anne was up again--very, very pale now and so thin that the
light seemed to shine through her making her more of a stained
window saint than ever.

Maggie told her about the visit, Aunt Anne looked at her curiously.
She seemed so weak and frail that Maggie suddenly felt warm maternal
love. Rather shyly she put her hand upon her aunt's: "I won't go
away until you're better--"

Aunt Anne nodded her head.

"I know you won't, dear," she said. "Don't be out late to-day. We
shall be anxious about you."

Maggie had made a promise and was terrified when she thought of it.
Suppose her aunt did not get better for years and years?

People often had long lingering illnesses with no apparent change in
their condition. To Maggie a promise was an utterly final thing. She
could not dream that one ever broke one's word. She trembled now
when she thought of what she had done. She had been entrapped after
all and by her own free will.

In her little room as she was putting on her hat she suddenly prayed
to a God, of whom she knew nothing, that her aunt might get better
soon.

She started out on her great adventure with a strange self-assurance
as though loving Martin had given her the wisdom of all the ages.

Turning down the street towards the Strand she found almost at once
a taxi-cab drawn up, as though it had been waiting there especially
for her like an eloping coach in a romantic tale. A fat red-faced
fellow with a purple nose, a cloth cap and a familiar vague eye, as
though he always saw further than he intended, waited patiently for
her to speak.

Boldly, as though she had done such things all her life, she said,
"Fourteen Bryanston Square." Then she slipped in and was hidden from
the gay world. She sat there, her hands on her lap staring at the
three crimson rolls in the neck of her driver. She was thinking of
nothing, nothing at all. Did she struggle to think? Only words would
come, "Martin," or "Bryanston Square," or "cab," again and again,
words that did not mean anything but physical sensations. "Martin"
hot fire at the throat, "Bryanston Square" an iron rod down the
spine, and "cab" dust and ashes in the eyes.

She tried to look at herself in the little mirror opposite her, but
she could only catch the corner of her cheek and half her hat. But
she minded less about her appearance now. If Martin could love her
it did not matter what others thought--nevertheless she pulled her
hat about a little and patted her dress. The cab stopped and she
felt desperately lonely. Did any one care about her anywhere? No, no
one. Then her eyes fell; and perhaps there was the slightest
flush of embarrassment, or pleasure, on the pale, handsome face.

But how quickly her spirits rose!

There was no more talk of politics as they neared England.

He described the successive ships to her; he called her attention
to the strings of wild-duck flying up Channel; he named the various
headlands to her.

Then, as they got nearer and nearer, the little Anneli had to be sought
out, and the various travelling impedimenta got together.

It did not occur to Mr.

Lind or his daughter as strange that George Brand should be
travelling without any luggage whatever.

But surely it must have occurred to them as remarkable that a
bachelor should have had a saloon-carriage reserved for himself--unless,
indeed, they reflected that a rich Englishman was capable of any
whimsical extravagance.

Then, no sooner had Miss Lind entered this carriage, than it seemed
as though everything she could think of was being brought for her.

Such flowers did not grow in railway-stations--especially in the
month of March. Had the fruit dropped from the telegraph-poles?
Cakes, wine, tea, magazines and newspapers appeared to come without
being asked for.

"Mr. Brand," said Natalie, "you must be an English Monte Cristo: do
you clap your hands, and the things appear?"
But a Monte Cristo should never explain.

The conjuror who reveals his mechanism is no longer a conjuror.

George Brand only laughed, and said he hoped Miss Lind would always
find people ready to welcome her when she reached English shores.

As they rattled along through those shining valleys--the woods
and fields and homesteads all glowing in the afternoon sun--she
had put aside her travelling-cloak and hood, for the air was
quite mild. Was it the drawing off of the hood, or the stir of wind
on board the steamer, that had somewhat disarranged her hair?--at
all events, here and there about her small ear or the shapely neck
there was an escaped curl of raven-black. She had taken off her gloves,
too: her hands, somewhat large, were of a beautiful shape, and
transparently white.

The magazines and newspapers received not much attention--except
from Mr. Lind, who said that at last he should see some news neither
a week old nor fictitious. As for these other two, they seemed to
find a wonderful lot to talk about, and all of a profoundly
interesting character. With a sudden shock of disappointment George
Brand found that they were almost into London.

His hand-bag was at once passed by the custom-house people; and he had
nothing to do but say good-bye. His face was not over-cheerful.

"Well, it was a lucky meeting," Mr. Lind said. "Natalie ought to thank
you for being so kind to her."
"Yes; but not here," said the girl, and she turned to him. "Mr. Brand,
people who have travelled so far together should not part so quickly:
it is miserable.

Will you not come and spend the evening with us?"
"Natalie will give us something in the way of an early dinner,"
said Mr.

Lind, "and then you can make her play the zither for you."
Well, there was not much hesitation about his accepting. That
drawing-room, with its rose-and-green-shaded candles, was not as
other drawing-rooms in the evening.

In that room you could hear the fountains plashing in the Villa
Reale, and the Capri fishermen singing afar, and the cattle-bells
chiming on the Campagna, and the gondolas sending their soft
chorus across the lagoon.

When Brand left his bag in the cloak-room at the station he gave
the porter half a crown for carrying thither, which was unnecessary.
Nor was there any hopeless apathy on his face as he drove away
with these two friends through the darkening afternoon, in the little
hired brougham. When they arrived in Curzon Street, he was even
good enough to assist the timid little Anneli to descend from the
box; but this was in order that he might slip a tip into the hand
of the coachman.

The coachman scarcely said "Thank you." It was not until afterward
that he discovered he had put half a sovereign into his breeches-pocket
as if it were an ordinary sixpence.

Natalie Lind came down to dinner in a dress of black velvet, with
a mob-cap of rose-red silk.

Round her neck she wore a band of Venetian silver-work, from the
centre of which was suspended the little old-fashioned locket she had
received in Hyde Park. George Brand remembered the story, and perhaps
was a trifle surprised that she should wear so conspicuously the
gift of a stranger.

She was very friendly, and very cheerful. She did not seem at all
fatigued with her travelling; on the contrary, it was probably the
sea-air and the sunlight that had lent to her cheek a faint flush
of color.

But at the end of dinner her father said.

"Natalushka, if we go into the drawing-room, and listen to music,
after so long a day, we shall all go to sleep. You must come into
the smoking-room with us."

"Very well, papa."
"But, Miss Lind," the other gentleman remonstrated, "a velvet
dress--tobacco-smoke--"
"My dresses must take their chance," said Miss Lind.

"I wear them to please my friends, not to please chance acquaintances
who may call during the day."
And so they retired to the little den at the end of the passage; and
Natalie handed Mr.

Brand a box of cigars to choose from, and got down from the rack her
father's long-stemmed, red-bowled pipe.

Then she took a seat in the corner by the fire, and listened.

The talk was all about that anarchical literature that Brand had
been devouring down at Dover; and he was surprised to find how
little sympathy Lind had with writing of that kind, though he had
to confess that certain of the writers were personal friends of his
own.

Natalie sat silent, listening intently, and staring into the fire.

At last Brand said,
"Of course, I had other books. For example, one I see on your
shelves there."

He rose, and took down the "Songs before Sunrise." "Miss Lind,"
he said, "I am afraid you will laugh at me; but I have been haunted
with the notion that you have been teaching Lord Evelyn how to read
poetry, or that he has been unconsciously imitating you.

I heard him repeat some passages from 'The Pilgrims,' and I was
convinced he was reproducing something he had heard from you.

Well--I am almost ashamed to ask you--"
A touch of embarrassment appeared on the girl's face, and she glanced
at her father.

"Yes, certainly, Natalie; why not?"
"Well," she said, lightly, "I cannot read if I am stared at.

You must remain as you are."
She took the book from him, and passed to the other side of the
room, so that she was behind them both.

There was silence for an instant or two as she turned over the
leaves.

Then the silence was broken; and if Brand was instantly assured
that his surmise was correct, he also knew that here was a more
pathetic cadence--a prouder ring--than any that Lord Evelyn had
thrown into the lines.

She read at random--a passage here, a passage there--but always it
seemed to him that the voice was the voice of a herald proclaiming
the new awakening of the world--the evil terrors of the night
departing--the sunlight of liberty and right and justice beginning
to shine over the sea.

And these appeals to England!

"Oh thou, clothed round with raiment of white waves, Thy brave brows
lightening through the gray wet air, Thou, lulled with sea-sounds of
a thousand caves, And lit with sea-shine to thy inland lair, Whose
freedom clothed the naked souls of slaves And stripped the muffled
souls of tyrants bare, Oh, by the centuries of thy glorious graves,
By the live light of the earth that was thy care, Live, thou must
not be dead, Live; let thy armed head Lift itself up to sunward and
the fair Daylight of time and man, Thine head republican, With the
same splendor on thine helmless hair That in his eyes kept up a
light Who on thy glory gazed away their sacred sight."

The cry there was in this voice! Surely his heart answered,
"Oh Milton's land, what ails thee to be dead!"

Was it in this very room, he wondered, that the old Polish refugee
was used to lift up his trembling hand and bid his compatriots
drink to "the white chalk-line beyond the sea?"

How could he forget, as he and she sat together that morning, and
gazed across the blue waters to the far and sunlit line of coast,
the light that shone on her face as she said, "If I were English,
how proud I should be of England!"

And this England of her veneration and her love--did it not contain
some, at least, who would answer to her appeal?

Presently Natalie Lind shut the book and gently laid it down, and
stole out of the room.

She was gone only for a few seconds.

When she returned, she had in her hand a volume of sketches, of
which she had been speaking during dinner.

He did not open this volume at once. On the contrary, he was silent
for a little while; and then he looked up, and addressed Natalie,
with a strange grave smile on his face.

"I was about to tell your father, Miss Lind, when you came in, that
if I could not translate for you, or carry a message across the
Atlantic for him, he might at least find something else that I can
do.

At all events, may I say that I am willing to join you, if I can
be of any help at all?"

Ferdinand Lind regarded him for a second, and said, quite calmly,

"It is unnecessary. You have already joined us."

CHAPTER IX.

A NIGHT IN VENICE.

The solitary occupant of this railway-carriage was apparently reading;
but all the same he looked oftener at his watch than at his book.

At length he definitely shut the volume and placed it in his
travelling-bag. Then he let down the carriage-window, and looked
out into the night.

The heavens were clear and calm; the newly-risen moon was but a
thin crescent of silver; in the south a large planet was shining.

All around him, as it seemed, stretched a vast plain of water, as dark
and silent and serene as the overarching sky. Then, far ahead, he
could catch a glimpse of a pale line stretching across the watery
plain--a curve of the many-arched viaduct along which the train was
thundering; and beyond that again, and low down at the horizon,
two or three minute and dusky points of orange. These lights were
the lights of Venice.

This traveller was not much hampered with luggage.

When finally the train was driven into the glare of the station,
and the usual roar and confusion began, he took his small bag in
his hand and rapidly made his way through the crowd; then out and
down the broad stone steps, and into a gondola.

In a couple of minutes he was completely away from all that glare
and bustle and noise; nothing around him but darkness and an absolute
silence.

The city seemed as the City of the Dead.

The tall and sombre buildings on each side of the water-highway were
masses of black--blackest of all where they showed against the
stars.

The ear sought in vain for any sound of human life; there was nothing
but the lapping of the water along the side of the boat, and the
slow, monotonous plash of the oar.

Father and farther into the silence and the darkness; and now here
and there a window, close down to the water, and heavily barred with
rectangular bars of iron, shows a dull red light; but there is no
sound, nor any passing shadow within.

The man who is standing by the hearse-like cabin of the gondola observes
and thinks. These black buildings; the narrow and secret canals;
the stillness of the night: are they not suggestive enough--of
revenge, a quick blow, and the silence of the grave?

And now, as the gondola still glides on, there is heard a slow and
distant tolling of bells.

The Deed is done, then?

--no longer will the piteous hands be thrust out of the barred
window--no longer will the wild cry for help startle the passer-by
in the night-time.

And now again, as the gondola goes on its way, another sound--still
more muffled and indistinct--the sound of a church organ, with the
solemn chanting of voices.

Are they praying for the soul of the dead?

The sound becomes more and more distant; the gondola goes on its
way.

The new-comer has no further time for these idle fancies.

At the Rialto bridge he stops the gondola, pays the man, and goes
ashore.

Then, rapidly ascending the steps, he crosses the bridge, descends
the other side, and again jumps into a gondola.

All this the work of a few seconds.

But it was obvious he had been expected. He gave no instructions to
the two men in this second gondola. They instantly went to work, and
with a rapid and powerful stroke sent the boat along--with an
occasional warning cry as they swept by the entrance to one or other
of the smaller canals.

Finally, they abruptly left the Grand Canal, close by the Corte
d'Appello, and shot into a narrow opening that seemed little more
than a slit between the buildings.

Here they had to go more cautiously; the orange light of their
lamp shining as they passed on the empty archways, and on
the iron-barred windows, and slimy steps.

And always this strange silence in the dead or sleeping city, and
the monotonous plash of the oars, and the deep low cry of "Sia
premi!"

or "Sia stali!" to give warning of their approach.

But, indeed, that warning was unnecessary; they were absolutely alone
in this labyrinth of gloomy water-ways.

At length they shot beneath a low bridge, and stopped at some steps
immediately beyond. Here one of the men, getting out, proceeded to
act as guide to the stranger. They had not far to go. They passed
first of all into a long, low, and foul-smelling archway, in the
middle of which was a narrow aperture protected by an iron gate.
The man lit a candle, opened the gate, and preceded his companion
along a passage and up a stone staircase. The atmosphere of the
place was damp and sickly; the staircase was not more than three
feet in width; the feeble glimmer of the candle did but little to
dispel the darkness. Even that was withdrawn; for the guide, having
knocked thrice at a door, blew out the candle, and retreated
down-stairs.

"_The night is dark, brother._"
"_The dawn is near._"
Instantly the door was thrown open; the dark figure of a man was
seen against the light; he said, "Come in! come in!" and his hand
was outstretched. The stranger seemed greatly surprised.

"What, you, Calabressa!" he exclaimed. "Your time has not yet
expired!"
"What, no? My faith, I have made it expire!" said the other, airily,
and introducing a rather badly pronounced French word or two into
his Italian.

"But come in, come in; take a seat. You are early; you may have to
wait."
He was an odd-looking person, this tall, thin, elderly man, with the
flowing yellow-white hair and the albino eyes.

There was a semi-military look about his braided coat; but, on the
other hand, he wore the cap of a German student--of purple velvet,
with a narrow leather peak.

He seemed to be proud of his appearance. He had a gay manner.

"Yes, I am escaped. Ah, how fine it is! You walk about all day as you
please; you smoke cigarettes; you have your coffee; you go to look
at the young English ladies who come to feed the pigeons in the
place."
He raised two fingers to his lips, and blew a kiss to all the
world.

"Such complexions! A wild rose in every cheek! But listen, now; this
is not about an English young lady. I go up to the Church of St.

Mark--besides the bronze horses. I am enjoying the air, when I hear
a sound; I turn; over there I see open windows; ah! the figure in
the white dressing-gown! It is the _diva_ herself. They play the
_Barbiere_ to-night, and she is practicing as she dusts her room.
_Una voce poco fa_--it thrills all through the square. She puts
the ornaments on the mantel-piece straight. _Lo giurai, la
vincero!_--she goes to the mirror and makes the most beautiful
attitude. Ah, what a spectacle--the black hair all down--the white
dressing-gown--_In sono docile_"--and again he kissed his two fingers.
Then he said,
"But now, you.

You do not look one day older. And how is Natalie?"
"Natalie is well, I believe," said the other, gravely.

"You are a strange man. You have not a soft heart for the pretty
creatures of the world; you are implacable. The little Natalushka,
then; how is she?"
"The little Natalushka is grown big now; she is quite a woman."

"A woman! She will marry an Englishman, and become very rich: is not
that so?"
"Natalie--I mean, Natalushka will not marry," said the other
coldly.
"She knows she is very useful to me.

She knows I have no other."
"_Maintenant_: the business--how goes that?"
"Elsewhere, well; in England, not quite so well," said Ferdinand
Lind.
"But what can you expect? The English think they have no need of
co-operation, except to get their groceries cheap. Why, everything
is done in the open air there. If a scoundrel gets a lash too many
in prison, you have it before Parliament next week. If a school-boy
is kicked by his master, you have all the newspapers in the country
ablaze.
The newspapers govern England.

A penny journal has more power than the commander-in-chief."

"Then why do you remain in England?"
"It is the safest for me, personally.

Then there is most to be done there.

Again, it is the head-quarters of money.

Do you see, Calabressa?
One must have money, or one cannot work."
The albino-looking man lit a cigarette.

"You despair, then, of England? No, you never despair."
"There is a prospect.

The Southern Englishman is apathetic; he is interested only, as
I have said, in getting his tea and sugar cheap.

But the Northern Englishman is vigorous. The trades' associations
in the North are vast, powerful, wealthy; but they are suspicious of
anything foreign. Members join us; the associations will not.
But what do you think of this, Calabressa: if one were to have the
assistance of an Englishman whose father was one of the great
iron-masters; whose name is well known in the north; who has a large
fortune, and a strong will?"

"You have got such a man?"

"Not yet. He is only a Friend.

But if I do not misjudge him, he will be a Companion soon. He is a
man after my own heart; once with us, all the powers of the earth
will not turn him back."
"And his fortune?"
"He will help us with that also, no doubt."

"But how did it occur to Providence to furnish you with an assistant
so admirably equipped?"

"Do you mean how did I chance to find him? Through a young English
lord--an amiable youth, who is a great friend of Natalie's--of
Natalushka's.

Why, he has joined us, too--"
"An English milord!"
"Yes; but it is merely from poetical sympathy.

He is pleasant and warm-hearted, but to us not valuable; and
he is poor."
At this moment a bell rung, apparently in the adjoining
apartment.
Calabressa jumped from his chair, and hastened to a door on his left,
which he opened. A _portiere_ prevented anything being seen in the
chamber beyond.

"Has the summons been answered?"

a voice asked, from the other side.

"Yes, sir," said Calabressa. "Brother Lind is here."
"That is well."
The door was again shut, and Calabressa resumed his seat.

"Brother Lind," said he, in a low voice, though he leaned back in
his chair, and still preserved that gay manner, "I suppose you do
not know why you have been summoned?"
"Not I."
"_Bien._ But suppose one were to guess? Suppose there is a gentleman
somewhere about who has been carrying his outraging of one's common
notions of decency just a little too far? Suppose it is necessary
to make an example? You may be noble, and have great wealth, and
honor, and smiles from beautiful women; but if some night you find
a little bit of steel getting into your heart, or if some morning
you find your coffee as you drink it burn all the way down until
you can feel it burn no more--what then? You must bid good-bye to
your mistresses, and to your gold plates and feasts, and your
fountains spouting perfumes, and all your titles; is not that so?"

"But who is it?" said Lind, suddenly bending forward.

The other regarded him for a moment, playfully.

"What if I were to mention the '_Starving Cardinal_?'"

"Zaccatelli!"

exclaimed Lind, with a ghastly pallor appearing for a moment in
the powerful iron-gray face.

Calabressa only laughed.

"Oh yes, it is beautiful to have all these fine things. And the
unhappy devils who are forced to pawn their last sticks of furniture
at the Monte di Pieta, rather than have their children starve when
bread is dear; how it must gratify them to think of his Eminence
seizing the funds of that flourishing institution to buy up the
whole of the grain in the Papal States!

What an admirable speculation! How kind to the poor, on the part of
the Secretary to the Vicar of Christ! What!--do you think because
I am a cardinal I am not to make a profit in corn?

I tell you those people have no business to be miserable--they have
no business to go and pawn their things; if I am allowed to speculate
with the funds, why not?

_Allons donc!_--It is a devilish fine world, merry gentlemen!"
"But--but why have they summoned me?" Lind said, in the same low
voice.

"Who knows?" said the other, lightly. "I do not. Come, tell me more
about the little Natalushka. Ah, do I not remember the little minx,
when she came in, after dinner, among all those men, with her '_Eljen
a haza_!' What has she grown to?

what has she become?"
"Natalie is a good girl," said her father; but he was thinking of
other things.

"Beautiful?"
"Some would say so."
"But not like the English young ladies?"
"Not at all."
"I thought not. I remember the black-eyed little one--with her pride
in Batthyany, and her hatred in Gorgey, and all the rest of it.
The little Empress!

--with her proud eyes, and her black eyelashes.

Do you remember at Dunkirk, when old Anton Pepczinski met her for
the first time?
'_Little Natalushka, if I wait for you, will you marry me when you
grow up?_" Then the quick answer, "_I am not to be called any longer
by my nursery name; but if you will fight for my country, I will
marry you when I grow up._'"
Light-hearted as this man Calabressa was, having escaped from prison,
and eagerly inclined for chatter, after so long a spell of enforced
silence, he could not fail to perceive that his companion was hardly
listening to him.

"Mais, mon frere, a quoi bon le regarder?" he said, peevishly.
"If it must come, it will come. Or is it the poor cardinal you pity?
That was a good name they invented for him, anyway--_il cardinale
affamatore_."
Again the bell rung, and Ferdinand Lind started.
She had of course not
known this; her adventures in introspection had been very few,
besides she had not known what happiness looked like; her father,
her uncle, and her aunts were not exactly happy people . . .

Now she flung herself without thought or care into a flood of
happiness, and as sometimes occurs in life, she was granted by the
gods, beneficent or ironic as you please, a period of security when
everything menacing or dangerous withdrew and it seemed as though
the whole world were in a conspiracy to cheat her into confidence.
She was confident because she did not think; she simply did not
think at all. She loved Martin and Martin loved her; cased in that
golden armour, she confronted her aunts and the house and the world
behind the house with a sublime and happy confidence. She loved her
aunts now, she loved Martha and the parrot and the cat, and she
could not believe that they did not all love her. Because Martin
loved her the rest of the world must also do so, and if they did not
she would compel them.

For three whole weeks the spell lasted, for three marvellous golden
weeks. When she looked back afterwards she wondered that she had not
seen many things, warnings, portents, whatever you please to call
them. But for three weeks she saw nothing but Martin, and for three
weeks he saw nothing but Maggie.

She began her career of defiance at once by informing Aunt Anne that
she was now going out every morning to do her shopping. Considering
the confinement to the house that her life had always been, this was
such a declaration of independence as those walls had never
encountered before. But Aunt Anne never turned one of her shining
neatly ordered hairs. "Shopping, my dear?" she asked. "Yes," said
Maggie, looking her full in the face. "What sort of shopping, dear?"
"Oh, I don't know," said Maggie. "There's always something every
day."

Maggie had an uncomfortable feeling that her aunt had in some way
mysteriously defeated her by this sudden abandonment of all protest,
and for a moment the mysterious house closed around her, with its
shadows and dim corners and the little tinkling Chapel hell in the
heart of it. But the thought of Martin dissolved the shadows, and
off she went.

They agreed to meet every morning at eleven o'clock outside
Hatchards, the bookseller's, in Piccadilly. They chose that place
because you could look into a bookseller's window for quite a long
time without seeming odd, and there were so many people passing that
no one noticed you. Their habit then was to walk to the corner of
the Green Park and there climb on to the top of a motor omnibus and
go as far as they could within the allotted time. Maggie never in
after life found those streets again. They had gone, she supposed,
to Chelsea, to St. John's Wood, to the heart of the city, to the
Angel, Islington, to Westminster and beyond, but places during those
three weeks had no names, streets had no stones, houses no walls,
and human figures no substantiality. They tried on one or two
occasions to go by Tube, but they missed the swing of the open air,
the rush of the wind, and their independence of men and women. Often
he tried to persuade her to stay with him for luncheon and the
afternoon, but she was wiser than he.

"No," she said, "everything depends on keeping them quiet. A little
later on it will be lovely. You must leave that part of it to me."

She promised him definitely that soon they should go to a matinee
together, but she would not give her word about a whole evening. In
some strange way she was frightened of the evening, although she had
already pledged her word to him on something much more final: "No,"
she thought to herself, "when the moment comes for me to leave
everything, I will go, but he shall know that I am not doing it
cheaply, simply for an evening's fun." He felt something of that
too, and did not try to persuade her. He hugged his unselfishness;
for the first time in his life it seemed to him that he wanted to
follow somebody else's will; with the other women it had been so
different, if they had not wanted to obey him he had left them. But
indeed all through these three weeks they were discovering
themselves and one another, and, as though it were part of the
general conspiracy, only the best part of themselves. On the top of
the 'bus, as they sat close together, their hands locked under his
overcoat, the world bumping and jolting, and jogging about their
feet, as though indeed public houses and lamp-posts and cinemas and
town halls and sweet-shops were always jumping up tiptoe to see
whether they couldn't catch a glimpse of the lovers, Martin and
Maggie felt that they were really divine creatures, quite modestly
divine, but nevertheless safe from all human ravages and earthly
failings, wicked and cowardly thoughts, and ambitions and desires.

Indeed, during those three weeks Maggie saw nothing of Martin's
weaknesses, his suspicions and dreads, his temper and self-
abasement. The nobility that Martin had in him was true nobility,
his very weaknesses came from his sharp consciousness of what purity
and self-sacrifice and asceticism really were, and that they were
indeed the only things for man to live by. During those weeks he saw
so truly the sweetness and fidelity and simplicity of Maggie that
his conscience was killed, his scruples were numbed. He did not want
during those weeks any sensual excitement, any depravity, any
license. A quiet and noble asceticism seemed to him perfectly
possible. He burst out once to Maggie with: "I can't conceive,
Maggie, why I ever thought life complicated. You've straightened
everything out for me, made all the troubles at home seem nothing,
shown me what nonsense it was wanting the rotten things I was always
after."

But Maggie had no eloquence in reply--she could not make up fine
sentences; it embarrassed her dreadfully to tell him even that she
loved him, and when he was sentimental it was her habit to turn it
off with a joke if she could. She wanted terribly to ask him
sometimes what he had meant when he said that he didn't love her as
he had loved other women. She had never the courage to ask him this.
She wondered sometimes why it had hurt her when he had said he loved
her as though she were a man friend, without any question of sex.
"Surely that's enough for me," she would ask herself, "it means that
it's much more lasting and safe." And yet it was not enough.

Nevertheless, during these weeks she found his brotherly care of her
adorable, he found her shyness divine.

"Every other woman I have ever been in love with," he told her once,
"I have always kept asking them would they ever change, and would
they love me always, and all that kind of nonsense. A man always
begins like that, and then the time comes when he wishes to God they
would change, and they won't. But you're not like that, Maggie, I
know you'll never change, and I know that I shall never want you
to." "No, I shall never change," said Maggie.

At the very beginning of the three weeks a little incident occurred
that was trivial enough at the time, but appeared afterwards as
something significant and full of meaning. This incident was a
little talk with poor Mr. Magnus. Maggie always thought of him as
"poor Mr. Magnus." He seemed so feckless and unsettled, and then he
wrote novels that nobody wanted to buy. He always talked like a
book, and that was perhaps one reason why Maggie had avoided him
during these last months. Another reason had been that she really
could not be sure how far he was in the general conspiracy to drive
her into the Chapel. He would not do that of his own will she was
sure, but being in love with Aunt Anne he might think it his sacred
duty, and Maggie was terrified of "sacred duties." Therefore when,
three days after that great evening in the park, he caught her alone
in the drawing-room, her first impulse was to run away; then she
looked at him and found that her love for the world in general
embraced him too "if only he won't talk like a book," she thought to
herself.

He looked more wandering than ever with his high white collar, his
large spectacles, and his thin, dusty hair; the fire of some hidden,
vital spirit burnt beneath those glasses, and his face was so kindly
that she felt ashamed of herself for having avoided him so often.

"Both the aunts are at Miss Avies'." she said.

"Oh," he said, looking at her rather blankly.

"Perhaps I'll come another time," and he turned towards the door.

"No," she cried. "You won't--I haven't seen you for months."

"That's not my fault," he answered. "I thought we were to have been
friends, and you've run away every time you saw the corner of my
dusty coat poking round the door."

"Yes," she said, "I have--I've been frightened of every one lately."

"And you're not now?" he asked, looking at her with that sudden
bright sharpness that was so peculiarly his.

"No, I'm not," she answered. "I'm frightened of nobody."

He said nothing to that, but stared fixedly in front of him.

"I'm in a bad mood," he said. "I've been trying for weeks to get on
with a novel. Just a fortnight ago a young man and a young woman
took shelter from the rain in the doorway of a deserted house--
they're still there now, and they haven't said a word to one another
all that time."

"Why not?" asked Maggie.

"They simply won't speak," he answered her.

"Well then, I should start another story," said Maggie brightly.

"Ah," he said, shaking his head. "What's the use of starting one if
you know you're never going to finish it, what's the use of
finishing it if you know no one is ever going to read it?" Maggie
shook her head.

"You've changed. When I saw you last you told me that you didn't
mind whether any one ever read them or not, and that you just wrote
them because you loved doing them."

"Every author," said Mr. Magnus gloomily," says that to himself when
he can't sell his books, but it's all vainglory, I'm afraid."

"I can't help being glad," Maggie answered. "There are such
interesting things you might do. I can't imagine why any one writes
books now when there are so many already in existence that nobody's
read."

He wasn't listening to her. He looked up suddenly and said quite
wildly:

"It's terrible all this that's going on. You know about it, of
course--Warlock's visions I mean and the trouble it's making. I'm
outside it and you're outside it, but we're being brought into it
all the same--how can we help it when we love the people who are in
it? It's so easy to say that it's nonsense, that people ought to be
wiser nowadays; that it's hysteria, even insanity--I know all that
and, of course, I don't believe for a moment that God's coming in a
chariot of fire on New Year's Eve especially for the benefit of
Thurston, Miss Avies and the rest, but that doesn't end it--it ought
to end it, but it doesn't. There's more in some people's madness
than in other people's sanity, and anyway, even if it's all nonsense
it means life or death to your aunt and some of the others, and it
means a certain breaking up of all this place. And it probably means
the triumph of a charlatan like Thurston and the increase of humbug
in the world and the discouragement of all the honest adventurers. I
call myself an adventurer, you know, Miss Maggie, although I'm a
poor specimen--but I'm damned if it isn't better to be a poor
adventurer than to be a fat, swollen, contented stay-at-home who can
see just as far as his nose and his cheque-book and might be just as
well dead as alive--I beg your pardon," he added suddenly, "for
swearing--I'm not myself, I'm not really."

She could see indeed that he was in great agitation of mind, and
some of this agitation communicated itself to her. Had she not been
selfish in forgetting all this through her own happiness? He was
right, she was part of it all, whether she wished or no.

"What do you think," she asked, dropping her voice a little, "is the
real truth about it?"

"The real truth"--he looked at her suddenly with a tender, most
charming smile that took away his ugliness. "Ah, that's a tremendous
question. Part of the truth is that Warlock's been praying so much
and eating so little that it would be odd indeed if he didn't see
visions of some sort. And part of the truth is that there are a lot
of women in the world who'll believe simply anything that you tell
them. It's part of the truth, too, that there are scoundrels in the
world who will take advantage of anybody's simple trust to fill
their pockets. But that's not all," he went on, shaking his head,
"no, that's not all. It's part of the truth that there is a mystery,
and that human beings will go on searching whatever all the
materialists and merchants in the world can try to do to stop them.
I remember years ago an old man, a little off his dot, telling my
father that he, the old man, was a treasure hunter. He told my
father that the world was divided into two halves, the treasure
hunters and the Town Councillors, and that the two halves would
never join and never even meet. My father, who was a practical man,
said that the old idiot should be shut up in an asylum, and
eventually I believe he was. 'We'll have him going off one day,' my
father said, 'in a cargo boat with a map in his pocket, looking for
gold pieces.' But it wasn't gold pieces he was after."

To Maggie it was always irritating the way that Mr. Magnus would
wander away from the subject. She brought him back now with a jerk.

"No, but what do you think is going to happen?" she asked him.

"I don't know," he answered. "I can't tell, but I know all my
happiness here is coming to an end, and I don't know what I shall
do. If I were a strong man I would go out and find all the other
treasure hunters, all the vicious ones, and the diseased, and the
drunkards and the perverted, and I would try to found some kind of a
society so that they should recognise one another all the world over
and shouldn't feel so lonely and deserted and hopelessly done for. I
don't mean a society for improving them, mind you, or warning them
or telling them they'll go to prison if they don't do better, that's
none of my business. But it seems to be a solemn fact that you
aren't a treasure hunter until there's something wrong with you,
until you've got a sin that's stronger than you are, or until you've
done something that's disgraceful in the eyes of the world--not that
I believe in weakness or in giving way to things. No one admires the
strong and the brave more than I do. I think a man's a fool if he
doesn't fight as hard as he can. But there's a brotherhood of the
dissatisfied and the uneasy and the anxious-hearted, and I believe
it's they who will discover the Grail in the end if it's ever going
to be discovered at all."

He broke off, then said restlessly: "I think things out, you know,
and at last I come to a conclusion, and it ends by being a platitude
that all the goody, goody books have said times without number. But
all the same that doesn't prevent it from being my discovery. It's
nothing to do with goodness and nothing to do with evil, it's
nothing to do with strength, and nothing to do with weakness; it
simply is that there are some people who want what they can see and
no more, and there are others, the baffled, fighting and disordered
others, for whom nothing that they can see with their mortal eyes is
enough, and who'll be restless all their days with their queer
little maps and their mysterious, thumbed directions to some island
or other that they'll never reach and never even get a ship for."

He stopped and there was a long silence between them, Maggie was
silent because she never knew what to say when he burst into
parables and divided mankind, under strange names, into different
camps. And yet this time she did know a little what he was after.
There was that house of Katharine Mark's the other day, with its
comfort and quiet and kind smiling clergyman--and there was this
strange place with all of them in an odd quiver of excitement
waiting for something to happen. But she couldn't speak to him about
that, she couldn't say anything to him at all. He cleared his throat
as though he were embarrassed and were conscious that he had been
making a fool of himself. Maggie felt that he was disappointed in
her. She was sorry for that, but she was as she was.

"Well, I'm glad you're happy," he said, looking at her wistfully. He
got up and stood awkwardly looking at her.

"I want you to promise me something," he said, "that's really what I
came for. I want you to promise that you won't in any case leave
your aunts before the New Year."

She got up, looked at him and gave him her hand.

"Yes," she said. "I promise that."

The year had only a week or two more to run and she was not afraid
of that little space of time. He seemed to want to say something
more, but after hesitating he suddenly made a bolt for the door and
she could hear him stumbling downstairs.

She forgot him almost as soon as he had left the house, but his
words nevertheless brought her to consider her aunts. Next morning
at breakfast time she had a further reason to consider them. Aunt
Elizabeth met her, when she came downstairs, with a very grave face.

"Your aunt's had a terrible night," she said. "She's insisted on
coming downstairs--I told her not. She never listens to anything I
say."

Maggie could see that something more than ordinary had occurred.
Aunt Elizabeth was on the edge of tears, and in so confused a state
of mind that she put sugar into her egg, and then ate it with a
puzzled air as though she could not be sure why it tasted so
strange. When Aunt Anne came in it was plain enough that she had
wrestled with demons during the night. Maggie had often seen her
before battling with pain and refusing to be defeated. Now she
looked as though she had but risen from the dead. It was a ghost in
very truth that stood there; a ghost in black silk dress with white
wristbands and a stiff white collar, black hair, so tightly drawn
back and ordered that it was like a shining skull-cap. Her face was
white, with the effect of a chalk drawing into which live, black,
burning eyes had been stuck. But it was none of these things that
frightened Maggie. It was the expression somewhere in the mouth, in
the eyes, in the pale bony hands, that spoke of some meeting with a
torturer whose powers were almost omniscient--almost, but not quite.
Pain, sheer physical, brutal pain, came into the room hulking,
steering behind Aunt Anne's shoulder. It grinned at Maggie and said,
"You haven't begun to feel what I can do yet, but every one has his
turn. You needn't flatter yourself that you're going to escape."

When Aunt Anne moved now it was with infinite caution, as though she
were stalking her enemy and was afraid lest any incautious gesture
should betray her into his ambush. No less marked than her torture
was her courage and the expectation that sustained that courage. She
had her eyes set upon something very sure and very certain. Maggie
was afraid to think what that expectation might be. But Maggie had
grown during these last weeks. She did not now kiss her aunt and try
to show an affection which was not so genuine as she would have
liked it to be by nervous little demonstrations. She said gravely:

"I am so sorry, Aunt Anne, that you have had so bad a night. Shall I
stay this morning and read to you?"

Even as she spoke she realised with sharp pain what giving up her
meeting with Martin meant.

"What were you going to do, dear?" asked Aunt Anne, her eyes seeing
as ever far beyond Maggie and the room and the house. As she spoke
Thomas, the cat, came forward and began rubbing himself very gently,
as though he were whispering something to his mistress, against her
dress. Maggie had an impulse, so strong that it almost defeated her,
to burst out with the whole truth. She almost said: "I'm going out
to meet Martin Warlock, whom I love and with whom I'm going to
live." She hated deceit, she hated lies. But this was some one
else's secret as well as her own, and telling the truth now would
only lead to much pain and distress, and then more lies and more
deceit.

So she said:

"I'm going to Piccadilly to get some things for Aunt Elizabeth."

"Yes," said Aunt Elizabeth, "she saves me a great deal of trouble.
She's a good girl."

"I know she's a good girl," said Aunt Anne softly.

It was strange to remember the time not so long ago when to run out
of the house and post a letter had seemed a bold defiant thing to do
threatened with grave penalties. The aunts had changed their plans
about her and had given her no reasons for doing so. No reasons were
ever given in that house for anything that was done. The more Maggie
went out, the more she was drawn in.

On her way to Martin that morning the figure of Aunt Anne haunted
her. She felt for a brief moment that she would do anything, yes,
even surrender Martin, to ease her aunt's pain. And then she knew
that she would not, and she called herself cruel and selfish and
felt for an instant a dark shadow threatening her because she was
so. But when she saw Martin outside Hatchard's she forgot it all. It
was a strange thing that during those weeks they neither of them
asked any questions about their home affairs. It was as though they
both inwardly realised that there was trouble for them of every kind
waiting outside and that they could only definitely realise their
happiness by building a wall around themselves. They knew perhaps in
their secret hearts, or at any rate Martin knew, that they could not
hold their castle for long. But is not the gift of three perfect
weeks a great thing for any human being to be given--and who has the
temerity, the challenging audacity, to ask with confidence for even
so much?

On this particular morning Martin said to her:

"Before we get into the 'bus, Maggie, you've got to come into a shop
with me." He was especially boyish and happy and natural that
morning. It was strange how his face altered when he was happy. His
brow was clear, his eyes were bright, and he had a kind of crooked
confident smile that must have won anybody's heart. His whole
carriage was that of a boy who was entering life for the first time
with undaunted expectation that it could give him nothing but the
best and jolliest things. Maggie as she looked at him this morning
caught her breath with the astonishing force of her love for him.
"Oh, how I'll look after him," was her thought. "He shall never be
unhappy again."

They crossed the street together, and stood for a moment close
together on the kerb in the middle way as though they were quite
alone in the world. She caught his arm and they ran before a
charging motor-'bus, laughing. People turned back and looked at
them, so happy they seemed. They walked up Bond Street and Martin
drew her into a jeweller's. She had never possessed any ornament
except her coral necklace in all her life and she knew now for the
first time how terribly she liked beautiful things. She guessed
pretty well what underlay that pleasant, plausible exterior of
his. And she was not at all sure that, if she went to Mr. Lind and
told him that in such and such circumstances his daughter meant to
go to America as the wife of George Brand, the first outburst of his
anger might not fall on herself. She was an intermeddler. What
concern of hers was it? He might even accuse her of having connived
at the whole affair, especially during his absence in Philadelphia.

But after all, the little Polish lady was exceedingly fond of
this girl; and she resolved to go at all hazards and see whether
something could not be done to put matters straight. She would call
at the chambers in Lisle Street, and make sure of seeing Mr. Lind
alone. She would venture to remind him that his daughter was grown
up--a woman, not to be treated as a child.

As she had been altogether on the father's side in arguing with Natalie,
so she would be altogether on the daughter's side in making
these representations to Mr. Lind.

Perhaps some happy compromise would result.

She was, however, exceedingly nervous when, on the following
afternoon, she called at Lisle Street, and was preceded up-stairs
by the stout old German.

In the room into which she was shown Reitzei was seated.

Reitzei received her very graciously; they were old friends.

But although Madame Potecki on ordinary occasions was fond of
listening to the sound of her own voice, she seemed now quite
incapable of saying anything. Reitzei had been fortunate enough
to hear the new barytone sing at a private house on the previous
evening; she did not even ask what impression had been
produced.

Then Mr.

Lind came into the room, and Reitzei left.

"How do you do, Madame Potecki?" said he, somewhat curtly.

She took it that he was offended because she had come on merely private
affairs to his place of business; and this did not tend to
lessen her embarrassment. However, she made a brave plunge.

"You are surprised," she said, "to find me calling upon you here,
are you not?

Yes; but I will explain. You see, my dear friend, I wished to see you
alone--"
"Yes, yes, Madame Potecki; I understand. What is your news?"
"It is--about Natalie," she managed to say, and then all the methods
of beginning that she had studied went clean out of her mind; and
she was reduced to an absolute silence.

He did not seem in the least impatient.

"Yes; about Natalie?" he repeated, taking up a paper-knife, and
beginning to write imaginary letters on the leather of the desk before
him.

"You will say to me, 'Why do you interfere?'" the little woman managed
to say at last. "Meddlers do harm; they are not thanked. But then,
my dear friend, Natalie is like my own child to me; for her what
would I not do?"
Mr.

Lind could not fail to see that his visitor was very nervous and
agitated: perhaps it was to give her time to compose herself that
he said, leisurely,
"Yes, Madame Potecki; I know that you and she are great friends;
and it is a good thing that the child should have some one to keep
her company; perhaps she is a little too much alone.

Well, what do you wish to say about her? You run no risk with me.
You will not be misunderstood. I know you are not likely to say
anything unkind about Natalie."

"Unkind!" she exclaimed; and now she had recovered herself somewhat.

"Who could do that? Oh no, my dear friend; oh no!"
Here was another awkward pause.

"My dear Madame Potecki," said Mr. Lind, with a smile, "shall I
speak for you? You do not like to say what you have come to say. Shall
I speak for you? This is it, is it not? You have become aware of
that entanglement that Natalie has got into. Very well. Perhaps
she has told you. Perhaps she has told you also that I have forbidden
her to have any communication with--well, let us speak frankly--Mr.
Brand.

Very well.
You go with her to the South Kensington Museum; you meet Mr.

Brand there. Naturally you think if that comes to my ears I shall
suspect you of having planned the meeting; and you would rather
come and assure me that you had nothing to do with it.

Is it so?"

"My dear friend," said Madame Potecki, quickly, "I did not come to
you about myself at all! What am I? What matters what happens to an
old woman like me? It is not about myself, it is about Natalie that
I have come to you. Ah, the dear, beautiful child!--how can one
see her unhappy, and not try to do something? Why should she be
unhappy?

She is young, beautiful, loving; my dear friend, do you wonder
that she has a sweetheart?--and one who is so worthy of her, too:
one who is not selfish, who has courage, who will be kind to her.
Then I said to myself, 'Ah, what a pity to have father and daughter
opposed to each other!' Why might not one step in and say, 'Come,
and be friends.

You love each other: do not have this coldness that makes a young
heart so miserable!'"
She had talked quickly and eagerly at last; she was trembling with
excitement, she had her eyes fixed on his face to catch the first
symptom of acquiescence.

But, on the contrary, Mr. Lind remained quite impassive, and he
said, coldly,
"This is a different matter altogether, Madame Potecki. I do not
blame you for interfering; but I must tell you at once that your
interference is not likely to be of much use. You see, there are
reasons which I cannot explain to you, but which are very serious,
why any proposal of marriage between Mr.

Brand and Natalie is not to be entertained for a moment.

The thing is quite impossible. Very well. She knows this; she knows
that I wish all communication between them to cease; nevertheless,
she says she will see him every day until he goes.

How can you wonder that she is unhappy? Is it not her own doing?"

"If she was in reality my child, that is not the way I would speak,"
said the little woman, boldly.

"Unfortunately, my dear Madame Potecki," said Mr. Lind, blandly, "I
cannot, as I say, explain to you the reasons which make such a
marriage impossible, or you yourself would say it was impossible.
Very well, then. If you wish to do a service to your friend
Natalie--if you wish to see her less unhappy, you know what advice
to give her. A girl who perseveres in wilful disobedience is not
likely to be very contented in her mind."

Madame Potecki sat silent and perplexed. This man seemed so firm, so
reasonable, so assured, it was apparently hopeless to expect any
concession from him.

And yet what was the use of her going away merely to repeat the
advice she had already given?

"And in any case," he continued, lightly, "it is not an affair for
you to be deeply troubled about, my dear Madame Potecki; on the
contrary, it is a circumstance of little moment. If Natalie chooses
to indulge this sentiment--well, the fate of empires does not
hang on it, and in a little while it will be all right. Youth soon
recovers from small disappointments; the girl is not morbid or
melancholy. Moreover, she has plenty to occupy her mind with: do not
fear that she will be permanently unhappy."
All this gave Natalie's friend but scant consolation. She knew
something of the girl, she knew it was not a light matter that had
made her resolve to share banishment with her lover rather than
that he should depart alone.

"Yes, she is acting contrary to my wishes," continued Mr. Lind,
who saw that his visitor was anxious and chagrined. "But why should
you vex yourself with that, my dear madame?--why, indeed?

It is only for a few days. When Mr. Brand leaves for America, then she
will settle down to her old ways. This episode of sentiment will
soon be forgotten. Do not fear for your friend Natalie; she has a
healthy constitution; she is not likely to sigh away her life."
"But you do not understand, Mr. Lind!" Madame Potecki exclaimed suddenly.
"You do not understand. When he leaves for America, there is to
be an end?

No!

You are not aware, then, that if he goes to America, Natalie will
go also?"
She had spoken quickly, breathlessly, not taking much notice of her
words, but she was appalled by the effect they produced. Lind
started, as if he had been struck; and for a second, as he regarded
her, the eyes set under the heavy brows burnt like coals, and she
noticed a curious paleness in his face, especially in the lips. But
this lasted only for an instant. When he spoke, he was quite calm,
and was apparently considering each word.

"Are you authorized to bring me this message?" he said, slowly.

"Oh no; oh no!" the little woman exclaimed.

"I assure you, my dear friend, I came to you because I thought
something was about to happen--something that might be prevented.

Ah, you don't know how I love that darling child; and to see her
unhappy, and resolved, perhaps, to make some great mistake in her
life, how could I help interfering?"

"So," continued Lind, apparently weighing every word, "this is what
she is bent on!

If Brand goes to America, she will go with him?"

"I--I--am afraid so," stammered Madame Potecki.

"That is what I gathered from her--though it was only an imaginary
case she spoke of.

But she was pale, and trembling, and how could I stand by
and not do something?"
He did not answer; his lips were firm set. Unconsciously he
was pressing the point of the paper-knife into the leather; it
snapped in two.

He threw the pieces aside, and said, with a sudden lightness of manner,

"Ah, well, my dear madame, you know young people are sometimes very
headstrong, and difficult to manage. We must see what can be done
in this case.

You have not told Natalie you were coming to me?"

"No. She asked me at first; then she said she would tell you herself."

He regarded her for a second.

"There is no reason why you should say you have been here?"
"Perhaps not, perhaps not," Madame Potecki said, doubtfully. "No;
there is no necessity. But if one were sure that the dear child
were to be made any happier--"
She did not complete the sentence.

"I think you may leave the whole affair in my hands, my dear
Madame Potecki," said Lind, in his usual courteous fashion.

He spoke, indeed, as if it were a matter of the most trifling importance.
"I think I can promise you that Natalie shall not be allowed to
imperil the happiness of her life by taking any rash steps. In the
mean time, I am your debtor that you have come and told me.
It was considerate of you, Madame Potecki; I am obliged to you."

The little woman was practically dismissed. She rose, still doubtful,
and hesitated. But what more could she say?

"I am not to tell her, then?" she said.

"If you please, not."
When he had graciously bowed her out, he returned to his seat at
the desk; and then the forced courtesy of his manner was abandoned.
His brows gathered down; his lips were again firm set; he bent one
of the pieces of the paper-knife until that snapped too; and when
some one knocked at the door, he answered sharply in German.

It was Gathorne Edwards who entered.

"Well, you have got back?" he said, with but scant civility. "Where
is Calabressa?"
The tall, pale, stooping man looked round with some caution.

"There is no one--no one but Reitzei," said Lind, impatiently.

"Calabressa is detained in Naples--the General's orders," said the
other, in rather a low voice. "I did not write--I thought it was not
safe to put anything on paper; more especially as we discovered
that Kirski was being watched."

"No wonder," said Lind, scornfully. "A fool of a madman being taken
about by a fool of a mountebank!"
Edwards stared at him. Surely this man, who was usually the most
composed, and impenetrable, and suave of men, must have been
considerably annoyed thus to give way to a petulant temper.

"But the result, Edwards: well?"
"Refused!"
Lind laughed sardonically.

"Who could have doubted?

Of course the council do not think that I approved of that mad scheme?"

"At all events, sir," said Edwards, submissively, "you permitted
it."

"Permitted it! Yes; to please old Calabressa, who imagines himself
a diplomatist. But who could have doubted what the end would be?
Well, what further?"
"I understand that a message is on its way to you from the council,"
said the other, speaking in still lower tones, "giving further
instructions. They consider it of great importance that--it--should
be done by one of the English section; so that no one may imagine
it arises from a private revenge."
Lind was toying with one of the pieces of the broken paper-knife.

"Zaccatelli has had the warning," Edwards continued. "Granaglia took
it.
The Cardinal is mad with fright--will do anything."
Lind seemed to rouse himself with an effort.

"I beg your pardon, friend Edwards. I did not hear. What were
you saying?"
"I was saying that the Cardinal had had the decree announced to him,
and is mad with fear, and he will do anything. He offers thirty
thousand lire a year; not only that, but he will try to get his
Holiness to give his countenance to the Society.

Fancy, as Calabressa says, what the world would say to an alliance
between the Vatican and the SOCIETY OF THE SEVEN STARS!"
Lind seemed incapable of paying attention to this new visitor, so
absorbed was he in his own thoughts.

He had again to rouse himself forcibly.

"Yes," he said, "you were saying, friend Edwards, that the Starving
Cardinal had become aware of the decree. Yes; well, then?"
"Did you not hear, sir? He thinks there should be an alliance
between the Vatican and the Society."
"His Eminence is jocular, considering how near he is to the end of his
life," said Lind, absently.

"Further," Edwards continued, "he has sent back the daughter of old
De Bedros, who, it seems, first claimed the decree against him; and
he is to give her a dowry of ten thousand lire when she marries.

But all these promises and proposals do not seem to have weighed
much with the council."

Here Edwards stopped. He perceived plainly that Lind--who sat with
his brows drawn down, and a sombre look on his face--was not
listening to him at all.

Presently Lind rose, and said,

"My good Edwards, I have some business of serious importance to
attend to at once.

Now you will give me the report of your journey some other time.

To-night--at nine o'clock?"
"Yes, sir; if that will suit you."
"Can you come to my house in Curzon Street at nine?"

"Yes, certainly."
"Very well. I am your debtor. But stay a moment. Of course, I
understand from you that nothing that has happened interferes with
the decree against our excellent friend the Cardinal?"
"So it appears."
"The Council are not to be bought over by idle promises?"
"Apparently not."
"Very well.

Then you will come to-night at nine; in my little study there will
be no interruption; you can give me all the details of your holiday.
Ha, my friend Edwards," he added more pleasantly, as he opened the
door for his visitor, "would it not be better for you to give up
that Museum altogether, and come over to us? Then you would
have many a pleasant little trip."

"I suspect the Museum is most likely to give me up," said Edwards,
with a laugh, as he descended the narrow twilight stairs.

Then Lind returned to his desk, and sat down. A quarter of an hour
afterward, when Reitzei came into the room, he found him still
sitting there, without any papers whatsoever before him.

The angry glance that Lind directed to him as he entered told him
that the master did not wish to be disturbed; so he picked up a
book of reference by way of excuse, and retreated into the farther
room, leaving Lind once more alone.

CHAPTER XXXIV.

AN ENCOUNTER.

This was an October morning, in the waning of the year; and yet so
bright and clear and fresh was it, even in the middle of London, that
one could have imagined the spring had returned. The world was full
of a soft diffused light, from the pale clouds sailing across the
blue to the sheets of silver widening out on the broad bosom of the
Thames; but here and there the sun caught some shining surface--the
lip of a marble fountain, the glass of a lamp on the Embankment,
or the harness of some merchant-prince's horses prancing into
town--and these were sharp jewel-like gleams amidst the vague general
radiance. The air was sweet and clear; the white steam blown from the
engines on Hungerford Bridge showed that the wind was westerly.

Two lovers walked below, in the Embankment gardens, probably listening
but little to the murmur of the great city around them. Surely the
spring had come again, and youth and love and hope!

The solitary occupant of this chamber that overlooked the gardens
and the shining river did not stay to ask why his heart should be
so full of gladness, why this beautiful morning should yield him
so much delight.

He was thinking chiefly that on such a morning Natalie would be
abroad soon; she loved the sunlight and the sweet air.

It was far too fine a morning, indeed, to spend in a museum, even
with all Madame Potecki's treasures spread out before one.

So, instead of going to South Kensington, he went straight up to
Curzon Street. Early as he was, he was not too early, for he was
leisurely walking along the pavement when, ahead of him, he saw Natalie
and her little maid come forth and set out westward. He allowed
them to reach the park gates; then he overtook them. Anneli fell a
little way behind.

Now, whether it was the brightness of the morning had raised her
spirits, or that she had been reasoning herself into a more courageous
frame of mind, it was soon very clear that Natalie was not at all
so anxious and embarrassed as she had shown herself the day before
when they parted.

"There was no letter from you this morning," she said, with
a smile, though she did not look up into his face. "Then I have
offered myself to you, and am refused?"
"How could I write?" he said. "I tried once or twice, and then I saw
I must wait until I could tell you face to face all that I think
of your bravery and your goodness. And now that I see you Natalie,
it is not a bit better: I can't tell you; I am so happy to be near
you, to be beside you, and hear your voice, that I don't think I
can say anything at all."

"I am refused, then?"

said she, shyly.

"Refused!" he exclaimed.

"There are some things one cannot refuse--like the sunshine. But
do you know what a terrible sacrifice you are making?"
"It is you, then, who are making no sacrifice at all," she said,
reproachfully.

"What do I sacrifice more than every girl must sacrifice when she
marries?

England is not my home as it is your home; we have lived everywhere;
I have no childhood's friends to leave, as many a girl has."

"Your father--"
"After a little while my father will scarcely miss me; he is too
busy."

But presently she added,
"If you had remained in England I should never have been your wife."

"Why?" he said with some surprise.

"I should never have married against my father's wishes," she
said, thoughtfully. "No. My promise to you was that I would be
your wife, or the wife of no one. I would have kept that promise.
But as long as we could have seen each other, and been with each
other from time to time, I don't think I could have married against
my father's wish.

Now it is quite different. Your going to America has changed it all.
Ah, my dear friend, you don't know what I suffered one or two
nights before I could decide what was right for me to do!"
"I can guess," he said, in a low voice, in answer to that brief
sigh of hers.

Then she grew more cheerful in manner.

"But that is all over; and now, am I accepted?

I think you are like Naomi: it was only when she saw that Ruth was
very determined to go with her that she left off protesting. And
I am to consider America as my future home? Well, at all events,
one will be able to breathe freely there. It is not a country weighed
down with standing armies and conscriptions and fortifications. How
could one live in a town like Coblentz, or Metz, or Brest? The
poor wretches marching this way and marching that--you watch them
from your hotel window--the young men and the middle-aged men--and
you know that they would rather be away at their farms, or
in their factories, or saw-pits, or engine-houses, working for their
wives and children--"
"Natalie," said he, "you are only half a woman: you don't care about
military glory."

"It is the most mean, the most cruel and contemptible thing under
the sun!"

she said, passionately. "What is the quality that makes a great
hero--a great general--nowadays? Courage? Not a bit.

It is callousness!

--an absolute indifference to the slaughtering of human lives! You
sit in your tent--you sit on horseback--miles away from the fighting;
and if the poor wretches are being destroyed here or there in too
great quantities, if they are ridden down by the horses and torn to
pieces by the mitrailleuses, 'Oh, clap on another thousand or two:
the place must be taken at all risks.' Yes, indeed; but not much risk
to you! For if you fail--if all the thousands of men have been
hurled against the stone and lead only to be thrown back crushed
and murdered--why, you have fought with great courage--_you_, the
great general, sitting in your saddle miles away; it is _you_
who have shown extraordinary courage!--but numbers were against
you: and if you win, you have shown still greater courage; and the
audacity of the movement was so and so; and your dogged
persistence was so and so; and you get another star for your breast;
and all the world sings your praises. And who is to court-martial
a great hero for reckless waste of human life?
Who is to tell him that he is a cruel-hearted coward? Who is to
take him to the fields he has saturated with blood, and compel him
to count the corpses; or to take him to the homesteads he has ruined
throughout the land, and ask the women and sons and the daughters
what they think of this marvellous courage? Oh no; he is away back
in the capital--there is a triumphal procession; all we want now
is another war-tax--for the peasant must pay with his money as well
as with his blood--and another levy of the young men to be taken
and killed!"
This was always a sore point with Natalie; and he did not seek to
check her enthusiasm with any commonplace and obvious criticisms.
When she got into one of these moods of proud indignation, which
was not seldom, he loved her all the more. There was something in
the ring of her voice that touched him to the heart. Such noble,
quick, generous sympathy seemed to him far too beautiful and rare
a thing to be met by argument and analysis. When he heard that
pathetic tremulousness in her voice, he was ready to believe anything.
When he looked at the proud lips and the moistened eyes, what cause
that had won such eloquent advocacy would he not have espoused?
"Ah, well, Natalie," said he, "some day the mass of the people of
the earth will be brought to see that all that can be put a stop
to, if they so choose. They have the power: _Zahlen regieren die
Welt_; and how can one be better employed than in spreading abroad
knowledge, and showing the poorer people of the earth how the world
might be governed if they would only ally themselves together? It
would be more easy to persuade them if we had all of us your voice
and your enthusiasm."
"Mine?" she said. "A woman's talking is not likely to be of much
use.
But," she added, rather hesitatingly, "at least--she can give her
sympathy--and her love--to those who are doing the real work."
"And I am going to earn yours, Natalie," said he, cheerfully, "to
such a degree as you have never dreamed of, when you and I together
are away in the new world. And that reminds me now you must not be
frightened; but there is a little difficulty. Of course you thought
of nothing, when you wrote those lines, but of doing a kindness;
that was like you; your heart speaks quickly. Well--"
He himself seemed somewhat embarrassed."No one will
interrupt us. They know me here. I ordered the room yesterday." Tea
came, but she could not eat anything. In some strange way that
moment in the theatre when he had pressed her hand had altered
everything. She recognised in herself a new Maggie; she was excited
with a thick burning excitement, she was almost sleepy with the
strain of it and her cheeks were hot, but her throat icy cold. When
she told him that she wasn't hungry, he said, "I'm not either." Then
he added, not looking at her, "That fellow won't be back for an
hour." He came and stood by her looking down on her. He bent forward
over the chair and put his hands under her chin and pressed her face
up towards his. But he did not kiss her. Then he took her hands and
pulled her gently out of the chair, sat down on it himself, then,
still very tenderly, put his arms round her and drew her down to
him. She lay back against him, her cheek against his, his arms tight
around her. He whispered to her again and again, "Darling . . .
Darling . . . Darling." She felt now so terribly part of him that
she seemed to have lost all her own identity. His hands, softly,
tenderly passed up and down her body, stroking her hair, her cheeks,
her arms. Her mouth was against his cheek and she was utterly
motionless, shivering a little sometimes and once her hand moved up
and caught his and then moved away again. At last, as it seemed from
an infinite distance, his voice came to her, speaking to her.
"Maggie, darling," he said, "don't go back till late to-night. You
can say that those people asked you to stay to dinner. Your aunts
can't do anything. Nothing can happen. Stay with me here and then
later we'll go and have dinner at a little place I know . . . and
then come back here . . . come back here . . . like this. Maggie,
darling, say you will. You must. We mayn't have another chance for
so long. You're coming to me afterwards. What does it matter, a
week or two earlier? What does it matter, Maggie? Stay here. Let
us love one another and have something to think about . . . to
remember . . . to remember . . . to remember . . ." His voice seemed
to slip away into infinity as voices in a dream do. She could not
say anything because she was in a dream too. She could only feel his
hand stroking her face. He seemed to take her silence for consent.
He suddenly kissed her furiously, pressing her head back until it
hurt. That woke her. She pushed his arms back and sprang up. Her
hands were trembling. She shook her head. "No, Martin. No, not now."
"Why not?" He looked at her angrily from the chair. His face was
altered, he was frowning, his eyes were dark. "I'm not going to stay
now." Her voice shook in spite of herself. With shaking hands she
patted her dress. "Why not?" he asked again. "I'm not. I promised
the aunts. Not now. It would spoil everything." "Oh, very well."
He was furious with her. He wouldn't meet her eyes. "Not now." She
felt that she would cry; tears flooded her eyes. "It's been so
lovely . . . Martin . . . Don't look like that. Oh, I love you too
much!" She broke off. With a sudden movement she fell at his feet;
kneeling there, she drew his hands to her face, she kissed them, the
palms of his hands over and over again. His anger suddenly left him.
He put his arms round her and kissed her, first her eyes, then her
cheeks, then, gently, her mouth. "All right," he said. "Only I feel
somehow . . . I feel as though our time had come to an end." "But it
shan't?" He turned upon her fiercely, held her hands, looked in her
face. "Maggie, do you swear that you'll love me always, whatever I
am, whatever I do?" "I swear," she answered, gazing into his eyes,"
that I'll love you always, whatever you are, whatever you do." Then
she went away, leaving him by the table, staring after her. In the
street she saw that her chrysanthemum was in pieces, torn and
scattered and destroyed. She slipped off the ring and put it into
her pocket, then, with forebodings in her heart, as though she did
indeed know that her good time was over, she turned towards home.
She was right. Her good time was over. That night she was left
alone. Martha let her in and, regarding her darkly, said nothing.
The aunts also said nothing, sitting all the evening under the green
shade of the lamp in the drawing-room, Aunt Anne reading a pamphlet,
Aunt Elizabeth sewing. Maggie pretended to read but she saw no
words. She saw only the green lamp like a dreadful bird suspended
there and Aunt Anne's chiselled sanctity. Over and over again she
reasoned with herself. There was no cause for panic. Nothing had
happened to change things--and yet--and yet everything was changed.
Everything had been changed from that moment when Martin pressed her
hand in the theatre. Everything! . . . Danger now of every sort. She
could be brave, she could meet anything if she were only sure of
Martin. But he too seemed strange to her. She remembered his dark
look, his frown when she had refused him. Oh, this loneliness, this
helplessness. If she could be with him, beside him, she would fear
nothing. That night, the first faint suspicion of jealousy, of
doubt, an agonising dart of pain at the knowledge of what it would
mean to her now if he left her, stirred in her breast. This room was
stifling. She got up from her chair, went to the window, looked out
between the thick curtains at the dark deserted street. "What is it,
Maggie?" "Nothing, Aunt Anne." "You're very restless, dear." "It's
close. May I open the door?" "A little, dear." She opened the door
and then sat there hearing the Armed Men sway ever so slightly, tap,
tap, against the wall in the passage. That night she scarcely slept
at all, only tumbling into sudden nightmare dreams when something
had her by the throat and Martin was not there. In the morning as
soon as she could escape she hurried to Piccadilly. Martin was
waiting for her. When she saw him she realised at once that her good
time was indeed over. His face was white and strained. He scarcely
looked at her but stared anxiously up and down the street.

"What is it?" she asked breathlessly. "Look here, Maggie," he began,
still scarcely looking at her. "I must get back at once. I only came
to tell you that we must drop our meetings for the next day or two--
until it's blown over."

"Until what's blown over," she asked him.

"It's my father. I don't know what exactly has happened. They'll
none of them tell me, damn them. It's Caroline Smith. She's been
talking to Amy about you and me. I know that because of what Amy
said about you at breakfast this morning."

"What did she say?"

"She wouldn't speak out. She hinted. But she admitted that Caroline
Smith had told her something. But she doesn't matter. Nothing
matters except father. He mustn't be excited just now. His heart's
so bad. Any little thing . . . We must wait."

She saw that he was scarcely realising her at all. She choked down
all questions that concerned themselves. She simply agreed, nodding
her head.

He did look at her then, smiling as he used to do.

"It's awfully hard on us. It won't be for more than a day or two.
But I must put things right at home or it will be all up. I don't
care for the others, of course, but if anything happened to father
through me . . ." He told her to write to the Charing Cross post-
office. He would do the same. In a day or two it would be all right.
He pressed her hand and was gone.

When she looked about her the street seemed quite empty although it
was full of people. She threw up her head. She wouldn't be beaten by
anybody . . . only, it was lonely going back to the house and all of
them . . . alone . . . without Martin.

She cried a little on her way home. But they were the last tears she
shed.


CHAPTER IX

THE INSIDE SAINTS


Maggie, when she was nearly home, halted suddenly. She stopped as
when on the threshold of a room that should be empty one sees
waiting a stranger. If at the end of all this she should lose
Martin! . . .

There was the stranger who had come to her now and would not again
depart. She recognised the sharp pain, the almost unconscious
pulling back on the sudden edge of a dim pit, as something that
would always be with her now--always. One knows that in the second
stage of a great intimacy one's essential loneliness is only
redoubled by close companionship. One asks for so much more, and
then more and more, but that final embrace is elusive and no
physical contact can surrender it. But she was young and did not
know that yet. All she knew was that she would have to face these
immediate troubles alone, that she would not see him for perhaps a
week, that she would not know what his people at home were doing,
and that she must not let any of these thoughts come up into her
brain. She must keep them all back: if she did not, she would tumble
into some foolish precipitate action.

When she reached home she was obstinate and determined. At once she
found that something was the matter. During luncheon the two aunts
sat like statues (Aunt Elizabeth a dumpy and squat one). Aunt Anne's
aloofness was coloured now with a very human anger. Maggie realised
with surprise that she had never seen her angry before. She had been
indignant, disapproving, superior, forbidding, but never angry. The
eyes were hard now, not with religious reserve but simply with bad
temper. The mist of anger dimmed the room, it was in the potatoes
and the cold dry mutton, especially was it in the hard pallid knobs
of cheese. And Aunt Elizabeth, although she was frightened by her
sister's anger on this occasion, shared in it. She pursed her lips
at Maggie and moved her fat, podgy hand as though she would like to
smack Maggie's cheeks.

Maggie was frightened--really frightened. The line of bold
independence was all very well, but now risks were attached to it.
If she swiftly tossed her head and told her aunts that she would
walk out of the house they might say "Walk!" and that would
precipitate Martin's crisis. She knew from the way he had looked at
her that morning that his thoughts were with his father, and it
showed that she had travelled through the first stage of her
intimacy with him, that she could not trust him to put her before
his own family troubles. At all costs she must keep him safe through
these next difficult weeks, and the best way to keep him safe was
herself to remain quietly at home.

Of all this she thought as she swallowed the hostile knobs of cheese
and drank the tepid, gritty coffee.

She followed her aunts upstairs, and was not at all surprised when
Aunt Elizabeth, with an agitated murmur, vanished into higher
regions. She followed Aunt Anne into the drawing-room.

Aunt Anne sat in the stiff-backed tapestry chair by the fire. Maggie
stood in front of her. She was disarmed at that all-important moment
by her desperate sensation of defenceless loneliness. It was as
though half of herself--the man-half of herself--had left her. She
tried to summon her pluck but there was no pluck there. She could
only want Martin, over and over again inside herself. Had any one
been, ever so hopelessly ALONE before?

"Maggie, I am angry," said Aunt Anne. She said it as though she
meant it. Amazing how human this strange aloof creature had become.
As though some coloured saint bright with painted wood and tinsel
before whom one stood in reverence slipped down suddenly and with
fingers of flesh and blood struck one's face. Her cheeks were
flushed, her beautiful hands were no longer thin but were hard and
active.

"What have I done, aunt?" asked Maggie.

"You have not treated us fairly. My sister and I have done
everything for you. You have not made it especially easy for us in
any way, but we have tried to give you what you wanted. You have
repaid is with ingratitude."

She paused, but Maggie said nothing. She went on:

"Lately--these last three weeks--we have given you complete liberty.
I advised that strongly against my sister's opinion because I
thought you weren't happy. You didn't make friends amongst our
friends, and I thought you should have the chance of finding some
who were younger and gayer than we were. Then I thought we could
trust you. You have many faults, but I believed that you were
honest."

"I am honest!" Maggie broke in. Her aunt went on:

"You have used the liberty we gave you during these weeks to make
yourself the talk of our friends. You have been meeting Mr. Martin
Warlock secretly every day. You have been alone with him in the Park
and at the theatre. I know that you are young and very ignorant. You
could not have known that Martin Warlock is a man with whom no girl
who respects herself would be seen alone--"

"That is untrue!" Maggie flamed out.

"--and," went on Aunt Anne, "we would have forgiven that. It is your
deceit to ourselves that we cannot forget. Day after day you were
meeting him and pretending that you went to your other friends. I am
disappointed in you, bitterly disappointed. I saw from the first
that you did not mean to care for us, now, as well, you have
disgraced us--"

Maggie began: "Yes, I have been seeing Martin. I didn't think it
wrong--I don't now. I didn't tell you because I was afraid that
you would stop me--"

"Then that shows that you knew it was wrong."

"No, Aunt Anne--only that you would think it was wrong. I can only
go by myself, by what I feel is wrong I mean. I've always had to,
all my life. It would have been no good doing anything else at home,
because father--"

She pulled herself up. She was not going to defend herself or ask
for pity. She said, speaking finally:

"Yes, I have been out with Martin every day. I went to the theatre
with him, too, and also had tea with him."

Maggie could see Aunt Anne's anger rising higher and higher like
water in a tube. Her voice was hard when she spoke again--she
pronounced judgment:

"We see now that you were right when you said that you had better
leave us. You are free to go as soon as you wish. You have, of
course, your money, but if you care to stay with us until you have
found some work you must now obey our rules. While you remain with
us you must not go out unless my sister or I accompany you." Then
her voice changed, softening a little. She suddenly raised her hands
in a gesture of appeal: "Oh, Maggie, Maggie, turn to God. You have
rebelled against Him. You have refused to listen to His voice. The
end of that can be only misery. He loves, but He also judges. Even
now, within a day, a week, He may come with judgment. Turn to Him,
Maggie, not because I tell you but because of the Truth. Pray with
me now that He may help you and give you strength."

Because she felt that she had indeed treated them badly and must do
just now what they wished, she knelt down on the drawing-room
carpet. Aunt Anne also knelt down, her figure stiff like iron, her
raised hands once again delicate and ghost-like.

"0 Lord God," she prayed, "this Thy servant comes to Thee and prays
that Thou wilt give her strength in her struggle with the Evil One.
She has been tempted and is weak, but Thou art strong to save and
wilt not despise the least of these Thy children."

"Come, O Lord the Father, and take Thy daughter into Thy loving
care, and when Thou comest, in all Thy splendour, to redeem the
world, I pray that Thou wilt find her waiting for Thee in holiness
and meekness of heart."

They rose. Maggie's knees were sore with the stiff carpet. The
family group watched her from the wall ironically.

She saw that in spite of the prayer Aunt Anne had not forgiven her.
She stood away from her, and although her voice now was not so hard,
it had lost altogether the tender note that it used to have.

"Now, Maggie, you must promise us that you will not see Martin
Warlock again."

Maggie flushed. "No, aunt, I can't promise that."

"Then we must treat you as a prisoner whilst you are with us."

"If he wants to see me I must see him."

They looked at one another. Aunt Anne was like a man just then.

"Very well. Until you give us your promise we must see ourselves
that you do not disgrace us."

There was no more to be said. It was as though a heavy iron door had
rolled to.

Aunt Anne passed Maggie and left the room.

Well, then, there was the situation. As she remained in the empty
room she felt relief because now she knew where she was.

If only she could keep in touch with Martin then nothing else at all
mattered. But that must be, otherwise she felt that she would rush
at them all and tread them down and break doors and windows to get
at him.

Meanwhile, how they must all have been talking! She felt no especial
anger against Caroline Smith. It had been her own fault for trusting
that note to her honour. Caroline had no honour, of course. Maggie
might have guessed that from the way that she talked about other
people. And then probably she herself was in love with Martin . . .
She sat down, staring in front of her, thinking. They all knew, Amy
Warlock, Mr. Thurston, Miss Avies--knew about that wonderful,
marvellous thing, her love for Martin, his for her. They were
turning it over in their hands, soiling it, laughing at it, sneering
at it. And what were they doing to Martin? At that thought she
sprang up and began hurriedly to walk about. Oh, they must leave him
alone! What were they saying to him? They were telling him how
ridiculous it was to have anything to do with a plain, ugly girl!
And he? Was he defending her? At the sudden suggestion of his
disloyalty indignation fought in her with some strange, horrible
suspicion. Yes, it would come back, that thought. He was weak. He
had told her that he was. He was weak. She KNEW that he was. She
would not lie to herself. And then at the thought of his weakness
the maternal love in her that was the strongest instinct in her
character flooded her body and soul, so that she did not mind if he
were weak, but only wanted to defend him, to protect him . . .

Strangely, she felt more sure of him at that moment when she was
conscious of his weakness than she had been when she asserted his
strength. Beneath that weakness he would be true to her because he
needed her. No one else could give him what she did; he had said so
again and again. And it would always be so. He would have to come
back to her however often he denied her.

She felt happier then. She could face them all. She had been bad to
her aunts, too. She had done them harm, and they had been nothing
but goodness to her. Apart from leaving Martin she would do all,
these next weeks, to please them.

She went up to her bedroom, and when she reached it she realised,
with a little pang of fright, that she was a prisoner. No more
meetings outside Hatchards, no more teas, no more walks . . . She
looked out of the window down into the street. It was a long way
down and the figures walking were puppets, not human at all. But the
thing to be thought of now was the question of letters. How was she
to get them to the Strand Office and receive from them Martin's
letters in return? After long, anxious thought there seemed to be
only one way. There was a kitchen-maid, Jane, who came every morning
to the house, did odd jobs in the kitchen, and went home again in
the evening. Maggie had seen the girl about the house a number of
times, had noticed her for her rebellious, independent look, and had
felt some sympathy with her because she was under the harsh dominion
of Martha.

Maggie had spoken to her once or twice and the girl had seemed
grateful, smiling in a kind of dark, tearful way under her untidy
hair. Maggie believed that she would help her; of course the girl
would get into trouble were she discovered, and dismissal would
certainly follow, but it was clear enough that she would not in any
case be under Martha's government very long. Martha never kept
kitchen-maids for more than a month at a time.

She sat down at once and wrote her first letter, sitting on her bed.

DARLING MARTIN--There has been an explosion here. The aunts have
told me to give you up. I could not promise them that I would not
see you and so I am a prisoner here until I leave them altogether. I
won't leave them until after the New Year, partly because I gave a
promise and partly because it would make more trouble for you if I
were turned out just now. I can't leave the house at all unless I am
with one of them, so I am going to try and send the letters by the
kitchen-maid here who goes home every day, and she will fetch yours
when she posts mine. I'll give her a note to tell the post people
that she is to have them. Martin, dear, try and write every day,
even if it's only the shortest line, because it is dreadful to be
shut up all day, and I think of you all the time and wonder how you
are. Don't be unhappy, Martin--that's the one thing I couldn't bear.
If you're not, I'm not. There's no reason to be unhappy about me.
I'm very cheerful indeed if I know that you are all right. You are
all right, aren't you? I do want to know what happened when you got
home. I quite understand that the one thing you must do now is to
keep your father well and not let anything trouble him. If the
thought of me troubles him, then tell him that you are thinking of
nothing but him now and how to make him happy. But don't let them
change your feeling for me. You know me better than any of them do
and I am just as you know me, every bit. The aunts are very angry
because they say I deceived them, but they haven't any right to tell
me who I shall love, have they? No one has. I am myself and nobody's
ever cared for me except you--and Uncle Mathew, so I don't see why I
should think of anybody. The aunts never cared for me really--only
to make me religious.

But, Martin, never forget I love you so much I can never change. I'm
not one who changes, and although I'm young now I shall be just the
same when I'm old. I have the ring and I look at it all the time. I
like to think you have the locket. Please write, dear Martin, or
I'll find it very difficult to stay quiet here, and I know I ought
to stay quiet for your sake.

Your loving,

MAGGIE.

She put it in an envelope, wrote the address as he had told her, and
then set out to find Jane. It was four o'clock in the afternoon now
and the house, on this winter's day, was dark and dim.

The gas was always badly lit in the passages, spitting and muttering
like an imprisoned animal. The house was so quiet when Maggie came
out on to the stairs that there seemed to be no one in it. She found
her way down into the hall and saw Thomas the cat there, moving like
a black ghost along the floor. He came up to her and rubbed himself
in his sinister, mysterious way against her dress. When she turned
towards the green baize door that led towards the kitchen regions he
stood back from her, stole on to the lower steps of the staircase
and watched her with steady, unblinking eyes. She pushed the door
and went through into the cold passage that smelt of cheese and
bacon and damp earth. There seemed to be no one about, and then
suddenly the pantry door opened and Jane came out. She stopped when
she saw Maggie.

"Where's Martha?" asked Maggie in a low voice.

The whisper seemed to tell Jane at once that this was to be a
confidential matter. She jerked with a dirty thumb in the direction
of the kitchen.

"In there. Cooking the dinner," she whispered back. She was untidy,
there were streaks of black on her face, but her eyes looked up at
Maggie with a friendly, roguish glance, as though they had already
something in common. Maggie saw that she had no time to lose. She
came close to her.

"Jane," she said, "I'm in trouble. It's only you who can help me.
Here's a letter that I want posted--just in the ordinary way. Can
you do that for me?"

Jane, suddenly smiling, nodded her head.

"And there's something else," Maggie went on. "To-morrow morning,
before you come here, I want you to go to the Strand post-office--
you know the one opposite the station--and ask for a letter
addressed to me. I've written on a piece of paper here that you're
to be given any letters of mine. Give it to me somehow when no one's
looking. Do you understand?"

Jane nodded her head. Maggie gave her the note and also half-a-
crown, but Jane pushed back the money.

"I don't want no money," she said in a hoarse whisper. "You're the
only one here decent to me."

At that moment the kitchen door opened and Martha appeared. When she
saw Jane she came up to her and said: "Now then, idling again! What
about the potatoes?"

She looked at Maggie with her usual surly suspicion.

"I came down for a candle," Maggie said, "for my room. Will you give
me one, please?"

Jane had vanished.

Martin, meanwhile, after Maggie left him, had returned home in no
happy state. There had leapt upon him again that mood of sullen
impatient rebellion that he knew so well--a mood that really was
like a possession, so that, struggle as he--might, he seemed always
in the grip of some iron-fingered menacing figure.

It was possession in a sense that to many normal, happy people in
this world is so utterly unknown that they can only scornfully name
it weakness and so pass on their way. But those human beings who
have suffered from it do in very truth feel as though they had been
caught up into another world, a world of slavery, moral galley-
driving with a master high above them, driving them with a lash that
their chained limbs may not resist. Such men, if they try to explain
that torment, can often point to the very day and even hour of their
sudden slavery; at such a tick of the clock the clouds gather, the
very houses and street are weighted with a cold malignity, thoughts,
desires, impulses are all checked, perverted, driven and counter-
driven by a mysterious force. Let no man who has not known such
hours and the terror of such a dominion utter judgment upon his
neighbour.

To Martin the threat of this conflict with his father over Maggie
was the one crisis that he had wished to avoid. But his character,
which was naturally easy and friendly and unsuspicious, had confused
him. Those three weeks with Maggie had been so happy, so free from
all morbidity and complication, that he had forgotten the world
outside. For a moment when Maggie had told him that she had given
her note to Caroline he had been afraid, but he had been lulled as
the days passed and nothing interfered with their security. Now he
was suddenly plunged into the middle of a confusion that was all the
more complicated because he could not tell what his mother and his,
sister were thinking. He knew that Amy had disliked him ever since
his return, and that that dislike had been changed into something
fiercer since his declared opposition to Thurston. His mother he
simply did not understand at all. She spoke to him still with the
same affection and tenderness, but behind the words he felt a hard
purpose and a mysterious aloofness.

She was not like his mother at all; it was as though some spy had
been introduced into the house in his mother's clothing.

But for them he did not care; it was his father of whom he must
think. Here, too, there was a mystery from which he was deliberately
kept. He knew, of course, that they were all expecting some crisis;
as the days advanced he could feel that the excitement increased. He
knew that his father had declared that he had visions and that there
was to be a revelation very shortly; but of these visions and this
revelation he heard only indirectly from others. His father said
nothing to him of these things, and at the ordinary Chapel services
on Sunday there was no allusion to them. He knew that the Inside
Saints had a society and rules of their own inside the larger body,
and from that inner society he was quite definitely excluded. Of
that exclusion he would have been only too glad had it not been for
his father, but now when he saw him growing from day to day more
haggard and worn, more aloof from all human society, when lie saw
him wrapped further and further into some strange and as it seemed
to him insane absorption, he was determined to fight his way into
the heart of it. His growing intimacy with Maggie had relieved him,
for a moment, of the intensity of this other anxiety. Now suddenly
he was flung back into the very thick of it. His earlier plan of
forcing his father out of all this network of chicanery and
charlatanism now returned. He felt that if he could only seize his
father and forcibly abduct him and take him away from Amy and
Thurston and the rest, and all the associations of the Chapel, he
might cure him and lead him back to health and happiness again.

And yet he did not know. He had not himself escaped from it all by
leaving it, and then that undermining bewildering suspicion that
perhaps after all there was something in all of this, that it was
not only charlatanism, confused and disconcerted him. He was like a
man who hears sounds and faint cries behind a thick wall, and there
are no doors and windows, and the bricks are too stout to be torn
apart.

He had been behind that wall all his life . . .

Amy's allusion to Maggie in the morning had been very slight, but
had shown quite clearly that she had heard all, and probably more,
than the truth. When he returned that morning he found his mother
alone, knitting a pink woollen comforter, her gold spectacles on the
end of her nose, her fresh lace cap crisp and dainty on her white
hair--the very picture of the dearest old lady in the world.

"Mother," he began at once, "what did Amy mean this morning about
myself and Maggie Cardinal?"

"Maggie who, dear?" his mother asked.

"Maggie Cardinal--the Cardinal niece, you know," he said
impatiently.

"Did she say anything? I don't remember."

"Yes, mother. You remember perfectly well. She said that they were
all talking about me and Maggie."

"Did she?" The old lady slowly counted her stitches. "Well, dear, I
shouldn't worry about what they all say--whoever 'they' may be."

"Oh, I don't care for that," he answered contemptuously, "although
all the same I'm not going to have Amy running that girl down. She's
been against her from the first. What I want to know is has Amy been
to father with this? Because if she has I'm going to stop it. I'm
not going to have her bothering father with bits of gossip that
she's picked up by listening behind other peoples' key-holes."

Amy, meanwhile, had come in and heard this last sentence.

"Thank you, Martin," she said quietly.

He turned to her with fury. "What did you mean at breakfast," he
asked, "by what you said about myself and Maggie Cardinal?"

She looked at him with contempt but no very active hostility.

"I was simply telling you something that I thought you ought to
know," she said. "It is what everybody is saying--that you and she
have been meeting every day for weeks, sitting in the Park after
dark together, going to the theatre. People draw their own
conclusions, I suppose."

"How much have you told father of this?" he demanded.

"I don't know at all what father has heard," she answered.

"You've been that girl's enemy since the first moment that she came
here," he continued, growing angrier and angrier at her quiet
indifference. "Now you're trying to damage her character."

"On the contrary," she answered, "I told you because I thought you
ought to know what people were saying. The girl doesn't matter to me
one way or another--but I'm sorry for her if she thinks she cares
for you. That won't bring her much happiness."

Then suddenly her impassivity had a strange effect upon him. He
could not answer her. He left them both, and went up to his room.

As soon as he had closed the door of his bedroom he knew that his
bad time was come upon him. It was a physical as well as a spiritual
dominion. The room visibly darkened before his eyes, his brain
worked as it would in dreams suggesting its own thoughts and wishes
and intentions. A dark shadow hung over him, hands were placed upon
his eyes, only one thought came before him again and again and
again. "You know, you have long known, that you are doomed to make
miserable everything that you touch, to ruin every one with whom you
come in contact. That is your fate, and you can no more escape from
it than you can escape from your body!"

How many hours of this kind he had known in Spain, in France, in
South America. Often at the very moment when he had thought that he
was at last settling down to some decent steady plan of life he
would be jerked from his purpose, some delay or failure would
frustrate him, and there would follow the voice in his ear and the
hands on his eyes.

It was indeed as though he had been pledged to something in his
early life, and because he had broken from that pledge had been
pursued ever since . . .

He stripped to the waist and bathed in cold water; even then it
seemed to him that his flesh was heavy and dull and yellow, that he
was growing obese and out of all condition. He put on a clean shirt
and collar, sat down on his bed and tried to think the thing out. To
whomsoever he had done harm in the past he would now spare Maggie
and his father. He was surprised at the rush of tenderness that came
over him at the thought of Maggie; he sat there for some time
thinking over every incident of the last three weeks; that, at
least, had been a good decent time, and no one could ever take it
away from them again. He looked at her picture in the locket and
realised, as he looked at it, a link with her that he had never felt
with any woman before. "All the same," he thought, "I should go
away. She'd mind it at first, but not half as much as she'd mind me
later on when she saw what kind of a chap I really was. She'd be
unhappy for a bit, but she'd soon meet some one else. She's never
seen a man yet except me. She'd soon forget me. She's such a kid."

Nevertheless when he thought of beginning that old wandering life
again he shrank back. He had hated it--Oh! how he'd hated it! And he
didn't want to leave Maggie. He was in reality beginning to believe
that with her he might pull himself right out of this morass of
weakness and indecision in which he had been wallowing for years.
And yet what sort of a life could he offer her? He did not believe
that he would ever now be able to find this other woman whom he had
married, and until he had found her and divorced her Maggie's
position would be impossible. She, knowing nothing of the world,
could disregard it, but HE knew, knew that daily, hourly recurrence
of alights and insults and disappointments, knew what that life
could make after a time of women in such a position; even though she
did not mind he would mind for her and would reproach himself
continually.

No, it was impossible. He must go away secretly, without telling her
. . . Then, at that, he was pulled up again by the thought of his
father. He could not leave him until this crisis, whatever it might
be, was over. A very little thing now might kill him, and at the
thought of that possibility he jumped up from his bed and swore that
THAT catastrophe at least must be prevented. His father must live
and be happy and strong again, and he, Martin, must see to it.

That was his charge and his sacred duty above all else.

Strong in this thought he went down to his father's room. He knocked
on the door. There was no answer, and he went in. The room was in a
mess of untidiness. His father was walking up and down, staring in
front of him, talking to himself.

At the sound of the door he turned, saw Martin and smiled, the old
trusting smile of a child, that had been, during his time abroad,
Martin's clearest memory of him.

"Oh, is that you? Come in."

Martin came forward and his father put his arm round his neck as
though for support.

"I'm tired--horribly tired." Martin took him to the shabby broken
arm-chair and made him sit down. Himself sat in his old place on the
arm of the chair, his hand against his father's neck.

"Father, come away--just for a week--with me. We'll go right off
into the country to Glebeshire or somewhere, quite alone. We won't
see a soul. We'll just walk and eat and sleep. And then you'll come
back to your work here another man."

"No, Martin. I can't yet. Not just now."

"Why not, father?"

"I have work, work that can't be left."

"But if you go on like this you'll be so that you can't go on any
longer. You'll break down. You know what the doctor said about your
heart. You aren't taking any care at all."

"Perhaps . . . perhaps . . . but for a week or two I must just go
on, preparing . . . many things . . . Martin."

He suddenly looked up at his son, putting his hand on his knee.

"Yes, father."

"You're being good now, aren't you?"

"Good, father?"

"Yes . . . Not doing anything you or I'd be ashamed of. I know in
the past . . . but that's been forgotten, that's over. Only now,
just now, it's terribly important for us both that you should be
good . . . like you used to be . . . when you were a boy."

"Father, what have people been saying to you about me?"

"Nothing--nothing. Only I think about you so much. I pray about you
all the time. Soon, as you say, we'll go away together . . . only
now, just now, I want you with me here, strong by my side. I want
your help."

Martin took his father's hand, felt how dry and hot and feverish it
was.

"I'll be with you," he said. "I promise that. Don't you listen to
what any one says. I won't leave you." He would like to have gone on
and asked other questions, but the old man seemed so worn out and
exhausted that he was afraid of distressing him, so he just sat
there, his hands on his shoulders, and suddenly the white head
nodded, the beard sank over the breast and huddled up in the chair
as though life itself had left him; the old man slept.

During the next four days Martin and Maggie corresponded through the
fair hands of Jane. He wrote only short letters, and over them he
struggled. He seemed to see Maggie through a tangled mist of persons
and motives and intentions. He could not get at the real Maggie at
all, he could not even get at his real feelings about her. He knew
that these letters were not enough for her, he could feel behind her
own a longing for something from him more definite, something that
would bring her closer to him. He was haunted by his picture of her
sitting in that dismal house, a prisoner, waiting for him, and at
last, at the end of the four days, he felt that he must, in some way
or other see her. Then she herself proposed a way.

"To-morrow night (Friday)," she wrote, "the aunts are going to a
meeting. They won't return until after eight o'clock. During most of
that time Martha will be in the kitchen cooking, and Jane (who is
staying late that night) has promised to give me a signal. I could
run out for quarter of an hour and meet you somewhere close by and
risk getting back. Jane will be ready to let me in. Of course, it
may fail, but things can't be worse than they are . . . I absolutely
forbid you to come if you think that this can make anything worse
for you at home. But I MUST see you, Martin . . . I feel to-night as
though I couldn't stand it any longer (although I've only had five
days of it!), but I think that if I met you, really you, for only
five minutes, I could bear it then for weeks. Let me know if you
agree to this, and if so where we could meet about 7.30."

The mere thought of seeing her was wonderful. He would not have
believed a month ago that it could have come to mean so much to him.

He wrote back:

"Yes. At the corner of Dundas Street, by the Pillar Box, 7.30."

He knew that she had been to that dark little street with her aunts
to see Miss Pyncheon.

The night, when it came, was misty, and when he reached the place
she was at once in his arms. She had been there more than five
minutes, she had thought that he was not coming. Martha had nearly
caught her . . .

He kissed her hair and her eyes and her mouth, holding her to him,
forgetting everything but her. She stayed, quiet, clinging to him as
though she would never let him go, then she drew away.

"Now we must walk about or some one will see us," she said.

"We've only got five minutes. Martin, what I want to know is, are
you happy?"

"Yes," he said.

They walked like ghosts, in the misty street.

"Well, then I am," she said. "Only your letters didn't sound very
happy."

"Can you hold on till after the New Year?" They were walking hand in
hand, her fingers curled in his palm.

"Yes," she said. "If you're happy."

"There are troubles of course," he said. "But I don't care for Amy
and the rest. It's only father that matters. I can't discover how
much he knows. If I knew that I'd be much happier. We'll be all
right, Maggie, if nothing happens to him."

With a little frightened catch in her throat she asked him:

"How do you mean, if anything happens to him?"

"If anything happened to him--" she could feel his hand stiffen
round hers; "through me--then--why then--I'd leave you--everything--
I'd have to."

"Leave me! . . . Oh Martin! No!"

"I'd go. I'd go--I don't know where to. I don't know what I'd do.
I'd know then that I must leave every one alone, always, for ever--
especially you."

"No. You'd need me more than ever."

"You don't understand, Maggie. I'd be impossible after that. If
father suffered through me that would be the end of it--the end of
everything."

"Martin, listen." She caught his arm, looking up, trying to see his
face. "If anything like that did happen that would be where you'd
want me. Don't you see that you COULDN'T harm me EXCEPT by leaving
me?"

"You can reason it as you like, Maggie, but I know myself. I know
the impulse would be too strong--to go away and hide myself from
everybody. I've felt it before--when I've done something especially
bad. It's something in me that I've known all my life." Then he
turned to her: "But it's all right. Nothing shall happen to the old
man. I'll see that it doesn't. We've only got to wait a fortnight,
then I'll get him away for a holiday. And once he's better I can
leave him. It WILL be all right. It SHALL."

Then he bent down to her. "You know, Maggie, I love you more, far
more than I ever thought. Even if I went away you'd be the only one
I'd love. I never dreamt that I'd care for any one so much."

He felt her tremble under his hand when he said that.

She sighed. "Now I can go back," she said. "I'll say that over to
myself again and again."

They stayed a little longer, he put his arms round her again and
held her so close to him that she could feel his heart throbbing.
Then when they had kissed once more she went away.

She returned safely. Jane opened the door for her, mysteriously, as
though she enjoyed her share in the conspiracy. Maggie sped
upstairs, and now with Martin's words in her ears, had enough to
stiffen her back for the battle.

The next move in the affair was on the following afternoon when
Maggie, alone in the drawing-room, beheld Caroline Smith in the
doorway.

"She's got cheek enough for anything," was Maggie's first thought,
but she was not aware of the true magnificence of that young woman's
audacity until she found her hand seized and her cheek kissed.

Caroline, in fact, had greeted her with precisely her old
spontaneous enthusiasm.

"Maggie, darling, where have you been all these days--but WEEKS it
is indeed! You might at least have sent me just a word. Life simply
hasn't been the same without you! You pet! . . . and you look tired!
Yes, you do. You've been overworking or something, all because you
haven't had me to look after you!"

Maggie gravely withdrew, and standing away from the shining elegance
of her friend said:

"Caroline--I want to know something before we go any further. What I
want to know is--why did you read that note that I asked you to give
to Martin Warlock?"

Caroline stared in amazement. "My dear, what IS the matter? Are you
ill or something? Oh, you are. I can see you are! You poor darling!
Read your note? What note, dear?"

"The note I gave you a month ago--one evening when you were here."

"A note! A month ago. My dear! As though I could ever remember what
I did a MONTH ago! Why, it's always all I can manage to remember
what I did yesterday. Did you give me a note, dear?"

Maggie began to be angry. "Of course I did. You remember perfectly
well. I gave it to you for Martin Warlock. You let him have it, but
meanwhile you read it, and not only that but told everybody else
about it."

Caroline's expression changed. She was suddenly sulky. Her face was
like that of a spoilt child.

"Well, Maggie Cardinal, if you call that being a friend! To say that
I would ever do such a thing!"

"You know you did!" said Maggie quietly.

"Read your letters? As though I'd want to! Why should I? As though I
hadn't something more interesting to do! No thank you! Of course you
have been getting yourself into a mess. Every one knows that. That's
why I came here to-day--to show you that I was a REAL friend and
didn't mind WHAT people said about you! When they were all talking
about you last night, and saying the most DREADFUL things, I
defended you and said it wasn't really your fault, you couldn't have
told what a rotten sort of a man Martin Warlock was--"

"That's enough," said Maggie. "I don't want your defence, thank you.
You're mean and deceitful and untrue. You never have been a friend
of mine, and I don't want ever to see you again!"

Caroline Smith was horrified. "Well, upon my word. Isn't that
gratitude? Here am I, the only person in this whole place would take
any trouble with you! When the others all said that you were plain
and stupid and hadn't anything to say for yourself I stuck to you. I
did all I could, wasting all my time going to the dressmaker with
you and trying to make you look like something human, and this is
the way you repay me! Well, there's a lesson for me! Many's the time
mother's said to me, 'Carry, you'll just ruin yourself with that
kind heart of yours, laying yourself out for others when you ought
to be seeing after yourself. You've got too big a heart for this
world.' Doesn't it just show one? And to end it all with accusing me
of reading your letters! If you choose to sit in the park after dark
with a man who everybody knows--"

"Either you're going to leave this room or I am," said Maggie.

"Thank you!" said Caroline, tossing her head. "I haven't the
slightest desire to stay, I assure you! Only you'll be sorry for
this, Maggie Cardinal, you will indeed!"

With a swish of the skirts and a violent banging of the door she was
gone.

"The only friend I had," thought Maggie.

The next development was an announcement from Aunt Anne that she
would like Maggie to accompany her to a meeting at Miss Avies'. Aunt
Anne did not explain what kind of a meeting it would be, and Maggie
asked no questions. She simply replied that she would go. She had
indeed by this time a very considerable curiosity of her own as to
what every one thought was going to happen in ten days' time.
Perhaps this meeting would enlighten her. It did.

On arriving at Miss Avies' gaunt and menacing apartment she found
herself in the very stronghold of the Inside Saints. It was a
strange affair, and Maggie was never to see anything quite like it
again. In the first place, Miss Avies' room was not exactly the
place in which you would have expected to discover a meeting of this
kind.

She lived over a house-agent's in John Street, Adelphi. Her sitting-
room was low-ceilinged with little diamond-paned windows. The place
was let furnished, and the green and red vases on the mantelpiece,
the brass clock and the bright yellow wallpaper were properties of
the landlord. To the atmosphere of the place Miss Avies, although
she lived there for a number of years, had contributed nothing.

It had all the desolate forlornness of a habitation in which no
human being has dwelt for a very long time; there was dust on the
mantelpiece, a melancholy sputtering of coal choked with cinders and
gasping for breath in the fireplace, stuffy hot clamminess beating
about the unopened windows. Along the breadth of the faded brown
carpet some fifty cane-bottomed chairs were pressed tightly in rows
together, and in front of the window, facing the chairs, was a
little wooden table with a chair beside it, on the table a glass of
water and a Bible.

When Maggie and her aunts entered the chairs were almost all
occupied and they were forced to sit at the end of the last row but
one. The meeting had apparently not yet begun, and many heads were
turned towards them as they took their places. Maggie fancied that
the glances directed at herself were angry and severe, but that was
very possibly her imagination. She soon recognised people known to
her--Miss Pyncheon, calm and placid; Mrs. Smith, Caroline's mother,
very stout, hot, and self-important; Amy Warlock, proud and severe;
and Miss Avies herself standing, like a general surveying his
forces, behind the table.

The room was draughty and close and had a confused smell of oil-
cloth and geraniums, and Maggie knew that soon she would have a
headache. She fancied that already the atmosphere was influencing
the meeting. From where she sat she could see a succession of side
faces, and it was strange what a hungry, appealing look these pale
cheeks and staring eyes had. Hungry! Yes, that's what they all were.
She thought, fantastically, for a moment, of poor Mr. Magnus's
Treasure Hunters, and she seemed to see the whole of this company in
a raft drifting in mid-ocean, not a sail in sight and the last
ship's biscuit gone.

They were not, taken altogether, a very fine collection, old maids
and young girls, many of them apparently of the servant class, one
or two sitting with open mouths and a vacancy of expression that
seemed to demand a conjurer with a rabbit and a hat. Some faces were
of the true fanatic cast, lit with the glow of an expectancy and a
hope that no rational experience had ever actually justified. One
girl, whom Maggie had seen with Aunt Anne on some occasion, had
especially this prophetic anticipation in the whole pose of her body
as she bent forward a little, her elbows on her knees her chin on
her hands, gazing with wide burning eyes at Miss Avies. This girl,
whom Maggie was never to see again hung as a picture in the rooms of
her mind for the rest of her life--the youth, the desperate anxiety
as of one who throws her last piece upon the gaming-table, the
poverty of the shabby black dress, the real physical austerity and
asceticism of the white cheeks and the thin arms and pale hands--
this figure remained a symbol for Maggie. She used to wonder in
after years, when fortune had carried her far enough away from all
this world, what had happened to that girl. But she was never to
know.

There were faces, too, like Miss Pyncheon's, calm, contented,
confident, old women who had found in their religion the panacea of
all their troubles. There were faces like Mrs. Smith's, coarse and
vulgar, out for any sensation that might come along, and ready
instantly to express their contempt if the particular "trick" that
they were expecting failed to come off; other faces, again, like Amy
Warlock's, grimly set upon secret thoughts and purposes of their
own, faces trained to withstand any sudden attack on the emotions,
but eager, too, like the rest for some revelation that was to answer
all questions and satisfy all expectations.

Maggie wondered, as she looked about her, how she could have raised
in her own imagination, around the Chapel and its affairs, so
formidable an atmosphere of terror and tyrannic discipline. Here
gathered together were a few women, tired, pale, many of them
uneducated, awaiting like children the opening of a box, the
springing into flower of a dry husk of a seed, the raising of the
curtain on some wonderful scene. Maggie, as she looked at them, knew
that they must be disappointed, and her heart ached for them all,
yes, even for Amy Warlock, her declared enemy. She lost, as she sat
there, for the moment all sense of her own personal history. She
only saw them all tired and hungry and expectant; perhaps, after
all, there WAS something behind it all--something for which they had
a right to be searching; even of that she had not sure knowledge--
but the pathos and also the bravery of their search touched and
moved her. She was beginning to understand something of the beauty
that hovered like a bird always just out of sight about the ugly
walls of the Chapel.

"Whatever they want, poor dears," she thought, "I do hope they get
it."

Miss Avies opened the meeting with an extempore prayer: then they
all stood up and sang a hymn, and their quavering voices were thin
and sharp and strained in the stuffy close-ceilinged room. The hymn,
like all the other Chapel hymns that Maggie had heard, had to do
with "the Blood of the Lamb," "the sacrifice of Blood," "the Blood
that heals." There was also a refrain:

 And, when Thou comest, Lord, we pray That Thou wilt spare Thy
sword, Or on that grim and ghastly day Who will escape the Lord? WHO
will escape the Lord?

There were many verses to this hymn, and it had a long and
lugubrious tune, so that Maggie thought that it would never end, but
as it proceeded the words worked their effect on the congregation,
and at the last there was much emotion and several women were
crying.

Then they all sat down again and the meeting developed a very
business-like side. There was a great deal of discussion as to
dates, places, appointments, and Maggie was amused to discover that
in this part of the proceedings Mrs. Smith had a great deal to say,
and took a very leading place.

The gathering became like any other assemblage of ladies for some
charitable or social purpose, and there were the usual disputes and
signs of temper and wounded pride; in all those matters Miss Avies
was a most admirable and unflinching chairman.

Then at last the real moment came. Miss Avies got up to speak. She
stood there, scornful, superior, and yet with some almost cynical
appeal in her eyes as though she said to them: "You poor fools! No
one knows better than I the folly of your being here, no one knows
better than I how far you will, all of you, be from realising any of
your dreams. Tricked, the lot of you!--and yet--and yet--go on
believing, expecting, hoping. Pray, pray that I may be wrong and you
may be right."

What she actually said was as follows: "This will be our last
meeting before the end of the year. What will come to all of us
before we all meet again no one can say, but this we all know, that
we have, most of us, been living now for many years in expectation.
We have been taught, by the goodness of God, to believe that we must
be ready at any moment to obey His call, and that call may come, in
the middle of our work, of our prayers, of our love for others, of
our pursuit of our own ambitions, and that whenever it does come we
must be ready to obey it. We have been told by our great and good
Master, who has been set over us for our guidance by God Himself,
that that call may now be very near. Whatever form it may take we
must accept it, give up all we have and follow Him. That is
understood by all of us. I will not say more now. This is not the
time for any more directions from me. We must address ourselves,
each one of us, to God Himself, and ask Him to prepare us so that we
may be as He would have us on the day of His coming. I suggest now
before we part that we share together in a few minutes of private
prayer." They all rose, and Maggie, before she knelt down, caught a
sudden glimpse of the pale girl whom she had noticed earlier
standing for a moment as though she were about to make some
desperate appeal to them all. Some words did indeed seem to come
from her lips, but the scraping of chairs drowned every other sound.
"You are released from that affair--"
But then he read farther, and he, too, became agitated.

"What--what does it mean? Lind, Beratinsky, Reitzei accused of
conspiracy--misusing the powers intrusted to them as officers of the
Society--Reitzei acquitted on giving evidence--Lind and Beratinsky
condemned!"

Edwards looked at his companion, aghast, and said,
"You know what the penalty is, Brand?"
The other nodded. Edwards returned to the letter, reading aloud,
in detached scraps, his voice giving evidence of his astonishment
and dismay.

"Beratinsky, allowed the option of undertaking the duty from which
you are released, accepts--it is his only chance, I suppose--poor
devil!

what chance is it, after all?" He put the letter back on the
table.
"What is all this that has happened, Brand?"
Brand did not answer.

He had risen to his feet; he stood like one bound with chains; there
was suffering and an infinite pity in the haggard face.

"Why is not Natalie here?" he said; and it was strange that two men
so different from each other as Brand and Calabressa should in
such a crisis have had the same instinctive thought. The lives
and fates of men were nothing; it was the heart of a girl that
concerned them. "They will tell her--some of them over there--they
will tell her suddenly that her father is condemned to die! Why
is she--among--among strangers?"

He pulled out his watch hastily, but long ago the night-mail had
left for Dover.

At this moment the bell rung below, and he started; it was unusual
for them to have a visitor at such an hour.

"It is only that drunken fool Kirski," Edwards said. "I asked him
to come here to-night."

CHAPTER LIII.

THE TRIAL.

It was a dark, wet, and cold night when Calabressa felt his way down
the gangway leading from the Admiralty Pier into the small
Channel steamer that lay slightly rolling at her moorings. Most
of the passengers who were already on board had got to leeward
of the deck-cabins, and sat huddled up there, undistinguishable
bundles of rugs. For a time he almost despaired of finding out
Reitzei, but at last he was successful; and he had to explain to
this particular bundle of rugs that he had changed his mind, and
would himself travel with him to Naples.

It was a dirty night in crossing, and both suffered considerably;
the difference being that, as soon as they got into the smooth
waters of Calais harbor, Calabressa recovered himself directly,
whereas Reitzei remained an almost inanimate heap of wrappings,
and had to be assisted or shoved up the steep gangway into the
glare of the officials' lamps.

Then, as soon as he had got into a compartment of the
railway-carriage, he rolled himself up in a corner, and sought to
forget his sufferings in sleep.

Calabressa was walking up and down on the platform. At length the
bell rung, and he was about to step into the compartment, when he
found himself preceded by a lady.

"I beg your pardon, madame," said he, politely, "but it is a carriage
for smokers."
"And if one wishes to smoke, one is permitted--is it not so?" said the
stranger, cheerfully.

Calabressa at once held open the door for her, and then followed.
These three had the compartment to themselves.

She was a young lady, good-looking, tall, bright-complexioned, with
brown eyes that had plenty of fire in them, and a pleasant smile that
showed brilliant teeth. Calabressa, sitting opposite her, judged
that she was an Austrian, from the number of bags and knickknacks
she had, all in red Russia leather, and from the number of trinkets
she wore, mostly of polished steel or silver. She opened a little
tortoise-shell cigarette-case, took out a cigarette, and gracefully
accepted the light that Calabressa offered her. By this time the
train had started, and was thundering through the night.

The young lady was very frank and affable; she talked to her companion
opposite--Reitzei being fast asleep--about a great many things;
she lit cigarette after cigarette.

She spoke of her husband moreover; and complained that he should
have to go and fight in some one else's quarrel. Why could not ladies
who went to the tables at Monte Carlo keep their temper, that a
perfectly neutral third person should be summoned to fight a duel
on behalf of one of them?

"You are going to rejoin him, then, madame?" said Calabressa.

"Not at all," she said, laughing. "I have my own affairs."
After some time, she said, with quite a humorous smile,
"My dear sir, I hope I do not keep you from sleeping. But you are
puzzled about me; you think you have seen me before, but cannot tell
where."
"There you are perfectly right, madame."
"Think of the day before yesterday. You were crossing in the steamer.

You were so good as to suggest to a lady on board that nearer
the centre vessel would be safer for her--"
He stared at her again. Could this be the same lady who, on the
day that he crossed, was seated right at the stern of the steamer
her brown hair flying about with the wind, her white teeth
flashing as she laughed and joked with the sailors, her eyes full of
life and merriment as she pitched up and down? Calabressa, before the
paroxysms of his woe overtook him, had had the bravery to go and
remonstrate with this young lady, and to tell her she would
be more comfortable nearer the middle of the boat; but she had
laughingly told him she was a sailor's daughter, and was not afraid
of the sea.

Well, this handsome young lady opposite certainly laughed like that
other, but still--
"Oh," she said, "do I puzzle you with such a simple thing?

My hair was brown the day before yesterday, it is black to-day;
is that a sufficient disguise? _Pardieu_, when I went to a
music-hall in London that same night to see some stupid nonsense--bah!
such stupid nonsense I have never seen in the world--I went dressed
as a man. Only for exercise, you perceive: one does not need disguises
in London."
Calabressa was becoming more and more mystified, and she saw it, and
her amusement increased.

"Come, my friend," she said, "you cannot deny that you also are
political?"
"I, madame?" said Calabressa, with great innocence.

"Oh yes. And you are not on the side of the big battalions, eh?"

"I declare to you, madame--"
She glanced at Reitzei.

"Your friend sleeps sound. Come, shall I tell you something? You did
not say a word, for example, when you stepped on shore, to a gentleman
in a big cloak who had a lantern--"
"Madame, I beg of you!" he exclaimed, in a low voice, also glancing
at Reitzei.

"What!" she said, laughing. "Then you have the honor of the acquaintance
of my old friend Biard? The rogue, to take a post like that! Oh, I
think my husband could speak more frankly with you; I can only guess."

"You are somewhat indiscreet, madame," said Calabressa, coldly.

"I indiscreet?" she said, flickering off the ash of her cigarette
with a finger of the small gloved hand. Then she said, with mock
seriousness, "How can one be indiscreet with a friend of the
good man Biard? Come, I will give you a lesson in sincerity.
My husband is gone to fight a duel, I told you; yes, but his enemy
is a St. Petersburg general who belonged to the Third Section. They
should not let Russians play at Monte Carlo; it is so easy to pick
a quarrel with them. And now about myself; you want to know what I
am--what I am about. Ah, I perceive it, monsieur.

Well, this time, on the other hand, I shall be discreet. But if you
hear of something within a few weeks--if the whole of the world
begins to chatter about it--and you say, 'Well, that woman had
pluck'--then you can think of our little conversation during the
night. We must be getting near Amiens, is it not so?"
She took from her traveling-bag a small apparatus for showering
eau-de-cologne in spray, and with this sprinkled her forehead;
afterward removing the drops with a soft sponge, and smoothing
her rebellious black hair. Then she took out a tiny flask and cup
of silver.

"Permit me, monsieur, to give you a little cognac, after so
many cigarettes. I fear you have only been smoking to keep me
company--"

"A thousand thanks, madame!" said Calabressa, who certainly did not
refuse. She took none herself; indeed, she had just time to put
her bags in order again when the train slowed into Amiens station;
and she, bidding her bewildered and bewitched companion a most
courteous farewell, got out and departed.

Calabressa himself soon fell asleep, and did not wake until they
were near Paris. By this time the bundle of rugs in the corner
had begun to show signs of animation.

"Well, friend Reitzei you have had a good sleep," said Calabressa,
yawning, and stretching his arms.

"I have slept a little."

"You have slept all night--what more? What do you know, for example,
of the young lady who was in the carriage?"
"I saw her come in," Reitzei said, indifferently, "and I heard you
talking once or twice. What was she?"
"There you ask me a pretty question. My belief is that she was
either one of those Nihilist madwomen, or else the devil himself
in a new shape. At any rate, she had some good cognac."
"I should like some coffee now, Signor Calabressa; and you?"
"I would not refuse it."
Indeed, during all this journey to Naples, Calabressa and his companion
talked much more of the commonplace incidents and wants of travel
than of the graver matters that lay before them. Calabressa was
especially resolute in doing so. He did not like to look
ahead. He kept reminding himself that he was simply the agent of
the Council; he was carrying out their behests; the consequences
were for others to deal with. He had fulfilled his commission; he had
procured sufficient proof of the suspected conspiracy; if
evil-doers were to be punished, was he responsible? _Fiat justitia!_
he kept repeating to himself. He was answerable to the Council
alone. He had done his duty.

But from time to time--and especially when they were travelling at
night, and he was awake--a haunting dread possessed him.

How should he appear before these two women in Naples? His old friend
Natalie Berezolyi had been grievously wronged; she had suffered
through long years; but a wife forgets much when her husband is
about to die.

And a daughter? Lind had been an affectionate father enough to this
girl; these two had been companions all her lifetime; recent
incidents would surely be forgotten in her terror over the fact
that it was her own appeal to the Council that had wrought her
father's death.

And then he, Calabressa, what could he say? It was through him she had
invoked these unknown powers; it was his counsel that had taken her
to Naples; and he was the immediate instrument that would produce
this tragic end.

He would not think of it.

At the various places where they stopped he worried about food and
drink, and angrily haggled about hotel-bills: he read innumerable
stupid little newspapers from morning till night; he smoked Reitzei
nearly blind.

At last they reached Naples.

Within an hour after their arrival Calabressa, alone, was in
Tommaso's wine-vaults talking to the ghoul-like occupant.

A bell rung, faint and muffled, in the distance; he passed to the
back of the vaults, and lit a candle that Tommaso handed him; then
he followed what seemed, from the rumble overhead, some kind of
subterranean corridor. But at the end of this long sub-way he began
to ascend; then he reached some steps; finally, he was on an ordinary
staircase, with daylight around him, and above him a landing with
two doors, both shut.

Opening one of these doors, after having knocked thrice, he entered
a large, bare chamber which was occupied by three men, all
seated at a table which was covered with papers. One of them, Von
Zoesch, rose.

"That is good; that is very well settled," he said to the other
two. "It is a good piece of work. Now here is this English business,
and the report of our wily friend, Calabressa. What is it, Calabressa?
We had your telegram; we have sent for Lind and Beratinsky;
what more?"
"Excellency, I have fulfilled your commission, I hope with judgment,"
Calabressa said, his cap in his hand. "I believe it is clear
that the Englishman had that duty put upon him by fraudulent means."

"It is a pity if it be so; it will cost us some further trouble, and
we have other things to think about at present." Then he added,
lightly, "but it will please your young lady friend, Calabressa.
Well?"
"Excellency, you forget it may not quite so well please her if it is
found that her father was in the conspiracy," said Calabressa,
submissively.

"Why not?" answered the bluff, tall soldier. "However, to the
point, Calabressa. What have you discovered? and your proofs."

"I have none, your Excellency; but I have brought with me one
of the four in the ballot who is willing to confess. Why is he willing
to confess?" said Calabressa, with a little triumphant smile;
"because he thinks the gentlemen of the Council know already."
"And you have frightened the poor devil, no doubt," said Von Zoesch,
laughing.

"I have on the contrary, assured him of pardon," said Calabressa,
gravely. It is within the powers you gave me, Excellency. I have
pledged my honor--"
"Oh yes, yes; very well.

But do you mean to tell us, my good Calabressa," said this tall man,
speaking more seriously, "that you have proof of these three--Lind,
Beratinsky, Reitzei--having combined to impose on the Englishman?
Not Lind, surely? Perhaps the other two--"

"Your Excellency, it is for you to investigate further and determine.
I will tell you how I proceeded. I went to the Englishman, and got
minute particulars of what occurred. I formed my own little story,
my guess, my theory. I got hold of Reitzei, and hinted that it
was all known. On my faith, he never thought of denying anything,
he was so frightened! But regard this, Excellency; I know
nothing. I can give you the Englishman's account; then, if you
get that of Reitzei, and the two correspond, it is a good proof
that Reitzei is not lying in his confession. It is for you to examine
him, Excellency."'
"No, it is not for me," the ruddy-faced soldier-looking man
said, and then he turned to his two companions. The one was the
Secretary Granaglia: the other was a broad-shouldered, elderly man,
with strikingly handsome features of the modern Greek type, a pallid,
wax-like complexion, and thoughtful, impenetrable eyes. "Brother
Conventzi, I withdraw from this affair.

I leave it in hands of the Council; one of the accused was
in former days my friend; it is not right that I should interfere."

"And I also, Excellency," said Calabressa, eagerly. "I have fulfilled
my commission; may not I retire now also?"
"Brother Granaglia will take down your report in writing; then you
are free, my Calabressa.

But you will take the summons of the Council to your friend Reitzei;
I suppose he will have to be examined before the others arrive."

And so it came about that neither the General von Zoesch nor Calabressa
was present when the trial, if trial it could be called, took place.

There were no formalities.

In this same big bare room seven members of the Council sat at the
table, Brother Conventz presiding, the Secretary Granaglia at the
foot, with writing-materials before him.

Ferdinand Lind and Beratinsky stood between them and the side-wall
apparently impassive.

Reitzei was nearer the window, pallid, uneasy, his eyes wandering about
the room, but avoiding the place where his former colleagues stood.

The President briefly stated the accusation against them, and read
Reitzei's account of his share in what had taken place.

He asked if they had anything to deny or to explain.

Beratinsky was the first to speak.

"Illustrious Brethren of the Council," he began, as if with some
set speech; but his color suddenly forsook him, and he halted and
looked helplessly round.

Then he said, wildly, "I declare that I am innocent--I say that I
am innocent!

I never should have thought of it, gentlemen. It was Lind's suggestion;
he wished to get rid of the man; I declare I had nothing to gain.

Gentlemen, judge for yourselves: what had I to gain?"

He looked from one to the other; the grave faces were mostly regarding
Granaglia, who was slowly and carefully putting the words down.

Then Lind spoke, clearly and coldly:

"I have nothing to deny.

What I did was done in the interests of the Society.

My reward for my long services is that I am haled here like a
pickpocket.

It is the second time; it will be the last.

I have done, now, with the labor of my life. You can reap the
fruits of it. Do with me what you please."

The President rose.

"The gentlemen may now retire; the decision of the Council will be
communicated to them hereafter."
A bell rung; Tommaso appeared; Lind and Beratinsky were conducted
down the stairs and through the dark corridor.

In a few seconds Tommaso returned, and performed a like office for
Reitzei.

The deliberation of the Council were but of short duration. The
guilt of the accused was clear; and clear and positive was the penalty
prescribed by the articles of the Society.

But, in consideration of the fact that Beratinsky had been led into
this affair by Lind, it was resolved to offer him the alternative
of his taking over the service from which Brand was released.

This afforded but a poor chance of escape, but Beratinsky was in
a desperate position. That same evening he accepted; and the Secretary
Granaglia was forthwith ordered to report the result of these
proceedings to England, and give certain instructions as to the
further conduct of business there.

The Secretary Granaglia performed this task with his usual
equanimity.
He was merely a machine registering the decrees of the Council; it
was no affair of his to be concerned about the fate of Ferdinand
Lind; he had even forgotten the existence of the two women who had
been patiently waiting day after day at that hotel, alternately
hoping and fearing to learn what had occurred.

CHAPTER LIV.
PUT TO THE PROOF.
It was not at all likely that, at such a crisis, George Brand should
pay much attention to the man Kirski, who was now ushered into the
room. He left Edwards to deal with him. In any case he could not
have understood a word they were saying, except through the
interpretation of Edwards, and that was a tedious process. He had
other things to think of.
Edwards was in a somewhat nervous and excited condition after hearing
this strange news, and he grew both impatient and angry when he saw
that Kirski was again half dazed with drink.
"Yes, I thought so!" he exclaimed, looking as fierce as the mild
student-face permitted. "This is why you are not at the shop when
I called to-day. What do you mean by it? What has become of your
promises?"
"Little father, I have great trouble," said the man, humbly.
"You! You in trouble!" said Edwards, angrily. "You do not know what
trouble is. You have everything in the world you could wish for.
You have good friends, as much employment as you can want, fair
wages, and a comfortable home. If your wife ran away from you, isn't
it a good riddance? And then, instead of setting about your work
like a good citizen, you think of nothing but murdering a man who
is as far away from you as the man in the moon, and then you take
to drinking, and become a nuisance to every one."
"Little father, I have many troubles, and I wish to forget."
"Your troubles!" said Edwards, though his anger was a little bit
assumed: he wished to frighten the man into better ways. "What are
your troubles? Think of that beautiful lady you are always talking
about, who interested herself in you--the bigger fool she!--think
of her trouble when she knows that her father is to die; and for
what? Because he was not obedient to the laws of the Society. And
he is punished with death; and you, have you been obedient?When he came out into the street again he knew that he was half
drunk--not so drunk that he didn't know what he was doing. Oh dear,
no. HE could drink any amount without feeling it. Nevertheless he
had drunk so little during these last weeks that even a drop . . .
How foggy the streets were . . . made it difficult to find your way
home. But he was all right, he could walk straight, he could put his
latch-key into the door at one try, HE was all right.

He was at home again. He didn't stop to hang up his hat and coat but
went straight into the dining-room, leaving the door open behind
him. He saw that the meal was still on the table just as they'd left
it. Amy was there too.

He saw her move back when he came in as though she were afraid to
touch him.

"You're drunk!" she said.

"I'm not. You're a liar, Amy. You've always been a liar all your
life."

She tried to pass him, but he stood in the middle of the door.

"No, you don't," he said. "We've got to have this out. What have you
been spreading scandal about me and Maggie Cardinal for?"

"Let me go," she said again.

"Tell me that first. You've always tried to do me harm. Why?"

"Because I hate the sight of you," she answered quickly. "As you've
asked me, you shall have a truthful answer. You've never been
anything but a disgrace to us ever since you were a little boy. You
disgraced us at home and then abroad; now you've come back to
disgrace us here again."

"That's a lie," he repeated. "I've not disgraced anybody."

"Well, it won't be very long before you finish ruining that wretched
girl. The best you can do now is to marry her."

"I can't do that," he said. "I'm married already." She did not
answer that hut stared at him with amazement.

"But never mind that," he went on. "What if I am a bad lot? I don't
know what a bad lot is exactly, but if you mean that I've lived with
women and been drunk, and lost jobs because I didn't do the work,
and been generally on the loose, it's true, of course. But I meant
to live decently when I came home. Yes, I did. You can sneer as much
as you like. Why didn't you help me? You're my sister, aren't you?
And now I don't care what I do. You've all given me up. Well, give
me up, and I'll just go to bits as fast as I can go! If you don't
want me there are others who do, or at any rate the bit of money
I've got. You've kept me from the only decent girl I've ever known,
the one I could have been straight with--"

"Straight with!" Amy broke in. "How were you going to be straight if
you're married already?"

He would have answered her but a sound behind him made him turn. He
wheeled round and saw his father standing almost up against him. He
had only time for a horrified vision of the ghostlike figure, the
staring eyes, the open mouth, the white cheeks. The old man caught
his coat.

"Martin, what was that? What did you say? . . . No, no . . . I can't
bear that now. I can't, I can't."

He turned and made as though he would run up the stairs, catching
about him like a child the shabby old dressing-gown that he was
wearing. At the first step he stumbled, clutching the bannister to
save himself.

Martin rushed to him, putting his arms round him, holding him
close to him. "It's all right, father . . . It's not true what
you heard . . . It's all right."

His father turned, putting his arms round his neck.

Martin half helped, half carried him up to his bedroom. He laid him
on his bed and then, holding his hand, sat by his side all through
the long dim afternoon.

About, five Warlock suddenly revived, sat up, arid with the
assistance of Martin dressed properly, had some tea, and went down
to his study. He sat down in his chair, then suddenly looking up at
his son he said:

"Did you and Amy have a quarrel this afternoon?"

"No, father," said Martin.

"That's right. I thought--I thought . . . I don't know . . . My
head's confused. You've been a good boy, Martin, haven't you?
There's no need for me to worry, is there?"

"None, father," Martin said.

After a while Martin said:

"Father, don't go to Chapel to-night."

Warlock smiled.

"I must go. That's all right . . . Nothing to worry about."

For some while he sat there, Martin's hand in his; Martin did not
know whether he were asleep or not.

At about ten he ate and drank. At eleven he started with Amy and
Thurston for the Chapel.


CHAPTER XI

THE CHARIOT OF FIRE


When Jane, scolded by Aunt Anne for an untidy appearance, gave
notice and at once departed, Maggie felt as though the ground was
giving way under her feet.

A week until the New Year, and no opportunity of hearing from Martin
during that time. Then she laughed at herself:

"You're losing your sense of proportion, my dear, over this. Laugh
at yourself. What's a week?"

She did laugh at herself, but she had not very much to base her
laughter upon. Martin's last letters had been short and very uneasy.
She had already, in a surprising fashion for one so young, acquired
a very wise and just estimate of Martin's character.

"He's only a boy," she used to say to herself and feel his elder by
at least twenty years. Nevertheless the thought of his struggling on
there alone was not a happy one. George Brand was staring out of the
windows into the dark night, somewhat absently.

"I suppose," he answered, "all the great things that have been
done in the world have been founded in fanaticism. All that I can
hope for now is that this particular act of the Council may have the
good effect they hope from it. They ought to know. They see the
sort of people with whom they have to deal. I should have thought,
with Lind, that it was unwise--that it would shock, or even terrify;
but my opinion is neither here nor there. Further talking is of no
use, Evelyn; the thing is settled; what I have to consider now, as
regards myself, is how I can best benefit a few people whom
I am interested in, and you can help me in that."Nevertheless she had been deeply shocked at the revelation
of Maggie's bad behaviour, and it was a shock from which, in all
probability she would never recover.

"WE'LL never be friends again." Maggie thought, watching her aunt's
austere composure from the other side of the dining-table. She was
sad at the thought of that, remembering moments--that first visit to
St. Dreot's, the departure in the cab, the night when she had sat at
her aunt's bedside--that had given glimpses of the kind human
creature Aunt Anne might have been had she never heard of the Inside
Saints.

Maggie, during these last days, did everything that her aunts told
her. She was as good and docile as she could be. But, oh! there were
some dreary hours as she sat, alone, in that stuffy drawing-room,
trying to sew, her heart aching with loneliness, her needle always
doing the wrong thing, the clock heavily ticking, Thomas watching
her from the mat in front of the fire, and the family group sneering
at her from the wall-paper.

