Perceiving his fellow-travellers, either overawed into silence by his
presence, or struck dumb with admiration at his equipage, he accosted
them in these words, while an agreeable smile dimpled on his cheek:--

"The good company wonders, no doubt, to see a man cased in armour, such
as hath been for above a whole century disused in this and every other
country of Europe; and perhaps they will be still more surprised, when
they hear that man profess himself a novitiate of that military order,
which hath of old been distinguished in Great Britain, as well as through
all Christendom, by the name of knights-errant.  Yes, gentlemen, in that
painful and thorny path of toil and danger I have begun my career, a
candidate for honest fame; determined, as far as in me lies, to honour
and assert the efforts of virtue; to combat vice in all her forms,
redress injuries, chastise oppression, protect the helpless and forlorn,
relieve the indigent, exert my best endeavours in the cause of innocence
and beauty, and dedicate my talents, such as they are, to the service of
my country."

"What!" said Ferret, "you set up for a modern Don Quixote?  The scheme
is rather too stale and extravagant.  What was a humorous romance and
well-timed satire in Spain near two hundred years ago, will make but a
sorry jest, and appear equally insipid and absurd when really acted from
affectation, at this time of day, in a country like England."

The knight, eyeing this censor with a look of disdain, replied, in a
solemn, lofty tone: "He that from affectation imitates the extravagancies
recorded of Don Quixote, is an impostor equally wicked and contemptible.
He that counterfeits madness, unless he dissembles, like the elder
Brutus, for some virtuous purpose, not only debases his own soul, but
acts as a traitor to Heaven, by denying the divinity that is within him.
I am neither an affected imitator of Don Quixote, nor, as I trust in
Heaven, visited by that spirit of lunacy so admirably displayed in the
fictitious character exhibited by the inimitable Cervantes.  I have not
yet encountered a windmill for a giant, nor mistaken this public-house
for a magnificent castle; neither do I believe this gentleman to be the
constable; nor that worthy practitioner to be Master Elizabat, the
surgeon recorded in Amadis de Gaul; nor you to be the enchanter Alquife,
nor any other sage of history or romance; I see and distinguish objects
as they are discerned and described by other men.  I reason without
prejudice, can endure contradiction, and, as the company perceives, even
bear impertinent censure without passion or resentment.  I quarrel with
none but the foes of virtue and decorum, against whom I have declared
perpetual war, and them I will everywhere attack as the natural enemies
of mankind."

"But that war," said the cynic, "may soon be brought to a conclusion, and
your adventures close in Bridewell, provided you meet with some
determined constable, who will seize your worship as a vagrant, according
to the statute."  "Heaven and earth!" cried the stranger, starting up,
and laying his hand on his sword, "do I live to hear myself insulted with
such an opprobrious epithet, and refrain from trampling into dust the
insolent calumniator?"

The tone in which these words were pronounced, and the indignation that
flashed from the eyes of the speaker, intimidated every individual of the
society, and reduced Ferret to a temporary privation of all his
faculties.  His eyes retired within their sockets; his complexion, which
was naturally of a copper hue, now shifted to a leaden colour; his teeth
began to chatter; and all his limbs were agitated by a sudden palsy.  The
knight observed his condition, and resumed his seat, saying, "I was to
blame; my vengeance must be reserved for very different objects.  Friend,
you have nothing to fear--the sudden gust of passion is now blown over.
Recollect yourself, and I will reason calmly on the observation you have
made."

This was a very seasonable declaration to Mr. Ferret, who opened his
eyes, and wiped his forehead, while the other proceeded in these terms:
"You say I am in danger of being apprehended as a vagrant.  I am not so
ignorant of the laws of my country, but that I know the description of
those who fall within the legal meaning of this odious term.  You must
give me leave to inform you, friend, that I am neither bearward, fencer,
stroller, gipsy, mountebank, nor mendicant; nor do I practise subtle
craft, to deceive and impose upon the king's lieges; nor can I be held as
an idle disorderly person, travelling from place to place, collecting
monies by virtue of counterfeited passes, briefs, and other false
pretences; in what respect, therefore, am I to be deemed a vagrant?
Answer boldly without fear or scruple."

To this interrogation the misanthrope replied, with a faltering accent,
"If not a vagrant, you incur the penalty for riding armed in affray of
the peace."  "But, instead of riding armed in affray of the peace,"
resumed the other, "I ride in preservation of the peace; and gentlemen
are allowed by the law to wear armour for their defence.  Some ride with
blunderbusses, some with pistols, some with swords, according to their
various inclinations.  Mine is to wear the armour of my forefathers.
Perhaps I use them for exercise, in order to accustom myself to fatigue,
and strengthen my constitution; perhaps I assume them for a frolic."

"But if you swagger, armed and in disguise, assault me on the highway, or
put me in bodily fear for the sake of the jest, the law will punish you
in earnest," cried the other.  "But my intention," answered the knight,
"is carefully to avoid all those occasions of offence."  "Then," said
Ferret, "you may go unarmed, like other sober people."  "Not so,"
answered the knight; "as I propose to travel all times, and in all
places, mine armour may guard me against the attempts of treachery; it
may defend me in combat against odds, should I be assaulted by a
multitude, or have occasion to bring malefactors to justice."

"What, then," exclaimed the philosopher, "you intend to co-operate with
the honourable fraternity of thief-takers?"  "I do purpose," said the
youth, eyeing him with a look of ineffable contempt, "to act as a
coadjutator to the law, and even to remedy evils which the law cannot
reach; to detect fraud and treason, abase insolence, mortify pride,
discourage slander, disgrace immodesty, and stigmatise ingratitude, but
the infamous part of a thief-catcher's character I disclaim.  I neither
associate with robbers and pickpockets, knowing them to be such, that, in
being intrusted with their secrets, I may the more effectually betray
them; nor shall I ever pocket the reward granted by the legislature to
those by whom robbers are brought to conviction; but I shall always think
it my duty to rid my country of that pernicious vermin, which prey upon
the bowels of the commonwealth--not but that an incorporated company of
licensed thieves might, under proper regulations, be of service to the
community."

Ferret, emboldened by the passive tameness with which the stranger bore
his last reflection, began to think he had nothing of Hector but his
outside, and gave a loose to all the acrimony of his party rancour.
Hearing the knight mention a company of licensed thieves, "What else,"
cried he, "is the majority of the nation?  What is your standing army at
home, that eat up their fellow-subjects?  What are your mercenaries
abroad, whom you hire to fight their own quarrels?  What is your militia,
that wise measure of a sagacious ministry, but a larger gang of petty
thieves, who steal sheep and poultry through mere idleness; and were
they confronted with an enemy, would steal themselves away?  What is your
 .  .  .  but a knot of thieves, who pillage the nation under colour of
law, and enrich themselves with the wreck of their country?  When you
consider the enormous debt of above an hundred millions, the intolerable
load of taxes and impositions under which we groan, and the manner in
which that burden is yearly accumulating, to support two German
electorates, without our receiving anything in return, but the shows of
triumph and shadows of conquest;--I say, when you reflect on these
circumstances, and at the same time behold our cities filled with
bankrupts, and our country with beggars, can you be so infatuated as to
deny that the ministry is mad, or worse than mad--our wealth exhausted,
our people miserable, our credit blasted, and our state on the brink of
perdition?  This prospect, indeed, will make the fainter impression, if
we recollect that we ourselves are a pack of such profligate, corrupted,
pusillanimous rascals, as deserve no salvation."

The stranger, raising his voice to a loud tone, replied, "Such, indeed,
are the insinuations, equally false and insidious, with which the
desperate emissaries of a party endeavour to poison the minds of his
majesty's subjects, in defiance of common honesty and common sense.  But
he must be blind to all perception, and dead to candour, who does not see
and own that we are involved in a just and necessary war, which has been
maintained on truly British principles, prosecuted with vigour, and
crowned with success; that our taxes are easy, in proportion to our
wealth; that our conquests are equally glorious and important; that our
commerce flourishes, our people are happy, and our enemies reduced to
despair.  Is there a man who boasts a British heart, that repines at the
success and prosperity of his country?  Such there are, (Oh, shame to
patriotism, and reproach to Great Britain!) who act as the emissaries of
France, both in word and writing; who exaggerate our necessary burdens,
magnify our dangers, extol the power of our enemies, deride our
victories, extenuate our conquests, condemn the measures of our
government, and scatter the seeds of dissatisfaction through the land.
Such domestic traitors are doubly the objects of detestation;--first, in
perverting truth; and, secondly, in propagating falsehood, to the
prejudice of that community of which they have professed themselves
members.  One of these is well known by the name of Ferret, an old,
rancorous, incorrigible instrument of sedition.  Happy it is for him that
he has never fallen in my way; for, notwithstanding the maxims of
forbearance which I have adopted, the indignation which the character of
that caitiff inspires, would probably impel me to some act of violence,
and I should crush him like an ungrateful viper, that gnawed the bosom
which warmed it into life!"

These last words were pronounced with a wildness of look, that even
bordered upon frenzy.  The misanthrope once more retired to the pantry
for shelter, and the rest of the guests were evidently disconcerted.

Mr. Fillet, in order to change the conversation, which was likely to
produce serious consequences, expressed uncommon satisfaction at the
remarks which the knight had made, signified his approbation of the
honourable office he had undertaken, declared himself happy in having
seen such an accomplished cavalier, and observed, that nothing was
wanting to render him a complete knight-errant, but some celebrated
beauty, the mistress of his heart, whose idea might animate his breast,
and strengthen his arm to the utmost exertion of valour.  He added, that
love was the soul of chivalry.

The stranger started at this discourse.  He turned his eyes on the
surgeon with a fixed regard; his countenance changed; a torrent of tears
gushed down his cheeks; his head sunk upon his bosom; he heaved a
profound sigh, and remained in silence with all the external marks of
unutterable sorrow.  The company were, in some measure, infected by his
despondence, concerning the cause of which, however, they would not
venture to inquire.

By this time the landlady, having disposed of the squire, desired to
know, with many curtsies, if his honour would not choose to put off his
wet garments, assuring him, that she had a very good feather bed at his
service, upon which many gentlevolks of the virst quality had lain, that
the sheets were well aired, and that Dolly would warm them for his
worship with a pan of coals.  This hospitable offer being repeated, he
seemed to wake from a trance of grief, arose from his seat, and, bowing
courteously to the company, withdrew.

Captain Crowe, whose faculty of speech had been all this time absorbed in
amazement, now broke into the conversation with a volley of
interjections.  "Split my snatchblock!--Odd's firkin!--Splice my old
shoes!--I have sailed the salt seas, brother, since I was no higher than
the Triton's taffrel--east, west, north, and south, as the saying is--
Blacks, Indians, Moors, Morattos, and Seapoys;--but, smite my timbers!
such a man of war--"

Here he was interrupted by his nephew, Tom Clarke, who had disappeared at
the knight's first entrance, and now produced himself with an eagerness
in his look, while the tears stared in his eyes.--"Lord bless my soul!"
cried he, "I know that gentleman, and his servant, as well as I know my
own father!--I am his own godson, uncle; he stood for me when he was a
boy--yes, indeed, sir, my father was steward to the estate--I may say I
was bred up in the family of Sir Everhard Greaves, who has been dead
these two years--this is the only son, Sir Launcelot; the best-natured,
worthy, generous gentleman--I care not who knows it.  I love him as well
as if he was my own flesh and blood."

At this period, Tom, whose heart was of the melting mood, began to sob
and weep plenteously, from pure affection.  Crowe, who was not very
subject to these tendernesses, d---ed him for a chicken-hearted lubber;
repeating, with much peevishness, "What dost cry for? what dost cry for,
noddy?"  The surgeon, impatient to know the story of Sir Launcelot, which
he had heard imperfectly recounted, begged that Mr. Clarke would compose
himself, and relate it as circumstantially as his memory would retain the
particulars; and Tom, wiping his eyes, promised to give him that
satisfaction; which the reader, if he be so minded, may partake in the
next chapter.


CHAPTER THREE

WHICH THE READER, ON PERUSAL, MAY WISH WERE CHAPTER THE LAST.


The doctor prescribed a repetatur of the julep, and mixed the
ingredients, secundum artem; Tom Clarke hemmed thrice, to clear his
pipes; while the rest of the company, including Dolly and her mother, who
had by this time administered to the knight, composed themselves into
earnest and hushed attention.  Then the young lawyer began his narrative
to this effect:--

"I tell ye what, gemmen, I don't pretend in this here case to flourish
and harangue like a--having never been called to--but what of that, d'ye
see? perhaps I may know as much as--facts are facts, as the saying is.--I
shall tell, repeat, and relate a plain story--matters of fact, d'ye see,
without rhetoric, oratory, ornament, or embellishment; without
repetition, tautology, circumlocution, or going about the bush; facts
which I shall aver, partly on the testimony of my own knowledge, and
partly from the information of responsible evidences of good repute and
credit, any circumstance known to the contrary notwithstanding.--For as
the law saith, if so be as how there is an exception to evidence, that
exception is in its nature but a denial of what is taken to be good by
the other party, and exceptio in non exceptis, firmat regulam, d'ye see.
--But howsomever, in regard to this here affair, we need not be so
scrupulous as if we were pleading before a judge sedente curia."

Ferret, whose curiosity was rather more eager than that of any other
person in this audience, being provoked by this preamble, dashed the pipe
he had just filled in pieces against the grate; and after having
pronounced the interjection pish! with an acrimony of aspect altogether
peculiar to himself, "If," said he, "impertinence and folly were felony
by the statute, there would be no warrant of unexceptionable evidence to
hang such an eternal babbler."  "Anan, babbler!" cried Tom, reddening
with passion, and starting up; "I'd have you to know, sir, that I can
bite as well as babble; and that, if I am so minded, I can run upon the
foot after my game without being in fault, as the saying is; and, which
is more, I can shake an old fox by the collar."

How far this young lawyer might have proceeded to prove himself staunch
on the person of the misanthrope, if he had not been prevented, we shall
not determine; but the whole company were alarmed at his looks and
expressions.  Dolly's rosy cheeks assumed an ash colour, while she ran
between the disputants, crying, "Naay, naay--vor the love of God doan't
then, doan't then!"  But Captain Crowe exerted a parental authority over
his nephew, saying, "Avast, Tom, avast!--Snug's the word--we'll have no
boarding, d'ye see.--Haul forward thy chair again, take thy berth, and
proceed with thy story in a direct course, without yawing like a Dutch
yanky."

Tom, thus tutored, recollected himself, resumed his seat, and, after some
pause, plunged at once into the current of narration.  "I told you
before, gemmen, that the gentleman in armour was the only son of Sir
Everhard Greaves, who possessed a free estate of five thousand a year in
our country, and was respected by all his neighbours as much for his
personal merit as for his family fortune.  With respect to his son
Launcelot, whom you have seen, I can remember nothing until he returned
from the university, about the age of seventeen, and then I myself was
not more than ten years old.  The young gemman was at that time in
mourning for his mother; though, God knows, Sir Everhard had more cause
to rejoice than to be afflicted at her death:--for, among friends" (here
he lowered his voice, and looked round the kitchen), "she was very
whimsical, expensive, ill-tempered, and, I'm afraid, a little--upon the--
flightly order--a little touched or so;--but mum for that--the lady is
now dead; and it is my maxim, de mortuis nil nisi bonum.  The young
squire was even then very handsome, and looked remarkably well in his
weepers; but he had an awkward air and shambling gait, stooped mortally,
and was so shy and silent that he would not look a stranger in the face,
nor open his mouth before company.  Whenever he spied a horse or carriage
at the gate, he would make his escape into the garden, and from thence
into the park; where many is the good time and often he has been found
sitting under a tree, with a book in his hand, reading Greek, Latin, and
other foreign linguas.

"Sir Everhard himself was no great scholar, and my father had forgot his
classical learning; and so the rector of the parish was desired to
examine young Launcelot.  It was a long time before he found an
opportunity; the squire always gave him the slip.--At length the parson
catched him in bed of a morning, and, locking the door, to it they went
tooth and nail.  What passed betwixt them the Lord in heaven knows; but
when the doctor came forth, he looked wild and haggard as if he had seen
a ghost, his face as white as paper, and his lips trembling like an
aspen-leaf.  'Parson,' said the knight, 'what is the matter?--how dost
find my son?  I hope he won't turn out a ninny, and disgrace his family?'
The doctor, wiping the sweat from his forehead, replied, with some
hesitation, 'he could not tell--he hoped the best--the squire was to be
sure a very extraordinary young gentleman.'--But the father urging him to
give an explicit answer, he frankly declared, that, in his opinion, the
son would turn out either a mirror of wisdom, or a monument of folly; for
his genius and disposition were altogether preternatural.  The knight was
sorely vexed at this declaration, and signified his displeasure by
saying, the doctor, like a true priest, dealt in mysteries and oracles,
that would admit of different and indeed contrary interpretations.  He
afterwards consulted my father, who had served as a steward upon the
estate for above thirty years, and acquired a considerable share of his
favour.  'Will Clarke,' said he, with tears in his eyes, 'what shall I do
with this unfortunate lad?  I would to God he had never been born; for I
fear he will bring my grey hairs with sorrow to the grave.  When I am
gone, he will throw away the estate, and bring himself to infamy and
ruin, by keeping company with rooks and beggars.--O Will! I could forgive
extravagance in a young man; but it breaks my heart to see my only son
give such repeated proofs of a mean spirit and sordid disposition!'

"Here the old gentleman shed a flood of tears, and not without some
shadow of reason.  By this time Launcelot was grown so reserved to his
father, that he seldom saw him or any of his relations, except when he
was in a manner forced to appear at table, and there his bashfulness
seemed every day to increase.  On the other hand, he had formed some very
strange connexions.  Every morning he visited the stable, where he not
only conversed with the grooms and helpers, but scraped acquaintance with
the horses; he fed his favourites with his own hand, stroked, caressed,
and rode them by turns; till at last they grew so familiar, that, even
when they were a-field at grass, and saw him at a distance, they would
toss their manes, whinny like so many colts at sight of the dam, and,
galloping up to the place where he stood, smell him all over.

"You must know that I myself, though a child, was his companion in all
these excursions.  He took a liking to me on account of my being his
godson, and gave me more money than I knew what to do with.  He had
always plenty of cash for the asking, as my father was ordered to supply
him liberally, the knight thinking that a command of money might help to
raise his thoughts to a proper consideration of his own importance.  He
never could endure a common beggar, that was not either in a state of
infancy or of old age; but, in other respects, he made the guineas fly in
such a manner, as looked more like madness than generosity.  He had no
communication with your rich yeomen, but rather treated them and their
families with studied contempt, because forsooth they pretended to assume
the dress and manners of the gentry.

"They kept their footmen, their saddle horses, and chaises; their wives
and daughters appeared in their jewels, their silks, and their satins,
their negligees and trollopees; their clumsy shanks, like so many shins
of beef, were cased in silk hose and embroidered slippers; their raw red
fingers, gross as the pipes of a chamber organ, which had been employed
in milking the cows, in twirling the mop or churn-staff, being adorned
with diamonds, were taught to thrum the pandola, and even to touch the
keys of the harpsichord!  Nay, in every village they kept a rout, and set
up an assembly; and in one place a hog-butcher was master of the
ceremonies.

"I have heard Mr. Greaves ridicule them for their vanity and awkward
imitation; and therefore, I believe, he avoided all concerns with them,
even when they endeavoured to engage his attention.  It was the lower
sort of people with whom he chiefly conversed, such as ploughmen,
ditchers, and other day-labourers.  To every cottager in the parish he
was a bounteous benefactor.  He was, in the literal sense of the word, a
careful overseer of the poor; for he went from house to house,
industriously inquiring into the distresses of the people.  He repaired
their huts, clothed their backs, filled their bellies, and supplied them
with necessaries for exercising their industry and different occupations.

"I'll give you one instance now, as a specimen of his character:--He and
I, strolling one day on the side of a common, saw two boys picking hips
and haws from the hedges; one seemed to be about five, and the other a
year older; they were both barefoot and ragged, but at the same time fat,
fair, and in good condition.  'Who do you belong to?' said Mr. Greaves.
'To Mary Stile,' replied the oldest, 'the widow that rents one of them
housen.'  'And how dost live, my boy?  Thou lookest fresh and jolly,'
resumed the squire.  'Lived well enough till yesterday,' answered the
child.  'And pray what happened yesterday, my boy?' continued Mr.
Greaves.  'Happened!' said he, 'why, mammy had a coople of little Welsh
keawes, that gi'en milk enough to fill all our bellies; mammy's, and
mine, and Dick's here, and my two little sisters' at hoam:--Yesterday the
squire seized the keawes for rent, God rot'un!  Mammy's gone to bed sick
and sulky; my two sisters be crying at hoam vor vood; and Dick and I be
come hither to pick haws and bullies.'

"My godfather's face grew red as scarlet; he took one of the children in
either hand, and leading them towards the house, found Sir Everhard
talking with my father before the gate.  Instead of avoiding the old
gentleman, as usual, he brushed up to him with a spirit he had never
shown before, and presenting the two ragged boys, 'Surely, sir,' said he,
'you will not countenance that there ruffian, your steward, in oppressing
the widow and fatherless?  On pretence of distraining for the rent of a
cottage, he has robbed the mother of these and other poor infant-orphans
of two cows, which afforded them their whole sustenance.  Shall you be
concerned in tearing the hard-earned morsel from the mouth of indigence?
Shall your name, which has been so long mentioned as a blessing, be now
detested as a curse by the poor, the helpless, and forlorn?  The father
of these babes was once your gamekeeper, who died of a consumption caught
in your service.--You see they are almost naked--I found them plucking
haws and sloes, in order to appease their hunger.  The wretched mother is
starving in a cold cottage, distracted with the cries of other two
infants, clamorous for food; and while her heart is bursting with anguish
and despair, she invokes Heaven to avenge the widow's cause upon the head
of her unrelenting landlord!'

"This unexpected address brought tears into the eyes of the good old
gentleman.  'Will Clarke,' said he to my father, 'how durst you abuse my
authority at this rate?  You who know I have always been a protector, not
an oppressor of the needy and unfortunate.  I charge you, go immediately
and comfort this poor woman with immediate relief; instead of her own
cows, let her have two of the best milch cows of my dairy; they shall
graze in my parks in summer, and be foddered with my hay in winter.--She
shall sit rent-free for life; and I will take care of these her poor
orphans.'

"This was a very affecting scene.  Mr. Launcelot took his father's hand
and kissed it, while the tears ran down his cheeks; and Sir Everhard
embraced his son with great tenderness, crying, 'My dear boy!  God be
praised for having given you such a feeling heart.'  My father himself
was moved, thof a practitioner of the law, and consequently used to
distresses.--He declared, that he had given no directions to distrain;
and that the bailiff must have done it by his own authority.--'If that be
the case,' said the young squire, 'let the inhuman rascal be turned out
of our service.'

