This eBook was produced by Charles Franks and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team.


THE COMING OF CUCULAIN

BY

STANDISH O'GRADY


Author of

"THE TRIUMPH AND PASSING OF CUCULAIN"

"IN THE GATES OF THE NORTH"

"THE FLIGHT OF THE EAGLE"

ETC.


PREFACE

There are three great cycles of Gaelic literature. The first
treats of the gods; the second of the Red Branch Knights of Ulster
and their contemporaries; the third is the so-called Ossianic. Of
the Ossianic, Finn is the chief character; of the Red Branch
cycle, Cuculain, the hero of our tale.

Cuculain and his friends are historical characters, seen as it
were through mists of love and wonder, whom men could not forget,
but for centuries continued to celebrate in countless songs and
stories. They were not literary phantoms, but actual existences;
imaginary and fictitious characters, mere creatures of idle fancy,
do not live and flourish so in the world's memory. And as to the
gigantic stature and superhuman prowess and achievements of those
antique heroes, it must not be forgotten that all art magnifies,
as if in obedience to some strong law; and so, even in our own
times, Grattan, where he stands in artistic bronze, is twice as
great as the real Grattan thundering in the Senate. I will
therefore ask the reader, remembering the large manner of the
antique literature from which our tale is drawn, to forget for a
while that there is such a thing as scientific history, to give
his imagination a holiday, and follow with kindly interest the
singular story of the boyhood of Cuculain, "battle-prop of the
valour and torch of the chivalry of the Ultonians."

I have endeavoured so to tell the story as to give a general idea
of the cycle, and of primitive heroic Irish life as reflected in
that literature, laying the cycle, so far as accessible, under
contribution to furnish forth the tale. Within a short compass I
would bring before swift modern readers the more striking aspects
of a literature so vast and archaic as to repel all but students.


STANDISH O'GRADY

A TRIBUTE BY A. E.


In this age we read so much that we lay too great a burden on the
imagination. It is unable to create images which are the spiritual
equivalent of the words on the printed page, and reading becomes
for too many an occupation of the eye rather than of the mind. How
rarely--out of the multitude of volumes a man reads in his
lifetime--can he remember where or when he read any particular
book, or with any vividness recall the mood it evoked in him. When
I close my eyes, and brood in memory over the books which most
profoundly affected me, I find none excited my imagination more
than Standish O'Grady's epical narrative of Cuculain. Whitman said
of his Leaves of Grass, "Camerado, this is no book: who touches
this touches a man" and O'Grady might have boasted of his Bardic
History of Ireland, written with his whole being, that there was
more than a man in it, there was the soul of a people, its noblest
and most exalted life symbolised in the story of one heroic
character.

With reference to Ireland, I was at the time I read like many
others who were bereaved of the history of their race. I was as a
man who, through some accident, had lost memory of his past, who
could recall no more than a few months of new life, and could not
say to what songs his cradle had been rocked, what mother had
nursed him, who were the playmates of childhood or by what woods
and streams he had wandered. When I read O'Grady I was as such a
man who suddenly feels ancient memories rushing at him, and knows
he was born in a royal house, that he had mixed with the mighty of
heaven and earth and had the very noblest for his companions. It
was the memory of race which rose up within me as I read, and I
felt exalted as one who learns he is among the children of kings.
That is what O'Grady did for me and for others who were my
contemporaries, and I welcome these reprints of his tales in the
hope that he will go on magically recreating for generations yet
unborn the ancestral life of their race in Ireland. For many
centuries the youth of Ireland as it grew up was made aware of the
life of bygone ages, and there were always some who remade
themselves in the heroic mould before they passed on. The
sentiment engendered by the Gaelic literature was an arcane
presence, though unconscious of itself, in those who for the past
hundred years had learned another speech. In O'Grady's writings
the submerged river of national culture rose up again, a shining
torrent, and I realised as I bathed in that stream, that the
greatest spiritual evil one nation could inflict on another was to
cut off from it the story of the national soul. For not all music
can be played upon any instrument, and human nature for most of us
is like a harp on which can be rendered the music written for the
harp but not that written for the violin. The harp strings quiver
for the harp-player alone, and he who can utter his passion
through the violin is silent before an unfamiliar instrument. That
is why the Irish have rarely been deeply stirred by English
literature though it is one of the great literatures of the world.
Our history was different and the evolutionary product was a
peculiarity of character, and the strings of our being vibrate
most in ecstasy when the music evokes ancestral moods or embodies
emotions akin to these. I am not going to argue the comparative
worth of the Gaelic and English tradition. All I can say is that
the traditions of our own country move us more than the traditions
of any other. Even if there was not essential greatness in them we
would love them for the same reasons which bring back so many
exiles to revisit the haunts of childhood. But there was essential
greatness in that neglected bardic literature which O'Grady was
the first to reveal in a noble manner. He had the spirit of an
ancient epic poet. He is a comrade of Homer, his birth delayed in
time perhaps that he might renew for a sophisticated people the
elemental simplicity and hardihood men had when the world was
young and manhood was prized more than any of its parts, more than
thought or beauty or feeling. He has created for us or
rediscovered one figure which looms in the imagination as a high
comrade of Hector, Achilles, Ulysses, Rama or Yudisthira, as great
in spirit as any. Who could extol enough his Cuculain, that
incarnation of Gaelic chivalry, the fire and gentleness, the
beauty and heroic ardour or the imaginative splendour of the
episodes in his retelling of the ancient story. There are writers
who bewitch us by a magical use of words, whose lines glitter like
jewels, whose effects are gained by an elaborate art and who deal
with the subtlest emotions. Others again are simple as an Egyptian
image and yet are more impressive and you remember them less for
the sentence than for a grandiose effect. They are not so much
concerned with the art of words as with the creation of great
images informed with magnificence of spirit. They are not lesser
artists but greater, for there is a greater art in the
simplification of form in the statue of Memnon than there is in
the intricate detail of a bronze by Benvenuto Cellini. Standish
O'Grady had in his best moments that epic wholeness and
simplicity, and the figure of Cuculain amid his companions of the
Red Branch which he discovered and refashioned for us is I think
the greatest spiritual gift any Irishman for centuries has given
to Ireland.

I know it will be said that this is a scientific age, the world is
so full of necessitous life that it is waste of time for young
Ireland to brood upon tales of legendary heroes, who fought with
enchanters, who harnessed wild fairy horses to magic chariots and
who talked with the ancient gods, and that it would be much better
for youth to be scientific and practical. Do not believe it, dear
Irish boy, dear Irish girl. I know as well as any the economic
needs of our people. They must not be overlooked, but keep still
in your hearts some desires which might enter Paradise. Keep in
your souls some images of magnificence so that hereafter the halls
of heaven and the divine folk may not seem altogether alien to the
spirit. These legends have passed the test of generations for
century after century, and they were treasured and passed on to
those who followed, and that was because there was something in
them akin to the immortal spirit. Humanity cannot carry with it
through time the memory of all its deeds and imaginations, and it
burdens itself only in a new era with what was highest among the
imaginations of the ancestors. What is essentially noble is never
out of date. The figures carved by Phidias for the Parthenon still
shine by the side of the greatest modern sculpture. There has been
no evolution of the human form to a greater beauty than the
ancient Greeks saw and the forms they carved are not strange to
us, and if this is true of the outward form it is true of the
indwelling spirit. What is essentially noble is contemporary with
all that is splendid to-day, and, until the mass of men are equal
in spirit, the great figures of the past will affect us less as
memories than as prophecies of the Golden Age to which youth is
ever hurrying in its heart.

O'Grady in his stories of the Red Branch rescued from the past
what was contemporary to the best in us to-day, and he was equal
in his gifts as a writer to the greatest of his bardic
predecessors in Ireland. His sentences are charged with a heroic
energy, and, when he is telling a great tale, their rise and fall
are like the flashing and falling of the bright sword of some
great champion in battle, or the onset and withdrawal of Atlantic
surges. He can at need be beautifully tender and quiet. Who that
has read his tale of the young Finn and the Seven Ancients will
forget the weeping of Finn over the kindness of the famine-
stricken old men, and their wonder at his weeping and the self-
forgetful pathos of their meditation unconscious that it was their
own sacrifice called forth the tears of Finn. "Youth," they said,
"has many sorrows that cold age cannot comprehend."

There are critics repelled by the abounding energy in O'Grady's
sentences. It is easy to point to faults due to excess and
abundance, but how rare in literature is that heroic energy and
power. There is something arcane and elemental in it, a quality
that the most careful stylist cannot attain, however he uses the
file, however subtle he is. O'Grady has noticed this power in the
ancient bards and we find it in his own writing. It ran all
through the Bardic History, the Critical and Philosophical
History, and through the political books, "The Tory Democracy" and
"All Ireland." There is this imaginative energy in the tale of
Cuculain, in all its episodes, the slaying of the hound, the
capture of the Laity Macha, the hunting of the enchanted deer, the
capture of the wild swans, the fight at the ford and the awakening
of the Red Branch. In the later tale of Red Hugh which he calls
"The Flight of the Eagle" there is the same quality of power
joined with a shining simplicity in the narrative which rises into
a poetic ecstacy in that wonderful chapter where Red Hugh,
escaping from the Pale, rides through the Mountain Gates of
Ulster, and sees high above him Slieve Mullion, a mountain of the
Gods, the birthplace of legend "more mythic than Avernus" and
O'Grady evokes for us and his hero the legendary past, and the
great hill seems to be like Mount Sinai, thronged with immortals,
and it lives and speaks to the fugitive boy, "the last great
secular champion of the Gael," and inspires him for the fulfilment
of his destiny. We might say of Red Hugh and indeed of all
O'Grady's heroes that they are the spiritual progeny of Cuculain.
From Red Hugh down to the boys who have such enchanting adventures
in "Lost on Du Corrig" and "The Chain of Gold" they have all a
natural and hardy purity of mind, a beautiful simplicity of
character, and one can imagine them all in an hour of need, being
faithful to any trust like the darling of the Red Branch. These
shining lads never grew up amid books. They are as much children
of nature as the Lucy of Wordsworth's poetry. It might be said of
them as the poet of the Kalevala sang of himself,

   "Winds and waters my instructors."

These were O'Grady's own earliest companions and no man can find
better comrades than earth, water, air and sun. I imagine
O'Grady's own youth was not so very different from the youth of
Red Hugh before his captivity; that he lived on the wild and rocky
western coast, that he rowed in coracles, explored the caves,
spoke much with hardy natural people, fishermen and workers on the
land, primitive folk, simple in speech, but with that fundamental
depth men have who are much in nature in companionship with the
elements, the elder brothers of humanity: it must have been out of
such a boyhood and such intimacies with natural and
unsophisticated people that there came to him the understanding of
the heroes of the Red Branch. How pallid, beside the ruddy
chivalry who pass huge and fleet and bright through O'Grady's
pages, appear Tennyson's bloodless Knights of the Round Table,
fabricated in the study to be read in the drawing-room, as anaemic
as Burne Jones' lifeless men in armour. The heroes of ancient
Irish legend reincarnated in the mind of a man who could breathe
into them the fire of life, caught from sun and wind, their
ancient deities, and send them, forth to the world to do greater
deeds, to act through many men and speak through many voices. What
sorcery was in the Irish mind that it has taken so many years to
win but a little recognition for this splendid spirit; and that
others who came after him, who diluted the pure fiery wine of
romance he gave us with literary water, should be as well known or
more widely read. For my own part I can only point back to him and
say whatever is Irish in me he kindled to life, and I am humble
when I read his epic tale, feeling how much greater a thing it is
for the soul of a writer to have been the habitation of a demigod
than to have had the subtlest intellections.

We praise the man who rushes into a burning mansion and brings out
its greatest treasure. So ought we to praise this man who rescued
from the perishing Gaelic tradition its darling hero and restored
him to us, and I think now that Cuculain will not perish, and he
will be invisibly present at many a council of youth, and he will
be the daring which lifts the will beyond itself and fires it for
great causes, and he will also be the courtesy which shall
overcome the enemy that nothing else may overcome.

I am sure that Standish O'Grady would rather I should speak of his
work and its bearing on the spiritual life of Ireland, than about
himself, and, because I think so, in this reverie I have followed
no set plan but have let my thoughts run as they will. But I would
not have any to think that this man was only a writer, or that he
could have had the heroes of the past for spiritual companions,
without himself being inspired to fight dragons and wizardy. I
have sometimes regretted that contemporary politics drew O'Grady
away from the work he began so greatly. I have said to myself he
might have given us an Oscar, a Diarmuid or a Caoilte, an equal
comrade to Cuculain, but he could not, being lit up by the spirit
of his hero, be merely the bard and not the fighter, and no man in
Ireland intervened in the affairs of his country with a superior
nobility of aim. He was the last champion of the Irish aristocracy
and still more the voice of conscience for them, and he spoke to
them of their duty to the nation as one might imagine some
fearless prophet speaking to a council of degenerate princes. When
the aristocracy failed Ireland he bade them farewell, and wrote
the epitaph of their class in words whose scorn we almost forget
because of their sounding melody and beauty. He turned his mind to
the problems of democracy and more especially of those workers who
are trapped in the city, and he pointed out for them the way of
escape and how they might renew life in the green fields close to
Earth, their ancient mother and nurse. He used too exalted a
language for those to whom he spoke to understand, and it might
seem that all these vehement appeals had failed but that we know
that what is fine never really fails. When a man is in advance of
his age, a generation unborn when he speaks, is born in due time
and finds in him its inspiration. O'Grady may have failed in his
appeal to the aristocracy of his own time but he may yet create an
aristocracy of character and intellect in Ireland. The political
and social writings will remain to uplift and inspire and to
remind us that the man who wrote the stories of heroes had a
bravery of his own and a wisdom of his own. I owe so much to
Standish O'Grady that I would like to leave it on record that it
was he who made me conscious and proud of my country, and recalled
my mind, that might have wandered otherwise over too wide and
vague a field of thought, to think of the earth under my feet and
the children of our common mother. There hangs in the Municipal
Gallery of Dublin the portrait of a man with brooding eyes, and
scrawled on the canvas is the subject of his bitter meditation,
"The Lost Land." I hope that O'Grady will find before he goes back
to Tir-na-noge that Ireland has found again through him what
seemed lost for ever, the law of its own being, and its memories
which go back to the beginning of the world.


THE COMING OF CUCULAIN


CHAPTER I

THE RED BRANCH


     "There were giants in the earth in those days, the same
     were mighty men which were of yore men of renown."


The Red Branch feasted one night in their great hall at Emain
Macha. So vast was the hall that a man, such as men are now,
standing in the centre and shouting his loudest, would not be
heard at the circumference, yet the low laughter of the King
sitting at one end was clearly audible to those who sat around the
Champion at the other. The sons of Dithorba made it, giants of the
elder time, labouring there under the brazen shoutings of Macha
and the roar of her sounding thongs. Its length was a mile and
nine furlongs and a cubit. With her brooch pin she ploughed its
outline upon the plain, and its breadth was not much less. Trees
such as the earth nourished then upheld the massy roof beneath
which feasted that heroic brood, the great-hearted children of
Rury, huge offspring of the gods and giants of the dawn of time.
For mighty exceedingly were these men. At the noise of them
running to battle all Ireland shook, and the illimitable Lir
[Footnote: Lir was the sea-god, the Oceanns of the Celt; no doubt
the same as the British Lear, the wild, white-headed old king, who
had such singular daughters; two, monsters of cruelty, and one,
exquisitely sweet, kind, and serene, viz.: Storm, Hurricane, and
Calm.] trembled in his watery halls; the roar of their brazen
chariots reverberated from the solid canopy of heaven, and their
war-steeds drank rivers dry.

A vast murmur rose from the assembly, for like distant thunder or
the far-off murmuring of agitated waters was the continuous hum of
their blended conversation and laughter, while, ever and anon,
cleaving the many-tongued confusion, uprose friendly voices,
clearer and stronger than battle-trumpets, when one hero
challenged another to drink, wishing him victory and success, and
his words rang round the hollow dome. Innumerable candles, tall as
spears, illuminated the scene. The eyes of the heroes sparkled,
and their faces, white and ruddy, beamed with festal mirth and
mutual affection. Their yellow hair shone. Their banqueting
attire, white and scarlet, glowed against the outer gloom. Their
round brooches and mantle-pins of gold, or silver, or golden
bronze, their drinking vessels and instruments of festivity,
flashed and glittered in the light. They rejoiced in their glory
and their might, and in the inviolable amity in which they were
knit together, a host of comrades, a knot of heroic valour and
affection which no strength or cunning, and no power, seen or
unseen, could ever relax or untie.

At one extremity of the vast hall, upon a raised seat, sat their
young king, Concobar Mac Nessa, slender, handsome, and upright. A
canopy of bronze, round as the bent sling of the Sun-god, the
long-handed, far-shooting son of Ethlend, [Footnote: This was the
god Lu Lam-fada, i.e., Lu, the Long-Handed. The rainbow was his
sling. Remember that the rod sling, familiar enough now to Irish
boys, was the weapon of the ancient Irish, and not the sling which
is made of two cords.] encircled his head. At his right hand lay a
staff of silver. Far away at the other end of the hall, on a
raised seat, sat the Champion Fergus Mac Roy, like a colossus. The
stars and clouds of night were round his head and shoulders seen
through the wide and high entrance of the dun, whose doors no man
had ever seen closed and barred. Aloft, suspended from the dim
rafters, hung the naked forms of great men clear against the dark
dome, having the cords of their slaughter around their necks and
their white limbs splashed with blood. Kings were they who had
murmured against the sovereignty of the Red Branch. Through the
wide doorway out of the night flew a huge bird, black and grey,
unseen, and soaring upwards sat upon the rafters, its eyes like
burning fire. It was the Mor-Reega, [Footnote: There were three
war goddesses:--(1) Badb (pronounced Byve); (2) Macha, already
referred to; (3) The Mor-Rigu or Mor-Reega, who wag the greatest
of the three.] or Great Queen, the far-striding terrible daughter
of Iarnmas (Iron-Death). Her voice was like the shouting of ten
thousand men. Dear to her were these heroes. More she rejoiced in
them feasting than in the battle-prowess of the rest.

When supper was ended their bard, in his singing robes and girt
around the temples with a golden fillet, stood up and sang. He
sang how once a king of the Ultonians, having plunged into the
sea-depths, there slew a monster which had wrought much havoc
amongst fishers and seafaring men. The heroes attended to his
song, leaning forward with bright eyes. They applauded the song
and the singer, and praised the valour of the heroic man
[Footnote: This was Fergus Mac Leda, Fergus, son of Leda, one of
the more ancient kings of Ulster. His contest with the sea-monster
is the theme of a heroic tale.] who had done that deed. Then the
champion struck the table with his clenched hand, and addressed
the assembly. Wrath and sorrow were in his voice. It resembled the
brool of lions heard afar by seafaring men upon some savage shore
on a still night.

"Famous deeds," he said, "are not wrought now amongst the Red
Branch. I think we are all become women. I grow weary of these
huntings in the morning and mimic exercises of war, and this
training of steeds and careering of brazen chariots stained never
with aught but dust and mire, and these unearned feastings at
night and vain applause of the brave deeds of our forefathers.
Come now, let us make an end of this. Let us conquer Banba
[Footnote: One of Ireland's many names.] wholly in all her green
borders, and let the realms of Lir, which sustain no foot of man,
be the limit of our sovereignty. Let us gather the tributes of all
Ireland, after many battles and much warlike toil. Then more
sweetly shall we drink while the bards chaunt our own prowess.
Once I knew a coward who boasted endlessly about his forefathers,
and at last my anger rose, and with a flat hand I slew him in the
middle of his speech, and paid no eric, for he was nothing. We
have the blood of heroes in our veins, and we sit here nightly
boasting about them; about Rury, whose name we bear, being all his
children; and Macha the warrioress, who brought hither bound the
sons of Dithorba and made them rear this mighty dun; and Combat
son of Fiontann; and my namesake Fergus,[Footnote: This was the
king already referred to who slew the sea-monster. The monster had
left upon him that mark and memorial of the struggle.] whose
crooked mouth was no dishonour, and the rest of our hero sires;
and we consume the rents and tributes of Ulster which they by
their prowess conquered to us, and which flow hither in abundance
from every corner of the province. Valiant men, too, will one day
come hither and slay us as I slew that boaster, and here in Emain
Macha their bards will praise them. Then in the halls of the dead
shall we say to our sires, 'All that you got for us by your blood
and your sweat that have we lost, and the glory of the Red Branch
is at an end.'"

That speech was pleasing to the Red Branch, and they cried out
that Fergus Mac Roy had spoken well. Then all at once, on a sudden
impulse, they sang the battle-song of the Ultonians, and shouted
for the war so that the building quaked and rocked, and in the
hall of the weapons there was a clangour of falling shields, and
men died that night for extreme dread, so mightily shouted the
Ultonians around their king and around Fergus. When the echoes and
reverberations of that shout ceased to sound in the vaulted roof
and in the far recesses and galleries, then there arose somewhere
upon the night a clear chorus of treble voices, singing, too, the
war-chant of the Ultonians, as when rising out of the clangour of
brazen instruments of music there shrills forth the clear sound of
fifes. For the immature scions of the Red Branch, boys and tender
youths, awakened out of slumber, heard them, and from remote
dormitories responded to their sires, and they cried aloud
together and shouted. The trees of Ulster shed their early leaves
and buds at that shout, and birds fell dead from the branches.

Concobar struck the brazen canopy with his silver rod. The smitten
brass rang like a bell, and the Ultonians in silence hearkened for
the words of their clear-voiced king.

"No ruler of men," he said, "however masterful and imperious,
could withstand this torrent of martial ardour which rolls to-
night through the souls of the children of Rury, still less I,
newly come to this high throne, having been but as it were
yesterday your comrade and equal, till Fergus, to my grief,
resigned the sovereignty, and caused me, a boy, to be made king of
Ulla and captain of the Red Branch. But now I say, ere we consider
what province or territory shall first see the embattled Red
Branch cross her borders, let us enquire of Cathvah the Ard-Druid,
whether the omens be propitious, and whether through his art he is
able to reveal to us some rite to be performed or prohibition to
be observed."

That proposal was not pleasing to Fergus, but it pleased the Red
Branch, and they praised the wisdom of their king.

Then Cathvah the Ard-Druid [Footnote: High Druid, or Chief Druid.
Similarly we have Ard-Ri or High King.] spake.

"It hath been foretold," he said, "long since, that the Ultonians
shall win glory such as never was and never will be, and that
their fame shall endure till the world's end. But, first, there
are prophecies to be accomplished and predictions to be fulfilled.
For ere these things may be there shall come a child to Emain
Macha, attended by clear portents from the gods; through him shall
arise our deathless fame. Also it hath been foretold that there
shall be great divisions and fratricidal strife amongst the
children of Rury, a storm of war which shall strip the Red Branch
nigh bare."

Fergus was wroth at this, and spoke words of scorn concerning the
diviner, and concerning all omens, prohibitions, and prophecies.
Concobar, too, and all the Red Branch, rebuked the prophet. Yet he
stood against them like a rock warred on by winds which stand
immovable, let them rage as they will, and refused to take back
his words. Then said Concobar:

"Many are the prophecies which came wandering down upon the mouths
of men, but they are not all to be trusted alike. Of those which
have passed thy lips, O Cathvah, we utterly reject the last, and
think the less of thee for having reported it. But the former
which concerns the child of promise hath been ever held a sure
prophecy, and as such passed down through all the diviners from
the time of Amargin, the son of Milesius, who first prophesied for
the Gael. And now being arch-king of the Ultonians, I command thee
to divine for us when the coming of the child shall be."

Then Cathvah, the Ard-Druid, put on his divining apparel and took
his divining instruments in his hands, and made his symbols of
power upon the air. And at first he was silent, and, being in a
trance, stared out before him with wide eyes full of wonder and
amazement, directing his gaze to the east. In the end he cried out
with a loud voice, and prophesying, sang this lay:

    "Yea, he is coming. He draweth nigh.
    Verily It is he whom I behold--
    The predicted one--the child of many prophecies--
    Chief flower of the Branch that is over all--
    The mainstay of Emaiti Macha--the battle-prop of the Ultonians--
    The torch of the valour and chivalry of the North--
    The star that is to shine for ever upon the forehead of the Gael.
    It is he who slumbers upon Slieve Fuad--
    The child who is like a star--
    Like a star upon Slieve Fuad.
    There is a light around him never kindled at the hearth of Lu,
    The Grey of Macha keeps watch and ward for him,
        [Footnote: Madia's celebrated grey war-steed. The meaning
         of the allusion will be understood presently.]
    And the whole mountain is filled with the Tuatha de Danan."
       [Footnote: These were the gods of the pagan Irish.
        Tuatha=nations, De=gods, Danan=of Dana. The remark
        just made as regards the Sun seems to have some
        application to the Moon. There are a certain number of
        instances on record that what is commonly spoken of as the black
body of the Moon does, under certain circumstances, display traces
of red which has been variously spoken of as "crimson," "dull
coppery," "reddish-brownish" and "dull glowing coal."

SHADOW BANDS.

Let us suppose that we have a chance of observing a total eclipse
of the Sun; have completed all our preliminary preparations; have
taken note of everything which needs to be noted or suggests itself
for that purpose up till nearly the grand climax; and that the clock
tells us that we are within, say, five minutes of totality.

Somewhere about this time perhaps we shall be able to detect, dancing
across the landscape, singular wavy lines of light and shade.

These are the "Shadow Bands," as they are called.

The phrase is curiously inexplicit, but seemingly cannot be improved
upon at present because the philosophy of these appearances--their
origin and the laws which regulate their visibility--are unknown,
perhaps because amid the multitude of other things to think about
sufficient attention has hitherto not been paid to the study of them.

   These shadow bands are most
   striking if a high plastered wall, such as the front of a stone
or stuccoed house, is in their track as a screen to receive them.

                  The shadow bands seem to vary both in breadth and distance apart
at different eclipses, and also in the speed with which they pass
along.

   Though, as already stated, little is known of their origin yet they
may be conceived to be due to irregularities in the atmospheric
refraction of the slender beam of light coming from the waning or
the waxing crescent of the Sun, for be it understood they may be
visible after totality as well as before it.

                  It is to be remarked that they have never been photographed.

[Illustration: FIG. 6.--SHADOW BANDS.]
In addition to the shadow bands there are instances on record of
the limbs of the Sun's crescent appearing to undulate violently
on the approach of totality. These undulations were noticed by
Airy in 1842 about 6 minutes before totality. Blake,
in America in 1869, observed the same phenomenon 8 minutes before
totality. In other cases the interval would seem to have been
very much shorter--a mere matter of seconds.

A very singular observation was made in 1858 by Mr. J. D. Smith
at Laycock Abbey, Wiltshire, on the occasion of the annular eclipse
of that year.

He says[13]:--"Both my brother and myself were distinctly
impressed with the conviction that the withdrawal of light
was not continuous, but by pulsations, or, as it were, waves of
obscuration, the darkness increasing by strokes which sensibly
smote the eye, and were repeated distinctly some five or seven times
after we had remarked the phenomenon and before the time of greatest
obscuration.

This did not occur on the return of light, which came back
continuously and without shock or break."

Rümker mentions that though this phenomenon was very apparent to
the naked eye it was not visible in the telescope.

Faint rays or brushes of light sometimes seem to spring from the
diminishing crescent of the Sun. These rays generally are very
transient and not very conspicuous, and perhaps must be distinguished
as regards both their appearance and their origin from the more
striking rays which are usually seen a few minutes before or after
totality, and which are generally associated with, or even deemed
to belong to, the Corona.

Fig. 7 represents these rays as seen in Spain on July 18, 1860,
some minutes after totality. They are described as having been
well defined, but at some moments more marked than at others, and
though well-defined yet constantly varying. Radiations of light
more or less of the character just described may probably be
regarded as a standing feature of every total eclipse.

[Illustration: FIG. 7.--RAYS OF LIGHT SEEN NEAR THE TIME OF
TOTALITY.]

THE APPROACH OF TOTALITY.

The next thing to think about and to look out for is the approach
of the Moon's shadow. I have mentioned this already,[14] and
also the appalling velocity with which it seems to approach.
By this time the coming darkness, which characterises every total
phase, will have reached an advanced stage of development. The
darkness begins to be felt. The events which manifest themselves
at this juncture on the Earth (rather than in the sky around the
Sun) are so graphically described by the American writer whom
I have already quoted, and who writes, moreover, from personal
experience, that I cannot do better than transfer her striking
account to my pages.[15] "Then, with frightful velocity, the actual
shadow of the Moon is often seen approaching, a tangible darkness
advancing almost like a wall, swift as imagination, silent as
doom. The immensity of nature never comes quite so near as
then, and strong must be the nerves not to quiver as this blue-black
shadow rushes upon the spectator with incredible speed. A
vast, palpable presence seems overwhelming the world. The blue
sky changes to gray or dull purple, speedily becoming more
dusky, and a death-like trance seizes upon everything earthly.
Birds, with terrified cries, fly bewildered for a moment, and
then silently seek their night-quarters.
Bats emerge stealthily.

Sensitive flowers, the scarlet pimpernel, the African mimosa,
close their delicate petals, and a sense of hushed expectancy
deepens with the darkness.

An assembled crowd is awed into absolute silence almost invariably.
Trivial chatter and senseless joking cease. Sometimes the
shadow engulfs the observer smoothly, sometimes apparently with
jerks; but all the world might well be dead and cold and
turned to ashes. Often the very air seems to hold its breath for
sympathy; at other times a lull suddenly awakens into a strange
wind, blowing with unnatural effect. Then out upon the darkness,
gruesome but sublime, flashes the glory of the incomparable corona,
a silvery, soft, unearthly light, with radiant streamers,
stretching at times millions of uncomprehended miles into space,
while the rosy, flaming protuberances skirt the black rim of the
Moon in ethereal splendour. It becomes curiously cold, dew
frequently forms, and the chill is perhaps mental as well as
physical.

Suddenly, instantaneous as a lightning flash, an arrow of actual
sunlight strikes the landscape, and Earth comes to life again,
while corona and protuberances melt into the returning brilliance,
and occasionally the receding lunar shadow is glimpsed as it
flies away with the tremendous speed of its approach."
In connection with the approach of the Moon's shadow, it is to
be noted that at totality the heavens appear in a certain sense
to descend upon the Earth. If an observer is looking upwards
towards the zenith over his head, he will see the clouds appear to
drop towards the Earth, and the surrounding gloom seems also
to have the effect of vitiating one's estimate of distances. To an
observer upon a high hill, a plain below him appears to become
more distant. Although what has been called the descent of the
clouds (that is to say their appearance of growing proximity) is
most manifest immediately before the totality, yet a sense of
growing nearness may sometimes be noticed a very considerable time
before the total phase is reached.

Whilst on the subject of clouds, it may be mentioned that although
there is in the vault of heaven generally during the total phase
an appreciable sensation of black darkness, more or less absolute,
that is to say, either blackish or greyish, yet in certain regions
of the sky, (generally in the direction of the horizon) the clouds,
when there are any, often exhibit colours in strata, orange hue
below and red above, with indigo or grey or black higher up still,
right away to the Sun's place.

The cause of these differences is to be found in the fact that the
lower part of the atmosphere within the area of the Moon's shadow
is, under the circumstances in question, illuminated by light which
having passed through many miles of atmosphere near to the Earth's
surface, has lost much from the violet end of its spectrum, leaving
an undue proportion of the red end.

     On certain occasions iridescent or rainbow-tinted clouds may be
seen in the vicinity of the Sun, either before, or during, or after
totality, depending on circumstances unknown.

                    Such clouds have been observed at all these three stages of a total
eclipse.

     The effects of course are
     atmospheric, and
     have no physical connection with
     either Sun or Moon.
     
     

                    THE DARKNESS OF TOTALITY.

With respect to the general darkness which prevails during totality,
great discrepancies appear in the accounts, not only as between
different eclipses, but in respect of the same eclipse observed
by different people at different places. Perhaps the commonest
test applied by most observers is that of the facility or
difficulty of reading the faces of chronometers or watches.

Sometimes this is done readily, at other times with difficulty.
In India in 1868, one observer stated that it was impossible to
recognise a person's face three yards off, and lamplight was
needed for reading his chronometer. On the other hand in Spain in
1860, it was noted that a thermometer, as well as the finest
hand-writing, could be read easily. The foregoing remarks apply
to the state of things in the open air. In 1860, it was stated
that inside a house in Spain the darkness was so great that people
moving about had to take great care lest they should run violently
against the household furniture.

Perhaps on the whole it may be said that the darkness of an
ordinary totality is decidedly greater than that of a full Moon
night.

Many observers have noted during totality that even when there has
not been any very extreme amount of absolute darkness, yet the ruddy
light already mentioned as prevailing towards the horizon often
gives rise to weird unearthly effects, so that the faces of
bystanders assume a sickly livid hue not unlike that which results
from the light of burning salt.

METEOROLOGICAL AND OTHER EFFECTS.

It is very generally noticed that great changes take place in the
meteorological conditions of the atmosphere as an eclipse of the
Sun runs its course from partial phase to totality, and back
again to partial phase. It goes without saying that the obstruction
of the solar rays by the oncoming Moon would necessarily lead
to a steady and considerable diminution in the general temperature
of the air. This has often been made the matter of exact
thermometric record, but it is not equally obvious why marked
changes in the wind should take place. As the partial phase
proceeds it is very usual for the wind to rise or blow in gusts
and to die away during totality, though there are many exceptions
to this, and it can hardly be called a rule.

The depression of temperature varies very much indeed according
to the locality where the eclipse is being observed and the local
thermometric conditions which usually prevail. The actual depression
will often amount to 10° or 20° and the deposit of dew is occasionally
noticed.

In addition to the general effects of a total solar eclipse on
men, animals, and plants as summarised in the extract already
made from Mrs.
Todd's book a few additional particulars may be given culled from
many recorded observations. Flowers and leaves which ordinarily
close at night begin long before totality to show signs of closing
up. Thus we are told that in 1836 "the crocus, gentian and anemone
partially closed their flowers and reopened them as the phenomenon
passed off: and a delicate South African mimosa which we had reared
from a seed entirely folded its pinnate leaves until the Sun was
uncovered." In 1851 "the night violet, which shortly before the
beginning of the eclipse had little of its agreeable scent
about it, smelt strongly during the totality."
In the insect world ants have been noticed to go on working during
totality, whilst grasshoppers are stilled by the darkness, and
earth-worms come to the surface. Birds of all kinds seem always
upset in their habits, almost invariably going to roost as the
darkness becomes intensified before totality.

In 1868 "a small cock which had beforehand been actively
employed in grubbing about in the sand went to sleep with his
head under his wing and slept for about 10 minutes, and on waking
uttered an expression of surprise, but did not crow." In 1869 mention
is made of an unruly cow "accustomed to jump into a corn-field
at night" being found to have trespassed into the said corn-field
during the total phase.

The thrilling descriptions of the effects of the oncoming
darkness of totality, derived from the records of past total
eclipses, are not likely to be improved upon in the future, for
we shall receive them more and more from amateurs and less and
less from astronomical experts.
Every additional total eclipse which happens testifies to the fact
that the time and thoughts of these latter classes of people will
be to an increasing degree dedicated to instrumental work rather
than to simple naked eye or even telescopic observation. The
spectroscope and the camera are steadily ousting the simple
telescope of every sort and unassisted eye observations from solar
eclipse work.

Mrs.

Todd has the following apt remarks by way of summary of the results
to an individual of observing a total eclipse of the Sun:--"I doubt
if the effect of witnessing a total eclipse ever quite passes away.

     The impression is singularly vivid and quieting for days, and can
never be wholly lost.

                      A startling nearness to the gigantic forces of Nature and their
inconceivable operation seems to have been established.

Personalities and towns and cities, and hates and jealousies, and
even mundane hopes, grow very small and very far away."
FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 13: _Month. Not._, R.A.S., vol. xviii. p. 251.]
[Footnote 14: See p. 36 (_ante_).]
[Footnote 15: Mrs. D. P. Todd, _Total Eclipses of the
Sun_, p. 21.]

CHAPTER VI.

WHAT IS OBSERVED DURING THE TOTAL PHASE OF AN ECLIPSE OF
THE SUN.

The central feature of every total eclipse of the Sun is undoubtedly
the Corona[16] and the phenomena connected with it; but immediately
before the extinction of the Sun's light and incidental thereto
there are some minor features which must be briefly noticed.

[Illustration: FIG. 8.--BRUSHES OF LIGHT.]
The Corona first makes its appearance on the side of the dark Moon
opposite to the disappearing crescent, but brushes of light are
sometimes observed on the same side, along the convex limb of the
disappearing crescent.

The appearance of the brushes will be sufficiently realised
by an inspection of the annexed engraving without the necessity
of any further verbal description.

These brushes are little, if at all, coloured, and must not be
confused with the "Red Flames" or "Prominences" hereafter to be
described.

BAILY'S BEADS.

When the disc of the Moon has advanced so much over that of
the Sun as to have reduced the Sun almost to the narrowest possible
crescent of light, it is generally noticed that at a certain stage
the crescent suddenly breaks up into a succession of spots of light.

These spots are sometimes spoken of as "rounded" spots, but it
is very doubtful whether (certainly in view of their supposed
cause) they could possibly be deemed ever to possess an
outline, which by any stretch, could be called "rounded." Collating
the recorded descriptions, some such phrase as "shapeless
beads" of light would seem to be the most suitable designation.
These are observed to form before the total phase, and often
also after the total phase has passed. Under the latter circumstances,
the beads of light eventually run one into another, like so many
small drops of water merging into one big one. The commonly received
explanation of "Baily's Beads" is that they are no more than portions
of the Sun's disc, seen through valleys between mountains of the
Moon, the said mountains being the cause why the bright patches are
discontinuous.

It is exceedingly doubtful whether this is the true explanation.
The whole question is involved in great uncertainty, and well
deserves careful study during future eclipses; but this it
is not likely to get, in view of the current fashion of every
sufficiently skilled observer concentrating his attention on matters
connected with the solar Corona (observed spectroscopically or
otherwise), to the exclusion of what may be called older subjects
of study.

I will dismiss Baily's Beads from our consideration with the remark
that the first photograph of them was obtained at Ottumwa, Illinois,
U.S., during the eclipse of 1869.

[Illustration: FIG. 9.--"BAILY'S BEADS," FOUR STAGES, AT BRIEF
INTERVALS.

MAY 15, 1836.]
"Baily's Beads" received their name from Mr. Francis
Baily, who, in 1836, for the first time exhaustively described them;
but they were probably seen and even mentioned long before his
time. At the total eclipse of the Sun, seen at Penobscot in North
America, on October 27, 1780, they would seem to have been
noticed, and perhaps even earlier than that date.

Almost coincident with the appearance of Baily's Beads, that
is, either just before or just after, and also just before or just
after the absolute totality (there seems no certain rule of
time) jets of red flame are seen to dart out from behind
the disc of the Moon. It is now quite recognised as a certain fact
that these "Red Flames" belong to the Sun and are outbursts
of hydrogen gas. Moreover, they are now commonly called "Prominences,"
and with the improved methods of modern science may be seen
almost at any time when the Sun is suitably approached; and they
are not restricted in their appearance to the time when the Sun
is totally eclipsed as was long supposed.

Truly it was a
marvellous stroke for one so young. As he went for his ball the
boy stood still before the window. "Give me thy blessing, dear
mother," he said.

"Win victory and blessing for ever, O Setanta," she answered.
"Truly thou art an expert hurler."

"These feats," he replied, "are nothing to what I shall yet do in
needlework, O mother, when I am of age to be trusted with my first
needle, and knighted by thy hands, and enrolled amongst the
valiant company of thy sewing-women."

"What meaneth the boy?" said his mother, for she perceived that he
spoke awry.

"That his childhood is over, O Dectera," answered one of her
women, "and that thou art living in the past and in dreams. For
who can hold back Time in his career?"

The queen's heart leaped when she heard that word, and the blood
forsook her face. She bent down her head over her work and her
tears fell. After a space she looked out again upon the lawn to
see if the boy had returned, but he had not.

She bade her women go and fetch him, and afterwards the whole
household. They called aloud, "Setanta, Setanta," but there was no
answer, only silence and the watching and mocking trees and a
sound like low laughter in the leaves; for Setanta was far away.

The boy came out of that forest on the west side. Soon he struck
the great road which from Ath-a-clia [Footnote: Ath-a-cliah, i.e.,
the Ford of the Hurdles. It was the Irish name for Dublin.] ran
through Murthemney to Emain Macha, and saw before him the purple
mountain of Slieve Fuad. In his left hand was his sheaf of toy
javelins; in his right the hurle; his little shield was strapped
upon his back. The boy went swiftly, for there was power upon him
that day, and with his ashen hurle shod with red bronze ever urged
his ball forward. So he went driving, his ball before him. At
other times he would cast a javelin far out westward and pursue
its flight. Ever as he went there ever flew beside him a grey-
necked crow. "It is a good omen," said the boy, for he knew that
the bird was sacred to the Mor-Reega.

He was amazed at his own speed and the elasticity of his limbs.
Once when he rose after having gathered his thrown javelin, a man
stood beside him who had the port and countenance of some ancient
hero, and whose attire was strange. He was taller and nobler than
any living man. He bore a rod-sling in his right hand, and in his
left, in a leash of bronze, he led a hound. The hound was like
white fire. Setanta could hardly look in that man's face, but he
did. The man smiled and said--

"Whither away, my son?"

"To Emain Macha, to my uncle Concobar," said the boy.

"Dost thou know me, Setanta?" said the man.

"I think thou art Lu Lam-fada Mac Ethlend," [Footnote: Lu the
Long-Handed son of Ethlenn. This mysterious being, being one of
the deities of the pagan Irish, seems to have been the Sun-god.]
answered Setanta.

"I am thy friend," said the man, "fear nothing, for I shall be
with thee always."

Then the man and the hound disappeared as if they had been
resolved into the rays of the sun; Setanta saw nothing, only the
grey-necked crow starting for flight. Then a second man in a wide
blue mantle specked with white like flying foam came against him
and flung his mantle over Setanta. There was a sound in his ears
like the roaring of the sea. [Footnote: This man was Mananan son
of Lir. He was the Sea-god.] Chariots and horses came from the
east after that. Setanta recognised those who urged on the steeds,
they were his own people. "Surely," he said, "I shall be taken
now." The men drave past him. "If I mistake not," he said, "the
man who flung his mantle over me was Mananan the son of Lir."

Divers persons, noble and ignoble, passed him on the way, some
riding in chariots, some going on foot. They went as though they
saw him not.

In the evening he came to Slieve Fuad. He gathered a bed of dried
moss and heaped moss upon his shield for a pillow. He wrapped
himself in his mantle, and lay down to sleep, and felt neither
cold nor hunger. While he slept a great steed, a stallion, grey to
whiteness, came close to him, and walked all round him, and smelt
him, and stayed by him till the morning.

The feeling for liberty was constantly with her, as was to be
seen from _Casa Guidi Windows_ and _Poems before Congress_. About
1855, when she was on a visit to England, through the work of
Daniel D. Home, a notorious American exponent of spiritualism, Mrs."Horses have been here in the night," said the boy, "one horse.
What mighty hoof marks!" He wondered the more seeing how the marks
encircled him. "I too will one day have a chariot and horses, and
a deft charioteer." He stood musing, "Is it the grey of Macha?
[Footnote: The goddess Macha, already referred to, had a horse
which was called the Grey of Macha--Liath-Macha. He was said to be
still alive dwelling invisibly in Erin.] They say that he haunts
this mountain." He hastened to the brook, and finding a deep pool,
bathed in the clear pure water and dried himself in his woollen
bratta [Footnote: The Gaelic word for mantle.] of divers colours.
Very happy and joyous was Setanta that day. And he spread out the
bratta to dry, and put on his shirt of fine linen and his woollen
tunic that reached to the knees in many plaits. Shoes he had none;
bare and naked were his swift feet.

"This is the mountain of Fuad the son of Brogan," [Footnote: An
ancient Milesian hero. Brogan was uncle of Milesius.] said he. "I
would I knew where lies his cairn in this great forest that I
might pay my stone-tribute to the hero." Soon he found it and laid
his stone upon the heap. He climbed to the hill's brow and looked
westward and saw far away the white shining duns of the marvellous
city from which, even now, the morning smoke went up into the
windless air. He trembled, and rejoiced, and wept. He stood a long
time there gazing at Emain Macha. Descending, he struck again the
great road, but he went slowly; he cast not his javelins and drave
not his ball. Again, from a rising ground he saw Emain Macha, this
time near at hand. He remained there a long time filled with awe
and fear. He covered his head with his mantle and wept aloud, and
said he would return to Dun Dalgan, that he dared not set unworthy
feet in that holy place.

Then he heard the cheerful voices of the boys as they brake from
the royal palace and ran down the wide smooth lawn to the hurling-
ground. His heart yearned for their companionship, yet he feared
greatly, and his mind misgave him as to the manner in which they
would receive him. He longed to go to them and say, "I am little
Setanta, and my uncle is the king, and I would be your friend and
playfellow." Hope and love and fear confused his mind. Yet it came
to him that he was urged forwards, by whom he knew not.
Reluctantly, with many pausings, he drew nigh to the players and
stood solitary on the edge of the lawn southwards, for the company
that held that barrier were the weaker. He hoped that some one
would call to him and welcome him, but none called or welcomed.
Silently the child wept, and the front of his mantle was steeped
in his tears. Some looked at him, but with looks of cold surprise,
as though they said, "Who is this stranger boy and what doth he
here? Would that he took himself away out of this and went
elsewhere." The boy thought that he would be welcomed and made
much of because he was a king's son and nephew of the high King of
Ulla, and on account of his skill in hurling, and because he
himself longed so exceedingly for companions and comrades, and
because there were within him such fountains of affection and
loving kindness. And many a time happy visions had passed before
his eyes awake or asleep of the meeting between himself and his
future comrades, but the event itself when it happened was by no
means what he had anticipated. For no one kissed him and bade him
welcome or took him by the right hand and led him in, and no one
seemed glad of his coming and he was here of no account at all.
Bitter truly was thy weeping, dear Setanta.


CHAPTER V

THE NEW BOY


"I to surrender, to fling away this! So owned by God and Man! so
witnessed to! I had rather be rolled into my grave and buried with
infamy."--Battle-chaunt of a hero of the Saxons.

Once, struck sideways out of the press, the ball bounded into a
clear space not far from Setanta. "Thou of the Javelins," cried
the captain of the distressed party, "the ball is with thee." He
roared mightily at Setanta. On a sudden Setanta, filled with all
the glow and ardour of the mimic battle, cast his javelins to the
ground, slipped the strap of his shield over his head, flung the
shield beside his javelins on the grass and pursued the bounding
ball. He out-ran the rest and took possession of the ball. Now to
the right he urged it, now to the left. He played it deftly before
every opponent who sought to check his career, and swiftly and
cunningly carried it past each of these, and finally with a clear
loud stroke sent it straight as a sling-bolt through the middle of
the north goal. The boys of his adopted party shouted, and they
praised his playing and that final victorious stroke. Setanta went
back after that and stood by himself near the south goal. His face
was flushed and his eyes sparkled, and he himself trembled with
joy, yet was he not in the least exhausted or out of breath.

The captain of the northern company came down with his boys and
all the boys who were chief in authority, and they surrounded
Setanta and said, "Thou art here a stranger and on sufferance. We
know thee not, but thou art a good hurler and not otherwise, as we
think, unmeet to bear us company. Receive now our protection, and
we will divide the sides again with a new division and continue
the game, for thou art very swift and truly expert in the use of
thy hurle."

The boys regulated all things according to the laws and customs of
their elders. And everywhere it was the custom that the weak
should accept the protection of the strong and submit themselves
to their command. So slaves received masters, so runaways and
fugitives got to themselves lords, and sheltered themselves under
their protection and paid dues. Setanta's brow fell, and he
answered, "Put not upon me, I pray you, these hard terms. I would
be your friend and comrade, I cannot be your subject being what I
am."

And they said, "Who art thou?"

And he answered, "I am the son of Dectera of Dun Dalgan, and
nephew of the king."

Then the boy who was captain of the whole school, and the biggest
and strongest, stood over him, and said--

"Thou, the king's nephew! the son of Sualtam and Dectera of Dun
Dalgan! and comest hither without chariots and horsemen and a
prince's retinue and guard. Nay, thou art a churl and a liar to
boot, and hie thee hence now with wings at thy heels or verily
with sore blows I shall beat thee off the lawn."

Thereat the blood forsook thy face, O Setanta, O peerless one, and
thou stoodest like a still figure carved out of white marble, with
the pallor of death in thy immortal face. But that other,
indignant to see him stand as one both deaf and dumb, and
mistaking his pallor for fear, raised his hurle and struck with
all his might at the boy. Setanta sprang back avoiding the blow,
and ere the other could recover himself, struck him back-handed
over the right ear, whose knees were suddenly relaxed and the
useless weapon shaken from his hands. Then some stood aside, but
the rest ran upon Setanta to beat him off the lawn and struck at
him all together, as well as they could, for their numbers impeded
them, and fiercely the stranger defended himself, and many a
shrewd stroke he delivered upon his enemies, for the slumbering
war-spirit now, for the first time, had awaked in his gentle
heart. Many times he was overborne and flung to the ground, but
again he arose overthrowing others, never quitting hold of his
hurle, and, whenever he got a free space, grasping that weapon
like a war-mace in both hands, he struck down his foes. The skirts
of his mantle were torn, only a rag remained round his shoulders,
fastened by the brooch; he was covered with blood, his own and his
enemies', and his eyes were like burning fire. Then Conall Carna
being enraged ran towards the boys, meaning to rebuke their
cowardice and with his strong hands hurl them asunder and save the
stranger boy. There was not a knight in all Ireland those days who
loved battle-fairness better than Conall Carna. Truly he was the
pure-burning torch of the chivalry of the Ultonians in his time.
But as he ran one withheld him and a voice crying "Forbear" rang
in his ears. Yet he saw no man. He stood still, being astonished,
and became aware that this tumult was divinely guided, for as in a
trance he saw and heard marvellous things. For the war-steeds of
the Ultonians neighed loudly in their stables, and from the Tec
Brac, the Speckled House of the Red Branch, rose a clangour of
brass, the roar of the shield called Ocean, and the booming of the
Gate-of-Battle, and the singing of swords long silent, and the
brazen thunder of the revolution of wheels; and he saw strange
forms and faces in the air, and the steady sun dancing in the
heavens, and a man standing beside the stranger whose face was
like the sun. The son of Amargin saw and heard all, for he was a
seer and a prophet no less than a warrior. But meantime his
battle-fury descended upon Setanta, his countenance was distraught
and his strength was multiplied tenfold, and the steam of his war-
madness rose above him. He staggered to no blow, but every boy
whom he struck fell, and he charged this way and that, and
wherever he went they opened before him. Then seeing how they
closed in behind him and on each side, he beat his way back to the
grassy rampart in which was the goal, and, facing his enemies,
bade them come against him again in their troops, many against
one. "You have offered me your protection," he said, "and I would
not endure it, but now I swear to you by all my gods that you and
I do not part this day till you have accepted my protection, or
till I lie without life on this lawn a trophy of your prowess and
a monument of the chivalry and hospitality of the Red Branch."
Then a boy stood out from the rest. He was freckled, and with red
hair, and his voice was loud and fierce.

"Thou shalt have a comrade in thy battle henceforward," he said,
"O brave stranger. On the banks of the Nemnich, [Footnote: Now the
Nanny-Water, a beautiful stream running from Tara to the sea.]
where it springs beneath my father's dun on the Hill of Gabra,
nigh Tara, I met a prophetess; Acaill is her name, the wisest of
all women; and I asked her who would be my life-friend. And she
answered, 'I see him standing against a green wall at Emain Macha,
at bay, with the blood and soil of battle upon him, and alone he
gives challenge to a multitude. He is thy life-friend, O Laeg,'
she said, 'and no man ever had a friend like him or will till the
end of time.'"

So saying he ran to Setanta, and kneeling down he took him by his
right hand, and said, "I am thy man from this day forward." And
after that he arose and kissed him, and standing by his side
cried, "O Cumascra Mend Macha, O stammering son of Concobar, if
ever I was a shield to thee against thy mockers, come hither; and
thou too come O Art Storm-Ear, and thou Art of the Shadow, and
thou O Fionn of the Songs, and you O Ide and Sheeling, who were
nursed at the same breast and knee with myself." So he summoned to
him his friends, and they came to him, and there came to him,
uninvited, the three sons of Fergus and others whose hearts were
stirred with shame or ruth. Yet, indeed, they were few compared
with the multitude of his enemies. Then for the first time the
boy's soul was confused, and he cried aloud, and bowed his head
between his hands, and the hot tears gushed forth like rain from
his eyes, mingled with blood. Soon, hearing the loud mockery and
derisive laughter of his enemies, he hardened his heart and went
out against them with these his friends, and drove them over the
whole course of the playing-ground, and, hard by the north goal,
he brake the battle upon them and they fled. Of the fugitives some
ran round the King and the Champion where they sat, but Setanta
running straight sprang lightly over the chess table. Then
Concobar, reaching forth his left hand, caught him by the wrist
and brought him to a stand, panting and with dilated eyes.

"Why art thou so enraged?" said the King, "and why dost thou so
maltreat my boys?"

It was a long time before the boy answered, so furiously burned
the battle-fire within him, so that the King repeated his question
more than once. At last he made answer--

"Because they have not treated me with the respect due a
stranger."

"Who art thou thyself?" said the King.

"I am Setanta, son of Sualtam and of Dectera thy own sister, and
it is not before my uncle's palace that I should be dishonoured."

Concobar smiled, for he was well pleased with the appearance and
behaviour of the boy, but Fergus caught him up in his great arms
and kissed him, and he said--

"Dost thou know me, O Setanta?"

"I think thou art Fergus Mac Roy," he answered.

"Wilt thou have me for thy tutor?" said Fergus.

"Right gladly," answered Setanta. "For in that hope too I left Dun
Dalgan, coming hither secretly without the knowledge of my
parents."

This was the first martial exploit of Setanta, who is also called
Cuculain, and the reward of this his first battle was that the
boys at his uncle's school elected him to be for their captain,
and one and all they put themselves under his protection. And a
gentle captain made he when the war-spirit went out of him, and a
good play-fellow and comrade was Setanta amongst his new friends.

That night Setanta and Laeg slept in the same bed of healing after
the physicians had dressed their wounds; and they related many
things to each other, and oft times they kissed one another with
great affection, till sweet sleep made heavy their eyelids.

"She won't understand," he whispered, "no, she won't. _Will_ she?
They are easily frightened--ay, they are. I'd better do it another
way, and she'll not suspect--she'll not suppose. See, child?" he
said, after a second or two. "_Remember_ this key."
It was oddly shaped, and unlike others.

"It opens that." And he tapped sharply on the door of a cabinet.
"You will tell nobody what I have said, under pain of my
displeasure."
"Oh, no, sir!"
"Good child! _Except_ under one contingency. That is, in case I
should be absent and Dr. Bryerly--you recollect the thin
gentleman in spectacles and a black wig, who spent three days here
last month?--should come and enquire for the key, you understand,
in my absence."
"But you will then be absent, sir," I said. "How am I to find the
key?"
"True, child. I am glad you are so wise. _That_, you will find, I
have provided for. I have a very sure friend--a friend
whom I once misunderstood, but now appreciate."
I wondered silently whether it would be Uncle Silas.

"He'll make me a call some day soon, and I must make a little journey
with him. He's not to be denied; I have no choice. But on the
whole I rather like it. Remember, I say, I rather like it."
I think it was about a fortnight after this conversation that I
was one night sitting in the great drawing-room window, when on a
sudden, on the grass before me stood an odd figure--a very tall
woman in grey draperies, courtesying rather fantastically, smiling
very unpleasantly on me, and gabbling and cackling shrilly--I
could not distinctly hear _what_--and gesticulating oddly with
her long arms and hands. This was Madame de la Rougierre, my new
governess.

I think all the servants hated her. She was by no means a pleasant
_gouvernante_ for a nervous girl of my years. She was always making
excuses to consult my father about my contumacy and temper.
She tormented me by ghost stories to cover her nocturnal ramblings,
and she betrayed a terrifying curiosity about his health and his
will. My cousin Monica, Lady Knollys, who visited us about
this time, was shocked at her presence in the house; it was the
cause of a rupture between my father and her. But not even a
frustrated attempt to abduct me during one of our walks--which I
am sure madame connived at--could shake my father's confidence
in her, though he was perfectly transported with fury on
hearing what had happened. It was not until I found her
examining his cabinet by means of a false key that he dismissed
her; but madame had contrived to leave her glamour over me, and
now and then the memory of her parting menaces would return
with an unexpected pang of fear.

My father never alluded again to Madame de la Rougierre, but, whether
connected with her exposure and dismissal or not, there appeared
to be some new trouble at work in his mind.

"I am anxious about you, Maud," he said.

  "_You_ are more interested than
    _I_ can be in vindicating
   his character."
    "Whose character, sir?"

               I ventured to inquire during the pause that followed.

"Whose? Your Uncle Silas's. In course of nature he must survive
me. He will then represent the family name. Would you make some
sacrifice to clear that name, Maud?"
I answered briefly; but my face, I believe, showed my enthusiasm.

"I can tell you, Maud, if my life could have done it, it should
not have been undone. But I had almost made up my mind to leave all
to time to illuminate, or _consume_. But I think little Maud would
like to contribute to the restitution of her family name. It may
cost you something. Are you willing to buy it at a sacrifice?
Your Uncle Silas," he said, speaking suddenly in loud and
fierce tones that sounded almost terrible, "lies under an
intolerable slander. He troubles himself little about it; he is
selfishly sunk in futurity--a feeble visionary. I am not so.
The character and influence of an ancient family are a peculiar
heritage--sacred, but destructible. You and I, we'll leave
one proof on record which, fairly read, will go far to convince the
world."
That night my father bade me good-night early. I had fallen into
a doze when I was roused by a dreadful crash and a piercing
scream from Mrs.
Rusk. Scream followed scream, pealing one after the other
unabated, wilder and more terror-stricken.

Then came a strange lull, and the dull sounds of some heavy body
being moved.

What was that dreadful sound? Who had entered my father's
chamber? It was the visitor whom he had so long expected, with whom
he was to make the unknown journey, leaving me alone. The
intruder was Death!

_II.--The Sorceries of Bartram-Haugh_

One of those fearful aneurisms that lie close to the heart had given
way in a moment. He had fallen, with the dreadful crash I had
heard, dead upon the floor. He fell across the door, which caused
a difficulty in opening it. Mrs. Rusk could not force it open. No
wonder she had given way to terror. I think I should have lost my
reason.

I do not know how those awful days, and still more awful nights,
passed over.

Lady Knollys came, and was very kind. She was odd, but her eccentricity
was leavened with strong commonsense; and I have often thought
since with gratitude of the tact with which she managed my grief.

I did not know where to write to Dr. Bryerly, to whom I had promised
the key, but in accordance with my father's written directions, his
death was forthwith published in the principal London papers.

He came at midnight, accordingly, and on the morrow the will was
read. Except for a legacy of £10,000 to his only brother, Silas
Ruthyn, and a few minor legacies to relations and servants, my
father had left his whole estate to me, appointing my Uncle Silas
my sole guardian, with full parental authority over me until I
should have reached the age of twenty-one, up to which time I was
to reside under his care at Bartram-Haugh, with the sum of £2,000
paid yearly to him for my suitable maintenance and education.

I was startled by the expression of cousin Monica's face. She looked
ghastly and angry.

"To whom," she asked, with an effort, "will the property belong
in case--in case my cousin should die before she comes of
age?"

"To the next heir, her uncle, Mr. Silas Ruthyn. He's both
heir-at-law and next-of-kin," replied the attorney.

She was anxious to persuade my uncle to relinquish his guardianship
to her; but the evening of the funeral a black-bordered letter
came from him, bidding me remain at Knowl until he could arrange
for my journey to him.

There was a postscript, which made my cheek tingle.

"Pray present my respects to Lady Knollys, who, I understand, is
sojourning at Knowl.

I would observe that a lady who cherishes, I have reason to fear,
unfriendly feelings against your uncle is not the most desirable
companion for his ward.

But, upon the express condition that I am not made the subject of
your discussions, I do not interpose to bring your intercourse to
an immediate close."

                  "Did I ever
 hear! Well, if this isn't impertinent!" exclaimed
 Lady Knollys. "I did not intend to talk about
 him, but now I _will_." And so
 it was that I heard the story of that enigmatical
 person--martyr, angel, demon--Uncle Silas,
 with whom my fate was now so strangely linked.

                  It was twenty years ago.

He was not a reformed rake, but a ruined one then. My father had
helped him again and again, until his marriage with a barmaid. After
that he allowed him five hundred a year, and the use of his estate
of Bartram-Haugh. Then Mr. Charke, a gentleman of the turf, who
was staying with my uncle for Doncaster Races, was found dead
in his room--he had committed suicide by cutting his throat. And
Uncle Silas was suspected of having killed him.

This wretched Mr. Charke had won heavy wagers at the races from
Uncle Silas, and at night they had played very deep at cards. Next
morning his servant could not enter his room; it was locked on the
inside, the window was fastened by a screw, and the chimney was
barred with iron.

It seemed that he had hermetically sealed himself in, and then killed
himself. But he had been in boisterous spirits. Also, though his
own razor was found near his right hand, the fingers of his left
hand were cut to the bone. Then the memorandum-book in which his
bets were noted was nowhere to be found. Besides, he had written
two letters to a friend, saying how profitable he had found his
visit to Bartram-Haugh, and that he held Uncle Silas's I O U's for
a frightful sum; and although my uncle stoutly alleged he did not
owe him a guinea, there had scarcely been time in one evening
for him to win back so much money. In a moment the storm was up,
and although my uncle met it bravely, he failed to overcome
it, and became a social outcast, in spite of all my father's
efforts.

And now I was to rehabilitate him before the world, and accordingly
all preparations were made for my departure from Knowl; and at last
the morning came--a day of partings, a day of novelty, and regrets.

I remember we passed a gypsy bivouac on our journey, with fires
alight, on the edge of a great, heathy moor. I had my fortune
told, and I am ashamed to confess I paid the gypsy a pound for
a brass pin with a round bead for a head--a charmed pin, which
would keep away rat, and cat, and snake, a malevolent spirit, or
"a cove to cut my throat," from hurting me. The purchase was partly
an indication of the trepidations of that period Of my life.
At all events, I had her pin and she my pound, and I venture to
say I was the gladder of the two.

It was moonlight when we reached Bartram-Haugh. It had a forlorn
character of desertion and decay, contrasting almost awfully
with the grandeur of its proportions and richness of its architecture.

A shabby little old man, a young plump, but very pretty female
figure in unusually short petticoats, and a dowdy old charwoman,
all stood in the door among a riot of dogs. I sat shyly back,
peeping at the picture before me.

"Will you tell me--yes or no--is my cousin in the coach?" screamed
the young lady. She received me with a hug and a hearty "buss,"
as she called that salutation, and was evidently glad to see
me.

Then, after leading me to my bed-room to make a hurried toilet,
she conducted me to a handsome wainscotted room, where my Uncle
Silas awaited me.

A singular looking old man--a face like marble, with a fearful
monumental look--an apparition, drawn, as it seemed, in black
and white, venerable, bloodless, fiery-eyed, with its strange
look of power and an expression so bewildering. Was it derision,
or anguish, or cruelty, or patience?

He said something in his clear, gentle, but cold voice, and,
taking both my hands, led me affectionately to a chair near
his own. He was a miserable invalid, he told me, after speaking a
little eulogy of his brother and examining me closely, respecting
his illness and its symptoms. At last, remarking that I must be
fatigued, he rose and kissed me with a solemn tenderness, and,
placing his hand on a large Bible, bade me "Remember that book;
in it lives my only hope. Consult it, my beloved niece, day and
night as the only oracle."
"I'm awful afraid of the governor, I am," said Cousin Milly, when
we had left him. "I was in a qualm. When he spies me a-napping
maybe he don't fetch me a prod with his pencil-case over the head."

But Milly was a pretty and a clever creature in spite of her
uncouth dialect, and I liked her very much. We spent much time
taking long country rambles and exploring the old house, many
of whose rooms were closed and shuttered. Of my uncle we saw
little. He was "queerish," Milly said, and I learnt afterwards
he took much laudanum.

My other cousin, Dudley, I did not meet till later.

To my horror, I beheld in him one of the party of ruffians who
had terrified me so much the day of the attempted abduction at
Knowl; but he stoutly denied ever having been there with an air so
confident that I began to think I must be the dupe of a chance
resemblance.

My uncle viewed him with a strange, paternal affection. But dear
Cousin Monica had written asking Milly and me to go to her, and
we had some of the pleasantest and happiest days of our lives at
her house of Elverston, for there Milly met her good little
curate, the Rev. Sprigge Biddlepen, and Lord Ilbury.

Uncle Silas was terribly ill when we returned to Bartram-Haugh,
the result of an overdose of opium; but for the doctor's aid he
would have died. Remembering how desperate Lady Knollys had told
me his monetary position was, a new and dreadful suspicion
began to haunt me.

"Had he attempted to poison himself?"
I remember I was left alone with him while his attendant fetched a
fresh candle. A small thick Bible lay on the mantle-shelf. I
turned over its leaves, and lighted on two or three odd-looking
papers--promissory notes, I believe--when Uncle Silas, dressed
in a long white morning-gown, slid over the end of the bed and stood
behind me with a deathlike scowl and simper. Diving over my shoulder,
with his long, thin hand he snatched the Bible from me, and
whispered over my head, "The serpent beguiled her, and she did
eat."
It seemed an hour before Wyat came back. You may be sure I did not
prolong my watch. I had a long, hysterical fit of weeping when
I got to my room: the sorceries of Bartram-Haugh were enveloping.

About this time Dudley began to persecute me with his odious
attentions.
I was obliged to complain of him to my uncle. He was disposed to
think well of the match; but I could not consent, and it was
arranged that my cousin should go abroad.

And then that night I had the key to some of the mysterious doings
at Bartram-Haugh--the comings and goings in the darkness which had
so often startled me--the face of Madame de la Rougierre peeped
into the room.

_III.--A Night of Terror_

Shortly afterwards I lost Milly, who was sent to a French school,
where I was to follow her in three months.

I bade her farewell at the end of Windmill Wood, and was sitting
on the trunk of a tree when Meg Hawkes, a girl to whom I had once
been kind, passed by.

"Don't ye speak, nor look; fayther spies us," she said quickly.
"Don't ye be alone wi' Master Dudley nowhere, for the world's
sake!"
The injunction was so startling that I had many an hour of anxious
conjecture, and many a horrible vigil by night. But ten days later
I was summoned to my uncle's room. He implored me once more to wed
Dudley--to listen to the appeal of an old and broken-hearted
man.

"You see my suspense--my miserable and frightful suspense," he said.

   "I'm very miserable,
      nearly desperate. I stand before you in the attitude
      of a suppliant."
     "Oh, I must--I must--I _must_ say
    no!" I cried. "Don't question me, don't press me.

              I could not--I _could_ not do what you ask!"

"I yield, Maud--I yield, my dear. I will _not_ press you. I have
spoken to you frankly, perhaps too frankly; but agony and despair
will speak out and plead, even with the most obdurate and cruel!"

He shut the door, not violently, but with a resolute hand, and I
thought I heard a cry.

The discovery that Dudley was already married spared me further
importunity. I was anxious to relieve my uncle's necessities,
which, I knew were pressing; and the attorney from Feltram was
up with him all night, trying in vain to devise some means by which
I might do so. The morning after, I was told I must write to
Lady Knollys to ask if I might go to her, as there was shortly
to be an execution in the house.

I met Dudley on my way through the hall. He spoke oddly about his
father, and made a very strange proposal to me--that I should give
him my written promise for twenty thousand pounds, and he would
"take me cleverly out o' Bartram-Haugh and put me wi' my cousin
Knollys!" 
I refused indignantly, but he caught me by the wrist.
"Don't ye be a-flyin' out," he said peremptorily. "Take it or leave
it--on or off! Can't ye speak wi' common sense for once? I'll take
ye out o' all this, if you'll gi'e me what I say."
He looked black when I refused again. I judged it best to tell my
uncle of his offer. He was startled, but made what excuse he could,
smiling askance, a pale, peaked smile that haunted me. And then,
once more, entering an unfrequented room, I came upon the great
bony figure of Madame de la Rougierre. She was to be my companion
for a week or two, I was told, and shortly after her coming I found
my walks curtailed. I wrote again to my Cousin Knollys, imploring
her to take me away. This letter my uncle intercepted, and when she
came in reply to my former letter, I had but the sight of her
carriage driving swiftly away.Concobar answered straight, "Thou shalt not get from me or from
the Ultonians any eric, small or great. My nephew slew the beast
in fair fight, defending his life against an aggressor. But I will
say something else, proud smith, and little it recks me whether it
is pleasing to thee or not. Had thy wolf slain my nephew not one
of you would have left this dun alive, and of your famous city of
artificers I would have made a smoking heap."

The Ultonians fiercely applauded that speech, declaring that the
smiths should get no eric, great or small, for the death of their
monster. The smiths thereupon armed themselves with their hammers,
and tongs, and fire-poles, and great bars of unwrought brass, and
Culain himself seized an anvil withal to lay waste the ranks of
the Red Branch. The Ultonians on their side ran to the walls and
plucked down their spears from the pegs, and they raised their
shields and balanced their long spears, and swords flashed and
screeched as they rushed to light out of the scabbards, and the
vast chamber glittered with shaking bronze and shone with the
eyeballs of angry men, and rang with shouts of defiance and quick
fierce words of command. For the Red Branch embattled themselves
on one side of the chamber and the smiths upon the other, burning
with unquenchable wrath, earth-born. The vast and high dome re-
echoing rang with the clear terrible cries of the Ultonians and
the roar of the children of the gloomy Orchil, and, far away, the
magic shield moaned at Emain Macha, and the waves of the ocean
sent forth a cry, for the peril of death and of shortness of life
were around Concobar in that hour. And, though the doors of thick
oak, brass-bound, were shut and barred, there came a man into the
assembly, and he was not seen. He was red all over, both flesh and
raiment, as if he had been plunged in a bath of blood. His
countenance was distraught and his eyes like those of an insane
man, and sparks new from them like sparks from a smith's stithy
when he mightily hammers iron plucked white from the furnace.
Smoke and fire came from his mouth. He held in his hand a long
boar-yard. The likeness of a boar bounded after him. He traversed
the vast chamber with the velocity of lightning, and with his
boar-yard beat such as were not already drunk with wrath and
battle-fury, and shot insane fire into their souls. [Footnote:
This was the demon referred to in the lines at the head of the
chapter.]

Then indeed it wanted little, not the space of time during which a
man might count ten, for the beginning of a murder grim and great
as any renowned in the world's chronicles, and it is the opinion
of the learned that, in spite of all their valour and beautiful
weapons, the artificers would then and there have made a bloody
end of the Red Branch had the battle gone forward. But at this
moment, ere the first missile was hurled on either side, the boy
Setanta sprang into the midst, into the middle space which
separated the enraged men, and cried aloud, with a clear high
voice that rang distinct above the tumult--

"O Culain, forbear to hurl, and restrain thy people, and you the
Ultonians, my kinsmen, delay to shoot. To thee, O chief smith, and
thy great-hearted artificers I will myself pay no unworthy eric
for the death of thy brave and faithful hound. For verily I will
myself take thy dog's place, and nightly guard thy property,
sleepless as he was, and I will continue to do so till a hound as
trusty and valiant as the hound whom I slew is procured for thee
to take his place, and to relieve me of that duty. Truly I slew
not thy hound in any wantonness of superior strength, but only in
the defence of my own life, which is not mine but my King's. Three
times he leaped upon me with white fangs bared and eyes red with
murder, and three times I cast him off, but when the fourth time
he rushed upon me like a storm, and when with great difficulty I
had balked him on that occasion also, then I took him by the
throat and by his legs and flung him against one of the brazen
pillars withal to make him stupid. And truly it was not my
intention to kill him and I am sorry that he is dead, seeing that
he was so faithful and so brave, and so dear to thee whom I have
always honoured, even when I was a child at Dun Dalgan, and whom,
with thy marvel-working craftsman, I have for a long time eagerly
desired to see. And I thought that our meeting, whensoever it
might be, would be other than this and more friendly."

As he went on speaking the fierce brows of the smith relaxed, and
first he regarded the lad with pity, being so young and fair, and
then with admiration for his bravery. Also he thought of his own
boyish days, and as he did so a torrent of kindly affection and
love poured from his breast towards the boy, yea, though he saw
him standing before him with the blood of his faithful hound
gilding his linen lena and his white limbs. Yet, indeed, it was
not the hound's blood which was on the boy, but his own, so
cruelly had the beast torn him with his long and strong and sharp
claws.

"That proposal is pleasing to me," he said, "and I will accept the
eric, which is distinguished and conspicuous and worthy of my
greatness and of my name and reputation amongst the Gael. Why
should a man be angry for ever when he who did the wrong offers
due reparation?" Therewith over his left shoulder he flung the
mighty anvil into the dark end of the vast chamber among the
furnaces, at the sound of whose falling the solid earth shook. On
the other hand Concobar rejoiced at this happy termination of the
quarrel, for well he knew the might of those huge children of the
gloomy Orchil. He perceived, too, that he could with safety
entrust the keeping of the lad to those people, for he saw the
smith's countenance when it changed, and he knew that among those
artificers there was no guile.

"It is pleasing to me, too," he said, "and I will be myself the
lad's security for the performance of his promise."

"Nay, I want no security," answered the smith. "The word of a
scion of the Red Branch is security enough for me."

Thereafter all laid aside their weapons and their wrath. The
smiths with a mighty clattering cast their tools into the dark end
of the chamber, and the Ultonians hanged theirs upon the walls,
and the feasting and pledging and making of friendly speeches were
resumed. There was no more any anger anywhere, but a more
unobstructed flow of mutual good-will and regard, for the
Ultonians felt no more a secret inclination to laugh at the dusky
artificers, and the smiths no longer regarded with disdain the
beauty, bravery, and splendour of the Ultonians.

In the meantime Setanta had returned to his place between the King
and Fergus Mac Roy. There a faintness came upon him, and a great
horror overshadowed him owing to his battle with the dog, for
indeed it was no common dog, and when he would have fallen, owing
to the faintness, they pushed him behind them so that he lay at
full length upon the couch unseen by the smiths. Concobar nodded
to his chief Leech, and he came to him with his instruments and
salves and washes. There unobserved he washed the cruel gashes cut
by the hound's claws, and applied salves and stitched the skin
over the wounds, and, as he did so, in a low voice he murmured
healing songs of power.

"Where is the boy?" said Culain.

"He is reposing a little," said Concobar, "after his battle and
his conflict."

After a space they gave Setanta a draught of mighty ale, and his
heart revived in him and the colour returned to his cheeks wherein
before was the pallor of death, and he sat up again in his place,
slender and fair, between Concobar and Fergus Mac Roy. The smiths
cried out a friendly welcome to him as he sat up, for they held
him now to be their foster-son, and Culain himself stood up in his
place holding in both hands a great mether [Footnote: A four-
cornered quadrangular cup.] of ale, and he drank to all unborn and
immature heroes, naming the name of Setanta, son of Sualtam, now
his dear foster-son, and magnified his courage, so that the boy
blushed vehemently and his eyelids trembled and drooped; and all
the artificers stood up too and drank to their foster-son, wishing
him victory and success, and they drained their goblets and dashed
them, mouth downwards, upon the brazen tables, so that the clang
reverberated over Ulla. Setanta thereupon stood up while the
smiths roared a welcome to their foster-son, and he said that it
was not he who had gained the victory, for that someone invisible
had assisted him and had charged him with a strength not his own.
Then he faltered in his speech and said again that he would be a
faithful hound in the service of the artificers, and sat down. The
smiths at that time would not have yielded him for all the hounds
in the world.

After that their harpers harped for them and their story tellers
related true stories, provoking laughter and weeping. There was no
story told that was not true in the age of the heroes. Then the
smiths sang one of their songs of labour, though it needed the
accompaniment of ringing mettle, a song wild and strange, and the
Ultonians clear and high sang all together with open mouths a song
of battle and triumph and of the marching home to Emain Macha with
victory; and so they spent the night, till Concobar said--

"O Culain, feasting and singing are good, but slumber is good
also. Dismiss us now to our rest and our slumber, for we, the Red
Branch, must rise betimes in the morning, having our own proper
work to perform day by day in Emain Macha, as you yours in your
industrious city."

With difficulty were the smiths persuaded to yield to that
request, for right seldom was there a feast in Dun Culain, and the
unusual pleasure and joyful sense of comradeship and social
exaltation were very pleasing to their hearts.

The Ultonians slept that night in the smiths' hall upon
resplendent couches which had been prepared for them, and early in
the morning, having taken a friendly leave of the artificers, they
departed, leaving the lad behind them asleep. Setanta remained
with the smiths a long time after that, and Culain and his people
loved him greatly and taught him many things. It was owing to this
adventure and what came of it that Setanta got his second name,
viz., the Hound of Culain or Cu-Culain. Under that name he wrought
all his marvellous deeds.


CHAPTER IX

THE CHAMPION AND THE KING


     "Sing, O Muse, the destructive wrath of Achilles, son
     of Peleus, which brought countless woes upon the Achaeans."

                           --Homer.


Concobar Mac Nessa sat one day in his high chair, judging the
Ultonians. His great Council sat before him. In the Champion's
throne sat Fergus Mac Roy. Before the high King his suitors gave
testimony and his brehons pleaded, and Concobar in each case
pronounced judgment, clearly and intelligently, briefly and
concisely, with learning and with equity.

"Right glad am I, O Concobar," said Fergus, "that thou art in the
King's throne, and I where I sit. Verily, had I remained in that
chair of honour and distress, long since would these historians
and poets and subtle-minded lawyers have talked and rhymed me into
madness, or into my grave."

Concobar made answer--"Dear foster-father, the high gods in their
wisdom have fashioned us each man to illustrate some virtue. To
thee they have given strength, courage, and magnanimity above all
others; and to me, in small measure, the vision of justice, and
the perception of her beautiful laws. A man can only excel in what
he loves, and verily I love well the known laws of the Ultonians."

A great man just then entered the hall. His mantle was black. In
the breast of it, instead of a brooch, he wore an iron pin. He
came swiftly and without making the customary reverences. His face
was pale, and his garments torn, his dark-grey tunic stained with
blood. He stood in the midst and cried--

"O high King of the Ultonians, and you the wise men and sages of
the children of Rury, to all of you there is now need of some
prudent resolution. A great deed has been done in Ulla."

"What is that?" said the King.

"The abduction of the Beautiful Woman by Naysi, son of Usna.
Verily, she is taken away and may not be recovered, for the Clan
Usna came last night with a great company to the dun and they
stormed it in their might and their valour, and their irresistible
fury, and they have taken away Deirdre in their swift chariots,
and have gone eastwards to the Muirnicht with intent to cross the
sea northwards, and abide henceforth with their prize in the land
of the Picts and of the Albanah, beyond the stormy currents of the
Moyle."

Fergus Mac Roy, when he heard that word, sat up with eyes bright-
blazing in his head. Dearer to him than all the rest were those
sons of Usna, namely--Naysi, Anli, and Ardane, and dearest of the
three was Naysi, who excelled all the youth of his time in beauty,
valour, and accomplishments.

"Bind that man!" cried Concobar. His voice rang terribly through
the vast chamber. Truly it sheared through men's souls like a
dividing sword.

His guards took the man and bound him. "Lead him away now," said
Concobar," and stone him with stones even to the parting of body
with soul."

The man was one of Deirdre's guard.

A great silence fell upon the assembly after that and no man
spoke, only they looked at the King and then again at the
Champion, and, as it were, questioned one another silently with
their eyes. It was the silence behind which run the Fomorh,
brazen-throated and clad with storm. Well knew those wise men that
what they long apprehended had come now to pass, namely, the
fierce and truceless antagonism of the King and of the ex-King.
Well they knew that Concobar would not forgive the Clan Usna, and
that Fergus Mac Roy would not permit them to be punished.
Therefore, great and mighty as were the men, yet on this occasion
they might be likened only to cattle who stand aside astonished
when two fierce bulls, rending the earth as they come, advance
against each other for the mastery of the herd. In the high King's
face the angry blood showed as two crimson spots one on either
cheek, and his eyes, harder than steel, sparkled under brows more
rigid than brass. On the other hand, the face of the Champion
darkened as the sea darkens when a black squall descends suddenly
upon its sunny and glittering tides, wrinkling and convulsing all
the face of the deep. His listlessness and amiability alike went
out of him, and he sat huge and erect in his throne. His mighty
chest expanded and stood out like a shield, and the muscles of his
neck, stronger than a bull's, became clear and distinct, and his
gathering ire and stern resolution rushed stormfully through his
nostrils. The King first spoke.

"To the man who has broken our law and abducted the child of ill
omen, I decree death by the sword and burial with the three throws
of dishonour, and if taken alive, then death by burning with the
same, and if he escapes out of Erin, then sentence of perpetual
banishment and expatriation."

"He shall not be slain, and he shall not be burned, and he shall
not be exiled. I say it, even I, Fergus, son of the Red Rossa,
Champion of the North. Let the man who will gainsay me show
himself now in Emain Macha. Let him bring round the buckle of his
belt."

His eyes, as he spoke, were like flames of fire under a forehead
dark crimson, and with his clenched fist he struck the brazen
table before his throne, so that the clang and roar of the
quivering bronze sounded through all the borders of Ulla.

"I will gainsay thee, O Fergus," cried the King, "I am the
guardian and the executor of the laws of the Ultonians, and those
laws shall prevail over thee and over all men."

"All laws in restraint of true love and affection are unjust,"
said Fergus, "and the law by which Deirdre was consigned to
virginity was the unrighteous enactment of cold-hearted and
unrighteous men."


CHAPTER X

DEIRDRE


     "Beautiful the beginning of love,
      A man and a woman and the birds of Angus above them."

                    GAELIC BARD.


The birth of the child Deirdre, daughter of the chief poet of
Ulla, was attended with a great portent, for the child shrieked
from the mother's womb. Cathvah and the Druids were consulted
concerning that omen. They addressed themselves to their art of
divination, and having consulted their oracles and gods and
familiar spirits, they gave a clear counsel to the Ultonians.

"This child," they said, "will become a woman, in beauty
surpassing all the women who have ever been born or will be born.
Her union with a man will be a cause of great sorrow to the
Ultonians. Let her, therefore, be exposed after birth; or, if you
would not slay the Arch-Poet's only child, let her be sternly
immured; let her be reared to womanhood in utter and complete and
inviolable solitude, and live and die in her virginity."

The Ultonians determined that the child should live and be
immured. These things took place in the reign of Factna the
Righteous, father of Concobar. When the child was born she was
called Deirdre. The Ultonians appointed for her a nurse and
tutoress named Levarcam. They built for her and for the nurse a
strong dun in a remote forest and set a ward there, and they made
a solemn law enjoining perpetual virginity on the child of ill
omen, and the Druids shed a zone of terror round the dun.

Concobar Mac Nessa in the wide circuit of his thoughts consulted
always for the inviolability of that law, and the stern
maintenance of the watching and warding.

Unseen and unobserved, forgotten by all save the wise elders of
the Ultonians and by Concobar their King, whose thoughts ranged on
all sides devising good for the Red Branch, the child Deirdre grew
to be a maiden. Though her beauty was extraordinary, yet her mind
was as beautiful as her form, so that the Lady Levarcam loved her
exceedingly.

One day when the first flush of early womanhood came upon the
maiden, she said to her tutoress as they sat together and
conversed--

"Are all men like those our guards who defend us against savage
beasts and the merciless Fomorians, dear Levarcam?"

"Those our guards are true and brave men," said Levarcam.

"Surely they are," said the girl, "and we lack no courtesy and due
attention at their hands, but dear foster-mother, my question is
not answered. Maybe it is not to be answered and that I am curious
overmuch. Are all men grim, grave, and austere, wearing rugged
countenances scored with ancient wounds, and bearing each man upon
his shoulders the weight of some fearful responsibility? Are all
men like that, dear Levarcam?"

"Nay, indeed," said the other, "there arc youths too, gracious,
and gay, and beautiful, as well as grave men such as these."

They sat together in their sunny grianan, [Footnote: A derivative
from Grian, the sun. The grianan was an upper chamber, more
elegantly furnished than the hall, usually with large windows and
therefore well lit and reserved for the use of women.]
embroidering while they conversed. It was early morning and the
air was full of the noises and odours of sweet spring-time.

"I know that now," said the maiden, "which I only guessed before,
for waking or sleeping I have dreamed of a youth who was as unlike
these men as the rose-tree with its roses is unlike the rugged
oak-tree or the wrinkled pine that has wrestled with a thousand
storms. I would wish to have him for a playfellow and pleasant
acquaintance. Of maidens, too, such as myself I have dreamed, yet
they do not appear to me to be so alluring or so amiable as that
youth."

"Describe him more particularly," said Levarcam. "Tell me his
tokens one by one that I may know."

"He is tall and strong but very graceful in all his motions; and
of speech and behaviour both gay and gracious. He is white and
ruddy, whiter than snow and ruddier than the rose or the fox-
glove, where the heroic blood burns bright in his comely cheeks.
His eyes are blue-black under fine and even brows and his hair is
a wonder, so dense is it, so lustrous and so curling, blacker than
the crow's wing, more shining than the bright armour of the
chaffer. His body is broad above and narrow below, strong to
withstand and agile to pursue. His limbs long and beautifully
proportioned; his hands and feet likewise, and his step elastic
Smiles seldom leave his eyes and lips, and his mouth is a fountain
of sweet speech. O that I were acquainted with him and he with me?
I think we should be happy in each other's company. I think I
could love him as well as I do thee, dear foster-mother."

As she spoke, Deirdre blushed, and first she stooped down over her
work and then put before her face and eyes her two beautiful
hands, rose-white, with long delicate nails pink-flushed and
transparent; and tears, clearer than dewdrops, gushed between her
ringers and fell in bright showers upon the embroidery. Then she
arose and flung her soft white arms around Levarcam and wept on
her bosom.

"There is one youth only amongst the Red Branch," said Levarcam,
"who answers to that description, namely Naysi, the son of Usna,
who is the battle-prop of the Ultonians and the clear-shining
torch of their valour, and what god or druid or power hath set
that vision before thy mind, I cannot tell."

"Would that I could see him with eyes and have speech with him,"
answered the girl. "If but once he smiled upon me and I heard the
sweet words flow from his mouth which is beyond price, then gladly
would I die!"

"Thou shall both see him and have speech with him, O best,
sweetest, dearest, and loveliest of all maidens. Truly I will
bring him to thee and thee to him, for there is with me power
beyond the wont of women."

Now Levarcam was a mighty Druidess amongst the Ultonians. So the
lady in whom they trusted forgot the ancient prophecies and the
stern commands of the Red Branch and of their King, owing to the
great love which she bore to the maiden and the great compassion
which grew upon her day by day, as she observed the life of the
solitary girl and thought of the cruel law to which all her youth
and beauty and wealth of sweet love beyond all the jewels of the
world were thus barbarously sacrificed by the Ultonians in
obedience to soothsayers and Druids.

Naysi, son of Usna, once in a hunting became separated from his
companions. He wandered far in that forest, seeking some one who
should direct him upon his way. Oftentimes he raised his voice,
but there was no answer. Such were his beauty, his grace, and his
stature, that he seemed more like a god than a man, and such
another as Angus Ogue, son of Dagda, [Footnote: Angus Ogue was the
god of youth and beauty, son of the Dagda who seems to have been
the genius of earth and its fertility or perhaps the Zeus of our
Gaelic mythology.] whose fairy palace is on the margin of the
Boyne. His head and his feet were bare. His short hunting-cloak
was dark-red with flowery devices along the edge. On his breast he
wore a brooch of gold bronze; carbuncles and precious stones were
set in the bronze, and it was carved all over with many spiral
devices. His shirt below the mantle was coloured like the tassels
of the willow trees. His hair was fastened behind with a clasp and
an apple of red gold, and that apple lay below the blades of his
ample shoulders. In one hand he bore a broken leash of red bronze,
and in the other two hunting spears with blades of flashing
findruiney and the hafts were long, slender, and shining. By his
thigh hung a short sword in a sheath of red yew and beside it the
polished and nigh transparent horn of the Urus, suspended in a
baldrick of knitted thread of bronze. The grass stood erect from
the pressure of his light feet. His manly face had not yet known
the razor; only the first soft down of budding manhood was seen
there. His countenance was pure and joyous with bright beaming
eyes, and his complexion red and white and of a brilliancy beyond
words. In his heart was no guile, only indomitable valour and
truth and loyalty and sweet affection. He had never known woman
save in the way of courtesy. The very trees and rocks and stones
seemed to watch him as he passed.

Then suddenly and unawares an ice-cold air struck chill into his
inmost being, the bright earth was obscured and the sun grew dark
in the heavens and menacing voices were heard and horrid forms of
evil, monstrous, not to be described, came against him, and they
bade him return as he had come or they would tear him limb from
limb in that forest. Yet the son of Usna was by no means dismayed,
only he flushed with wrath and scorn and he drew his sword and
went on against the phantoms. In truth Naysi was at that moment
passing through the zone of terror which the Ultonian Druids had
shed around the dun where Deirdre was immured. The phantoms gave
way before him and Naysi passed beyond the zone. "Surely," he
said, "there is some chief jewel of the jewels of the world
preserved in this place."

He came to an opening in the forest. Beyond it there was a great
space which was cleared and girt all round by trees. There was a
dun in its midst. Scarlet and white were the walls of that dun.
There was a watch-tower on one side of the dun and a man there
sitting in the watchman's seat; a grianan on the other with
windows of glass. The roof of the dun was covered all over with
feathers of birds of various hues, and shone with a hundred
colours. The doorway was the narrowest which Naysi had ever seen.
The door pillars were of red yew curiously carved, having feet of
bronze and capitals of carved silver, and the lintel above was a
straight bar of pure silver. A knotted band or thickening ran
round the walls of the dun like a variegated zone, for the colours
of it were many and each different from the colours on the walls.
In the world there was no such prison as there was no such captive
as that prison held. Armed men of huge stature and terrible aspect
went round the dun. Their habiliments were black, their weapons
without ornament, the pins of their mantles were of iron. With
each company went a slinger having his sling bent, an iron bolt in
the sling, and his thumb in the string-loop, men who never missed
their mark and never struck aught, whether man or beast, that they
did not slay. Great hounds such as were not known amongst the
Ultonians went with those men. They were grey above and tawny
beneath, as large as wild oxen after the growth of one year. They
were quick of sight and scent, fiercer than dragons and swifter
than eagles; they were not quick of sight and scent to-day. The
Lady Levarcam had great power. In and around that dun were three
hundred men of war, foreigners, picked men of the great fighting
tribes of Banba. Such was the decree of the Ultonians and their
wise King, so greatly did they fear concerning those prophecies
and omens and concerning the child who in Emain Macha shrieked out
of her mother's womb. Naysi regarded the dun with wonder and
amazement, and with amazement the astonishing rigour of the watch
and ward which were kept there, and the more he looked the more he
wondered. It seemed to the hunter that he had chanced upon one of
the abodes of the enchanted races of Erin, namely the Tuatha De
Dana or the Fomorians, whom the sons of Milesius by their might
had driven into the mountains and unfrequented places and who, now
immortal and invisible, and possessing great druidic power, were
worshipped as gods by the Gael. He knew he was in great peril, but
his stout heart did not fail; he was resolved to see this
adventure to an end.

As he was about to step out into the open two women came from the
door of the grianan. One of them was old; she leaned upon her
companion and in her right hand held a long white wand squared
save in the middle where it was rounded for the hand grip, very
long, unornamented, and unshod at either extremity. Naysi paid
slight attention to her, though, as she was the first to come
forth, he observed these things. The other was young, tall,
slender, and lissom, her raiment costly and splendid like a high
queen's on some solemn day, and like a queen's her behaviour and
her pacing over the flowery lawn. Never had that hunter seen such
a form, so proudly modest and virginal, such sweetness, grace, and
majesty of bearing. Presently, having passed a company of the
guards, she flung back the white, half-transparent veil that
concealed her face. Then the sudden radiance was like the coming
unlocked for out of a white cloud of that very bright star which
shines on the edge of night and morning. All things were
transfigured in her light. Before her the grass grew greener and
more glittering and rare flowers started in her way. A silver
basket of most delicate craftsmanship, the work of some cunning
cerd, was on her right arm. It shone clear and sparkling against
her mantle which was exceedingly lustrous, many times folded,
darkly crimson, and of substance unknown. She towered above her
aged companion, straight as a pillar of red yew in a king's house.
So, unwitting, jocund, and innocent, fresh and pure as the
morning, she paced over the green lawn, going in the direction of
that youth, even Naysi, son of Usna the Ultonian. Naysi's loudly
beating heart fell silent when he saw how she came straight
towards him; he retreated into the forest, so amazing and so
confounding was the radiance of that beauty. A company of those
grim warders, silent and watchful, followed close upon the women.
As they went they slipped the muzzles from the mouths of their
dogs and lead them forward leashed. The countenances of the men
shewed displeasure. From the tower the watchman cried aloud words
in an unknown tongue, hoarse, barbaric accents charged with energy
and strong meaning. His voice rang terribly in the hollows of the
forest. There was a counter challenge in the forest repeated many
times, the voices of men mingled with the baying of hounds. There
was a ring of sentinels and dogs far out in the forest. The son of
Usna had gone through the ring. For twice seven years and one that
astonishing watch and ward had been maintained day and night
without relaxation or abatement. When they came to the edge of the
forest Levarcam addressed the commander of that company. She said,
"The Lady Deirdre would be alone with me in the forest for a
little space to gather flowers and listen to the music of the
birds and the stream, relieved, if but for one moment, of this
watching and warding."

The man answered not a word. He was of the Gamanrdians, dwellers
by the Sue, which feeds the great Western River; [Footnote: The
Shannon.] his people were of the Clan Dega in the south, and of
the children of Orc [Footnote: In scriptural language "of the seed
of the giants," huge, simple-hearted and simple-minded men, who
could obey orders and ask no questions.] from the Isles of Ore in
the frozen seas. [Footnote: The Orkney Islands.] The blood of the
Fomoroh was in those men. The women went on, and that grim company
followed, keeping close behind. When they gained the first cover
of the trees Levarcam turned round and stretched over them her
wand. They stood motionless, both men and dogs. Then the women
went forward, and alone.

"Fill thy basket now with forest flowers, O sweetest, and dearest,
and fairest of all foster-children, and listen to the songs of the
birds and the music of the rill. Cull thy flowers, darling girl,
and cull the flower of thy youth, the flower that grows but once
for all like thee, the flower whose glory puts high heaven to
shame, and whose odour makes mad the most wise."

"Where shall I gather that flower, O gentlest and most amiable of
foster-mothers? Is it in the glade or the thicket, or on the
margent of the rill?

"It is not to be found by seeking, O fairest of all maidens.
Gather it when thou meetest with it in the way. Wear it in thy
heart, be the end what it may. Verily thou wilt not mistake any
other flower for that flower."

"I know not thy meaning, O wise and many-counselled woman, but
there is fear upon me, and trembling, and my knees quake at thy
strange words. Now, if the whole world were swallowed up I should
not be surprised. Surely the end of the world is very nigh."

"It is the end of the world and the beginning of the world; and
the end of life and the beginning of life; and death and life in
one, and death and life will soon be the same to thee, O Deirdre!"

"There is amazement upon me, and terror, O my foster-mother, on
account of thy words, and on account of the gathering of this
flower. Let us return to the dun. Terrible to me are the hollow-
sounding ways of the unknown forest."

"Fear not the unknown forest, O Deirdre. Leave the known and the
familiar now that thy time has come. Go on. Accomplish thy
destiny. It is vain to strive against fate and the pre-ordained
designs of the high gods of Erin. Truly I have failed in my trust.
I see great wrath in Emain Macha. I see the Red Branch tossed in
storms, and a mighty riving and rending and scattering abroad, and
dismal conflagrations, and the blood of heroes falling like rain,
and I hear the croaking of Byves. [Footnote: Badb, pronounced
Byve, was primarily the scald-crow or carrion-crow, secondarily a
Battle-Fury.] Truly I have proved a brittle prop to the Ultonians,
but some power beyond my own drives me on."

"What wild words are these, O wisest of women, and what this
rending and scattering abroad, and showers of blood and croaking
of Byves because I cull a flower in the forest?"

"Nay, it is nothing. Have peace and joy while thou canst, sweet
Deirdre. Thus I lay my wand upon thy bosom and enjoin peace!"

"Thou art weary, dear foster-mother. Rest thee here now a little
space, while I go and gather forest flowers. Johnston remarks that
no more than three-fourths of the Sun's disc would have been
covered, as seen in Campania, but that elsewhere in Italy, at
about 3 p.m., the eclipse was much larger, and perhaps one or two
of the planets might have been visible.

On July 17, 334 A.D., there was an eclipse, which seems to have
been total in Sicily, if we may judge from the description given
by Julius Firmicus.[67]
Ammianus Marcellinus[68] describes an eclipse, to which the date
of August 28, 360 A.D., has been assigned.

Humboldt, quoting this historian, says that the description is quite
that of a solar eclipse, but its stated long duration (daybreak to
noon), and the word _caligo_ (fog or mist) are awkward factors.

Moreover, the historian associates it with events which happened
in the eastern provinces of the Roman Empire; but Johnston seems
in effect to challenge Marcellinus's statement when he says,
"It is true that there was an annular eclipse of the Sun in the
early morning on the above date, but it could only be seen in
countries E. of the Persian Gulf."
About the time that Alaric, King of the Visigoths appeared before
Rome, there was a gloom so great that the stars appeared in
the daytime. This narrative is considered to apply to an eclipse
of the Sun, which occurred on June 18, 410 A.D. The eclipse was
an annular one, but as the central line must have crossed far S.
of Rome, the stars must have been seen not at Rome but somewhere
else.

An eclipse occurred on July 19, 418 A.D., which is remarkable
for a twofold reason. People had an opportunity not only of
seeing an eclipse, but also a comet. We owe the account of the
circumstances to Philostorgius,[69] who tells us that--"On July 19,
towards the 8th hour of the day, the Sun was so eclipsed, that even
the stars were visible.
But at the same time that the Sun was thus hid, a light, in the
form of a cone was seen in the sky; some ignorant people called
it a comet, but in this light we saw nothing that announced a
comet, for it was not terminated by a tail; it resembled the
flame of a torch, subsisting by itself, without any star for
its base. Its movement too was very different from that of a
comet. It was first seen to the E. of the equinoxes; after that,
having passed through the last star in the Bear's tail, it
continued slowly its journey towards the W. Having thus traversed
the heavens, it at length disappeared, having lasted more than
four months. It first appeared about the middle of the summer,
and remained visible until nearly the end of autumn."
Boillot, a French writer, has suggested that this description
is that of the zodiacal light, but this seems out of the question
in view of the details given by the Chinese of a comet having been
visible in the autumn of this year for 11 weeks, and having
passed through the square of Ursa Major. Reverting to the
eclipse--Johnston finds that the greatest phase at Constantinople,
which was probably the place of observation, occurred at about
half an hour after noon, when a thin crescent of light might have
been seen on the northern limb of the Sun. From this it would
appear that the central line of eclipse must have passed somewhat
to the south of Constantinople. To the same effect Hind,
who found that 95/100ths of the Sun's diameter was covered at
Constantinople.

An eclipse of the Sun seems to be referred to by Gregorius
Turonensis, when he says[70] that:--"Then even the Sun appeared
hideous, so that scarcely a third part of it gave light, I believe
on account of such deeds of wickedness and shedding of innocent
blood."

This would seem to have been the eclipse which occurred on February
24, 453 A.D., when Attila and the Huns were ravaging Italy, and
to them it was doubtless that the writer alluded. At Rome
three-fourths of the Sun's disc would have been eclipsed at
sunset, a finding which tallies fairly with the statement of
Gregorius.

It is not till far into the 6th century that we come upon a native
English record of an eclipse of the Sun as having been observed
in England. This deficiency in our national annals is thus
judiciously explained and commented on by our clever and talented
American authoress.[71] Speaking of the eclipse of February 15, 538
A.D., she says:--"The accounts, however, are greatly confused and
uncertain, as would perhaps be natural fully 60 years before the
advent of St.

Augustine, and when Britain was helplessly harassed with its continual
struggle in the fierce hands of West Saxons and East Saxons, of
Picts and conquering Angles. Men have little time to record
celestial happenings clearly, much less to indulge in scientific
comment and theorising upon natural phenomena, when the history of
a nation sways to and fro with the tide of battle, and what is
gained to-day may be fatally lost to-morrow.

And so there is little said about this eclipse, and that little is
more vague and uncertain even than the monotonous plaints of
Gildas--the one writer whom Britain has left us, in his meagre
accounts of the conquest of Kent, and the forsaken walls and violated
shrines of this early epoch."

The well-known _Anglo-Saxon Chronicle_[72] is our authority for
this eclipse having been noted in England, but the record is bare
indeed:--"In this year the Sun was eclipsed 14 days before the
Calends of March from early morning till 9 a.m."

Tycho Brahe, borrowing from Calvisius, who borrowed from somebody
else, says that the eclipse happened "in the 5th year of Henry,
King of the West Saxons, at the 1st hour of the day till nearly the
3rd, or immediately after sunrise."

Johnson finds that at London nearly three-fourths of the Sun's disc
was covered at 7.43 a.m.

The next eclipse recorded in the _Anglo-Saxon Chronicle_ is somewhat
difficult to explain.

It is said that in 540 A.D. "The Sun was eclipsed on the 12th of
the Calends of July [= June 20], and the stars appeared full
nigh half an hour after 9 a.m." Johnson's calculations make the
middle of the eclipse to have occurred at about 7.37 a.m.
at London, two-thirds of the Sun's diameter being covered. He
notes that the Moon's semi-diameter was nearly at its maximum
whilst the Sun's semi-diameter was nearly at its minimum--a
favourable combination for a long totality.

The visibility of the stars seems difficult to explain in connection
with this eclipse, and therefore he suggests that the annalist has
made a mistake of four years and meant to refer to the eclipse of
September 1, 536 A.D., but this does not seem a satisfactory theory.

The year after Pope Martin held a Synod to condemn the Monothelite
heresy, an eclipse of the Sun took place.

It is mentioned by Tycho Brahe in his catalogue of eclipses as
having been seen in England.

Johnson gives the date as February 6, 650 A.D., and finds that the
Sun was three-fourths obscured at London at 3.30 p.m.

The _Anglo-Saxon Chronicle_ tells us under the year A.D. 664 that,
"In this year the Sun was eclipsed on the 5th of the Nones of
May; and Earcenbryht, King of the Kentish people died and Ecgbryht
his son succeeded to the Kingdom." Kepler thought this eclipse
had been total in England, and Johnson calculating for London found
that on May 1, at 5 p.m., there would only have been a very thin
crescent of the Sun left uncovered on the southern limb, so that
the line of totality would have passed across the country some
distance to the N. of London.

The eclipse of Dec. 7, A.D. 671, seems to be associated with a comic
tragedy.

The Caliph Moawiyah had a fancy to remove Mahomet's pulpit from
Medina to his own residence at Damascus. "He said that the walking-stick
and pulpit of the Apostle of God should not remain in the
hands of the murderers of Othman. Great search was made for the
walking-stick, and at last they found it. Then they went in
obedience to his commands to remove the pulpit, when immediately,
to their great surprise and astonishment, the Sun was eclipsed to
that degree that the stars appeared."[73] Once again the
question of visible stars is in some sense a source of difficulty.
Hind found that the eclipse was annular on the central line. At
Medina the greatest phase occurred at 10h. 43m. a.m.
when 85/100ths of the Sun's diameter was obscured. Hind suggests
that in the clear skies of that part of the world such a degree
of eclipse might be sufficient to bring out the brighter planets
or stars.

At any rate no larger eclipse visible at Medina occurred about this
epoch.

Prof.

 Ockley seems to refer to this eclipse
  in making, on the authority of several
  Arabian writers, the mention he does of an eclipse in the quotation
just given.

          Perhaps this will be a convenient place to bring in some remarks
on certain Arabian observations of eclipses only made known to the
scientific world in modern times.

That the Arabians were very capable practical astronomers
has long been recognised as a well-established fact, and if it had
not been for them there would have been a tremendous blank in
the history of astronomy during at least six centuries from about
the year A.D. 700 onwards. In the year 1804 there was published at
Paris a French translation of an Arabian manuscript preserved
at the University of Leyden of which little was known until near
the end of the last century.

The manuscript was then sent to Paris on loan to the French Government
which caused a translation to be made by "Citizen" Caussin, and
this was published under the title of _Le Livre de la grande Table
Hakénate_.[74] Caussin was Professor of Arabic at the College of
France.

Newcomb considers this to contain the earliest exact
astronomical observations of eclipses which have reached us. He
remarks that some of the data left us by Ptolemy, Theon,
Albategnius and others may be the results of actual observations,
but in no case, so far as is known, have the figures of the actual
observations been handed down. For example, we cannot regard
"midnight" nor "the middle of an eclipse" as moments
capable of direct observation without instruments of precision;
but in the Arabian work under consideration we find definite
statements of the altitudes of the heavenly bodies at the moments
of the beginning and ending of eclipses--data not likely to
be tampered with in order to agree with the results of
calculation. The eclipses recorded are 28 in number and usually
the beginning and end of them were observed. The altitudes are
given sometimes only in whole degrees, sometimes in coarse fractions
of a degree. The most serious source of error to be confronted
in turning these observations to account arises from the uncertainty
as to how long after the first contact the eclipse was perceived
and the altitude taken; and how long before the true end was the
eclipse lost sight of. Making the best use he could of the records
available Newcomb found that they could safely be employed in his
investigations into the theory of the Moon.

The observations were taken, some at Bagdad and the remainder at
Cairo.
I do not propose to occupy space by transcribing the accounts in
detail, but one extract may be offered as a sample of the
rest--"Eclipse of the Sun observed at Bagdad, August 18, 928 A.D.
The Sun rose about one-fourth eclipsed. We looked at the Sun
on a surface of water and saw it distinctly. At the end when we
found no part of the Sun was any longer eclipsed, and that its disc
appeared in the water as a complete circle, its altitude was 12°
in the E., less the one-third of a division of the instrument,
which itself was divided to thirds of a degree. One must therefore
reduce the stated altitude by one-ninth of a degree, leaving,
therefore, the true altitude as 11° 53' 20"." The skill and care
shown in this record shows that the Arab who observed this eclipse
nearly a thousand years ago must have been a man of a different
type from an ordinary resident at Bagdad in the year 1899.
No description is given of the instrument used, but presumably it
was some kind of a quadrant. It does not appear why some of the
observations were made at Bagdad and some at Cairo. The Bagdad
observations commence with an eclipse of the Sun on November 30,
829, and end with an eclipse of the Moon on November 5, 933.

The Cairo observations begin with an eclipse of the Sun on December
12, 977, and end with an eclipse of the Sun on January 24, 1004.
These statements apply to the 25 observations which Newcomb
considered were trustworthy enough to be employed in his researches,
but he rejected three as imperfect.

I have broken away from the strict thread of chronological sequence
in order to keep together the notes respecting Arabian observations
of eclipses. Let us now revert to the European eclipses.

Under the date of A.D. 733, the _Anglo-Saxon Chronicle_ tells us
that, "In this year Æthelbald captured Somerton; and the Sun was
eclipsed, and all the Sun's disc was like a black shield; and
Acca was driven from his bishopric." Johnston suggests that the
reference is to an annular eclipse which he finds occurred
on August 14, at about 8¼ h. in the morning.

In Schnurrer's _Chronik der Seuchen_ (pt. i., § 113, p. 164), it
is stated that, "One year after the Arabs had been driven back
across the Pyrenees after the battle of Tours, the Sun was so much
darkened on the 19th of August as to excite universal terror."

It may be that the English eclipse is here referred to, and a date
wrong by five days assigned to it by Schnurrer. Humboldt
(_Cosmos_, vol. iv. p. 384, Bohn's ed.) reports this eclipse
in an enumeration he gives of instances of the Sun having been
darkened.

On May 5, A.D. 840, there happened an eclipse of the Sun which,
amongst other effects, is said to have so greatly frightened
Louis Le Debonnaire (Charlemagne's son) that it contributed to his
death. The Emperor was taken ill at Worms, and having been removed
to Ingelheim, an island in the Rhine, near Mayence, died there on
June 20. Hind[75] found that this was a total eclipse, and that
the northern limit of totality passed about 100 miles south of
Worms. The middle of the eclipse occurred at 1h. 15m. p.m. with
the Sun at an altitude of 57°. The duration of the eclipse was
unusually long, namely about 5½ minutes. With the Sun so high and
the obscuration lasting so long, this eclipse must have been an
unusually imposing one, and well calculated to inspire special
alarm.

On Oct. 29, 878, in the reign of King Alfred, there was a total
eclipse visible at London. The mention of it in the _Anglo-Saxon
Chronicle_ is as follows:--"The Sun was eclipsed at 1 hour of
the day." No month is given, and the year is said to have been
879, which is undoubtedly wrong. Hind found that the central
line of the eclipse passed about 20 miles N. of London, and
that the totality lasted 1m. 51s. Tycho Brahe in his _Historia
Coelestis_ quotes from the _Annales Fuldenses_ a statement
that the Sun was so much darkened after the 9th hour that the stars
appeared in the heavens.

Thorpe in his edition of the _Anglo-Saxon Chronicle_ quotes from Mr.

Richard Price a note which assigns the date of March 14, 880, to
this eclipse, and cites in confirmation a passage from the
_Chronicle of Florence of Worcester_, anno 879. The 880 eclipse is
mentioned by Asser in his _De Vitâ et Rebus gestis Alfredi_ in the
words following:--"In the same year [879] an eclipse of the Sun
took place between three o'clock and the evening, but nearer
three o'clock." The confusion of dates is remarkable.

In the _Chronicon Scotorum_, under the date of 885, we find:--"An
eclipse of the Sun; and stars were seen in the heavens." The
reference appears to be to the total eclipse of June 16, A.D.
885. The totality lasted more than four minutes, and as the stars
are said to have been visible in the North of Ireland, doubtless
that part of Ireland came within the eclipse limits.

On Dec. 22, 968, there was an eclipse of the Sun, which was
almost total at London at about 8h. 33m. a.m., or soon after
sunrise. The central line passed across the S.-W. of England, and
thence through France to the Mediterranean.

One Leon, a deacon at Corfu, observed this eclipse, and has left
behind what probably is the first perfectly explicit mention of the
Corona.[76]
On Aug. 30, 1030, there happened an eclipse visible in Norway, which
has already been alluded to on a previous page under the name of
the "eclipse of Stiklastad."

This was one of those eclipses, the circumstances of which were
examined many years ago in detail by Sir G. 

     B. Airy,[77] because he thought that
     information of value might be obtained therefrom with respect to
the motions of the Moon.

                 Its availability for that purpose has, however, been seriously
questioned by Professor Newcomb.

     Stiklastad is a place where a battle was fought,
     at which Olav, King of Norway, is said to have been
     killed. While the battle was in progress
     the Sun was totally eclipsed, and a red light appeared around it.

                 This is regarded as an early record of the Corona, though not the
first.[78] Johnston found that the eclipse was nearly total at about
2h. 21m. p.m.

In 1033 there happened on June 29 an eclipse of the Sun, which
evidently had many observers, because it is mentioned by many
contemporary writers.

For instance, the French historian, Glaber,[79] says that "on
the 3rd of the Calends of July there was an eclipse from the
sixth to the eighth hour of the day exceedingly terrible. For the
Sun became of a sapphire colour; in its upper part having the
likeness of a fourth part of the Moon." This sufficiently harmonises
with Johnston's calculations that about four-fifths of the
Sun on the lower side was covered at 10h. 50m. in the morning.

FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 61: _Hist. Rome_, Book lv., chap. 22.]
[Footnote 62: Letter in the _Times_, July 19, 1872.]
[Footnote 63: _Hist.

Empty the racks also and bring
fresh hay. Thou wilt find it stored there too; clean straw also
and litter the horse-stalls."

The boy did that. In the meantime Concobar polished the pole, and
the yoke, and the chains. From the wall he took the head-gear of
the horses and the long shining reins of interwoven brass and did
the same very carefully till there was not a speck of rust or
discolouration to be seen.

"Where are the horses, my Uncle Concobar?" said the boy.

"That I cannot rightly tell," said Concobar, "but verily they are
somewhere."

"What are those horses?" said the boy. "How are they called? What
their attributes, and why do I fill their racks and mangers?"

"They are the Liath Macha and Black Shanglan," said Concobar.
"They have not been seen in Erin for three hundred years, not
since Macha dwelt visibly in Emain as the bride of Kimbaoth, son
of Fiontann. In this chariot she went forth to war, charioteering
her warlike groom. But they are to come again for the promised one
and bear him to battle and to conflict in this chariot, and the
time is not known but the King of Emain is under gesa [Footnote:
Terrible druidic obligations.] to keep the chariot bright and the
racks and mangers furnished with fresh hay, and barley two years
old. He is to wait, and watch, and stand prepared under gesa most
terrible."

"Maybe Kimbaoth will return to us again," said the boy.

"Nay, it hath not been so prophesied," answered the King. "He was
great, and stern, and formidable. But our promised one is gentle
exceedingly. He will not know his own greatness, and his nearest
comrades will not know it, and there will be more of love in his
heart than war." So saying Concobar looked steadfastly upon the
boy.

"Conall Carnach is as famous for love as for war," said Setanta.
"He is peerless in beauty, and his strength and courage are equal
to his comeliness, and his chivalry and battle-splendour to his
strength."

"Nay, lad, it is not Conall Carnach, though the women of Ulla
sicken and droop for the love of him. Verily, it is not Conall
Carnach."

Setanta examined curiously the great war-car.

"Was Kimbaoth assisting his wife," he asked, "when she took
captive the sons of Dithorba?"

"Nay," said the King, "she went forth alone and crossed the
Shannon with one step into the land of the Fir-bolgs, and there,
one by one, she bound those builder-giants the sons of Dithorba,
and bore them hither in her might, and truly those five brethren
were no small load for the back of one woman."

"Has anyone seen her in our time?" asked the lad.

"I have," said Concobar. "I saw her at the great fair of Tailteen.
There she pronounced a curse upon me and upon the Red Branch.
[Footnote: At Tailteen a man boasted that his wife could outrun
Concobar's victorious chariot-steeds. Concobar compelled the woman
to run against his horses. She won the race, but died at the goal
leaving her curse upon the Red Branch.] The curse hath not yet
fallen, but it will fall in my time, and the promised one will
come in my time and he will redeem us from its power. Great
tribulation will be his. Question me no more, dear Setanta, I have
said more than enough."

They went forth from the sacred chamber and Concobar locked the
doors.

As they crossed the vacant space going to the palace, Concobar
said--

"Why art thou sad, dear Setanta?"

"I am not sad," answered the boy.

"Truly there is no sadness in thy face, or thy lips, in thy voice
or thy behaviour, but it is deep down in thine eyes," said the
King. "I see it there always."

Setanta laughed lightly. "I know it not," he said.

Concobar went his way after that, musing, and Setanta, having
replaced the sacred vessels in their chamber and having locked the
door, strode away into the boys' hall. There was a great fire in
the midst, and the boys sat round it, for it was cold. Cuculain
broke their circle, pushing the boys asunder, and sat down. They
tried to drag him away, but he laughed and kept his place like a
rock. Then they called him "a Fomorian, and no man," and perforce
made their circle wider.


CHAPTER XIII

THE WEIRD HORSES


   "On the brink of the night and the morning
    My coursers are wont to respire,
    But the earth has just whispered a warning,
    That their flight must be swifter than fire,
    They shall breathe the hot air of desire."

                    SHELLEY.


One night when the stars shone brightly, Setanta, as he passed by
Cathvah's astrological tower, heard him declare to his students
that whoever should be knighted by Concobar on a certain day would
be famous to the world's end. He was in his coming out of the
forest then with a bundle of young ash trees under his arm. He
thought to put them to season and therewith make slings, for truly
he surpassed all others in the use of the sling. Setanta went his
way after that and came into the speckled house. It was the
armoury of the Red Branch and shone with all manner of war-
furniture. A fire burned here always, absorbing the damp of the
air lest the metal should take rust. Setanta flung his trees into
the rafters over the fire very deftly, so that they caught and
remained there. He said they would season best in that place.

As he turned to go a man stood before him in the vast and hollow
chamber.

"I know thee," said the boy. "What wouldst thou now?"

"Thou shalt go forth to-night," said the man, [Footnote: This man
was Lu the Long-Handed, the same who met him when he was leaving
home.] "and take captive the Liath Macha and Black Shanghlan.
Power will be given to thee. Go out boldly."

"I am not wont to go out fearfully," answered the lad. "Great
labours are thrust upon me."

He went into the supper hall as at other times and took his
customary place there, and ate and drank.

"Thy eyes are very bright," said Laeg.

"They will be brighter ere the day," he replied.

"That is an expert juggler," said Laeg. "How he tosseth the bright
balls!"

"Can he toss the stars so?" said Setanta.

"Thou art strange and wild to-night," said Laeg.

"I will be stranger and wilder ere the morrow," cried Setanta.

He stood up to go. Laeg caught him by the skirt of his mantle. The
piece came away in his hand.

"Whither art thou going, Setanta?" cried the King from the other
end of the vast hall.

"To seek my horses," cried the lad. His voice rang round the
hollow dome and down the resounding galleries and long corridors,
so that men started in their seats and looked towards him.

"They are stabled since the setting of the sun," said the chief
groom.

"Thou liest," answered the boy. "They are in the hills and valleys
of Erin." His eyes burned like fire and his stature was exalted
before their eyes.

"Great deeds will be done in Erin this night," said Concobar.

He went forth into the night. There was great power upon him. He
crossed the Plain of the Hurlings and the Plain of the Assemblies
and the open country and the great waste moor, going on to Dun-
Culain. Culain's new hound cowered low when he saw him. The boy
sprang over moat and rampart at one bound and burst open the doors
of the smith's house, breaking the bar. The noise of the riven
beam was like the brattling of thunder.

"That is an unusual way to enter a man's house," said Culain. He
and his people were at supper.

"It is," said Setanta. "Things more unusual will happen this
night. Give me bridles that will hold the strongest horses."
Culain gave him two bridles.

"Will they hold the strongest horses?" said the boy.

"Anything less than the Liath Macha they will hold," said the
smith.

The boy snapped the bridles and flung them aside. "I want bridles
that will hold the Liath Macha and Black Shanglan," said he.

"Fire all the furnaces," cried Culain. "Handle your tools; show
your might. Work now, men, for your lives. Verily, if he get not
the bridles, soon your dead will be more numerous than your
living."

Culain and his people made the bridles. He gave them to Cuculain.
The smiths stood around in pallid groups. Cuculain took the
bridles and went forth. He went south-westwards to Slieve Fuad,
and came to the Grey Lake. The moon shone and the lake glowed like
silver. There was a great horse feeding by the lake. He raised his
head and neighed when he heard footsteps on the hill. He came on
against Cuculain and Cuculain went on against him. The boy had one
bridle knotted round his waist and the other in his teeth. He
leaped upon the steed and caught him by the forelock and his
mouth. The horse reared mightily, but Setanta held him and dragged
his head down to the ground. The grey steed grew greater and more
terrible. So did Cuculain.

"Thou hast met thy master, O Liath Macha, this night," he cried.
"Surely I will not lose thee. Ascend into the heavens, or,
breaking the earth's roof, descend to Orchil, [Footnote: A great
sorceress who ruled the world under the earth.] yet even so thou
wilt not shake me away."

Ireland quaked from the centre to the sea. They reeled together,
steed and hero, through the plains of Murthemney. "Make the
circuit of Ireland Liath Macha and I shall be on the neck of
thee," cried Cuculain. The horse went in reeling circles round
Ireland. Cuculain mightily thust the bit into his mouth and made
fast the headstall. The Liath Macha went a second time round
Ireland. The sea retreated from the shore and stood in heaps.
Cuculain sprang upon his back. A third time the horse went round
Ireland, bounding from peak to peak. They seemed a resplendent
Fomorian phantom against the stars. The horse came to a stand. "I
think thou art tamed, O Liath Macha," said Cuculain. "Go on now to
the Dark Valley." They came to the Dark Valley. There was night
there always. Shapes of Death and Horror, Fomorian apparitions,
guarded the entrance. They came against Cuculain, and he went
against them. A voice from within cried, "Forbear, this is the
promised one. Your watching and warding are at end." He rode into
the Dark Valley. There was a roaring of unseen rivers in the
darkness, of black cataracts rushing down the steep sides of the
Valley. The Liath Macha neighed loudly. The neigh reverberated
through the long Valley. A horse neighed joyfully in response.
There was a noise of iron doors rushing open somewhere, and a
four-footed thunderous trampling on the hollow-sounding earth. A
steed came to the Liath Macha. Cuculain felt for his head in the
dark, and bitted and bridled him ere he was aware. The horse
reared and struggled. The Liath Macha dragged him down the Valley.
"Struggle not, Black Shanglan," said Cuculain, "I have tamed thy
better." The horse ceased to struggle. Down and out of the Dark
Valley rodest thou, O peerless one, with thy horses. The Liath
Macha was grey to whiteness, the other horse was black and
glistening like the bright mail of the chaffer. He rode thence to
Emain Macha with the two horses like a lord of Day and Night, and
of Life and Death. Truly the might and power of the Long-Handed
and Far-Shooting one was upon him that night. He came to Emain
Macha. The doors of Macha's stable flew open before him. He rode
the horses into the stable. Macha's war-car brayed forth a brazen
roar of welcome, the Tuatha De Danan shouted, and the car itself
glowed and sparkled. The horses went to their ancient stalls, the
Liath Macha to that which was nearer to the door. Cuculain took
off their bridles and hanged them on the wall. He went forth into
the night. The horses were already eating their barley, but they
looked after him as he went. The doors shut to with a brazen
clash. Cuculain stood alone in the great court under the stars. A
druidic storm was abroad and howled in the forests. He thought all
that had taken place a wild dream. He went to his dormitory and to
his couch. Laeg was asleep with the starlight shining on his white
forehead; his red hair was shed over the pillow. Cuculain kissed
him, and sitting on the bed's edge wept. Laeg awoke.

"Thou wert not well at supper," said Laeg, "and now thou hast been
wandering in the damp of the night, and thou with a fever upon
thee, for I hear thy teeth clattering. I sought to hinder thee,
and thou wouldst not be persuaded. Verily, if thou wilt not again
obey me, being thy senior, thou shalt have sore bones at my hands.
Undress thyself now and come to bed without delay."

Cuculain did so.

"Thou art as cold as ice," said Laeg.

"Nay, I am hotter than fire," said Cuculain.

"Thou art ice, I say," said Laeg, "and thy teeth are clattering
like hailstones on a brazen shield. Ay, and thine eyes shine
terribly."

Laeg started from the couch. He struck flintsparks upon a rag
steeped in nitre, and waved it to a flame, and kindled a lanthorn.
He flung his own mantle upon the bed and went forth in his shirt.
The storm raged terribly; the stars were dancing in high heaven.
He came to the house of the Chief Leech and beat at the door. The
Leech was not in bed. All the wise men of Emain Macha were awake
that night, listening to the portents.

"Setanta, son of Sualtam, is sick," said Laeg.

"What are his symptoms?" said the Leech.

"He is colder than ice, his eyes shine terribly, and his teeth
clatter, but he says that he is hotter than fire."

The Leech went to Cuculain. "This is not a work for me," he said,
"but for a seer. Bring hither Cathvah and his Druids." Cathvah and
and his seers came. They made their symbols of power over the
youth and chanted their incantations and Druid songs. After that
Cuculain slept. He slept for three days and three nights. There
was a great stillness while the boy slept, for it was not lawful
at any time for anyone to awake Cuculain when he slumbered.

On the third morning Cuculain awoke. The bright morning sunshine
was all around, and the birds sang in Emain Macha. He called for
Laeg with a loud voice and bade him order a division of the boys
to get ready their horses and chariots for charioteering exercise
and fighting out of their cars.


CHAPTER XIV

THE KNIGHTING OF CUCULAIN


     "Then felt I like a watcher of the skies
     When a new planet swims into his ken."

                        KEATS.


The prophecies concerning the coming of some extraordinary warrior
amongst the Red Branch had been many and ancient, and by certain
signs Concobar believed that his time was now near. Often he
contemplated his nephew, observed his beauty, his strength, and
his unusual proficiency in all martial exercises, and mused deeply
considering the omens. But when he saw him slinging and
charioteering amongst the rest, shooting spears and casting
battle-stones at a mark before the palace upon the lawn, and saw
him eating and drinking before him nightly in the hall like
another, and heard his clear voice and laughter amongst the boys,
his schoolfellows and comrades, then the thought or the faint
surmise or wish that his nephew might be that promised one passed
out of his mind, for the prophesyings and the rumours had been
very great, and men looked for one who should resemble Lu the
Long-Handed, son of Ethlend, [Footnote: This great deity resembled
the Greek Phoebus Apollo. He led the rebellion of the gods against
the Fomorian giants who had previously reduced them to a condition
of intolerable slavery. Some say that he was Cuculain's true
father. His favourite weapon was the sling, likened here to the
rainbow. It was not a thong or cord sling, but a pliant rod such
as boys in Ireland still make. The milky way was his chain.] whose
sling was like the cloud bow, who thundered and lightened against
the giants of the Fomoroh, who was all power and all skill, whose
chain wherewith he used to confine Tuatha De Danan and Milesians,
spanned the midnight sky. The rumours and prophecies were indeed
exceeding great and Cuculain, though he far surpassed the rest,
was but a boy like others. He stood at the head of Concobar's
horses when the King ascended his chariot. His shoulder was warm
and firm to the touch when the King lightly laid his hand upon
him.

One night there were terrible portents. All Ireland quaked; there
was a druidic storm under bright stars; the buildings rocked; a
brazen clangour sounded from the Tec Brac; there were mighty
tramplings and cries and a four-footed thunder of giant hoofs, and
they went round Ireland three times, only the third time swifter
and like a hurricane of sound. Cuculain was abroad that night.
There was deep sleep upon the people of Emain, only the chiefs
were awake and aware. Cuculain was sick after that. The Druids
stood around his bed.

"The world labours with the new birth," said Concobar. "Maybe my
nephew is the forerunner, the herald and announcer of the coming
god!"

One evening, after supper, when the lad came to bid his uncle
good-night as his custom was, he said, "If it be pleasing to thee,
my Uncle Concobar, I would be knighted on the morrow, for I am now
of due age, and owing to the instructions of my tutor, Fergus Mac
Roy, and thyself, and my other teachers and instructors, I am
thought to be sufficiently versed in martial exercises, and able
to play a man's part amongst the Red Branch."

He was now a man's full height, but his face was a boy's face, and
his strength and agility amazed all who observed him in his
exercises.

"Has thou heard what Cathvah has predicted concerning the youth
who is knighted on that day?" said the King.

"Yes," answered the lad.

"That he will be famous and short-lived and unhappy?"

"Truly," he replied.

"And doth thy purpose still hold?"

"Yes," he answered, "but whether it be mine I cannot tell."

Concobar, though unwilling, yielded to that request.

Loegairey, the Victorious, son of Conud, son of Iliach, the second
best knight of the Red Branch and the most devoted to poetry of
them all came that night into the hall while the rest slumbered.
The candles were flickering in their sockets. Darkness invested
the rest of the vast hollow-sounding chamber, but there was light
around the throne and couch of the King, owing to the splendour of
the pillars and of the canopy shining with bronze, white and red,
and silver and gold, and glittering with carbuncles and diamonds,
and owing to the light which always surrounded the King and
encircled his regal head like a luminous cloud, seen by many. He
was looking straight out before him with bright eyes, considering
and consulting for the Red Branch while they slept. Two great men
having their swords drawn in their hands, stood behind him, on the
right and on the left, like statues, motionless and silent.

Loegairey drew nigh to the King. Distraction and amazement were in
his face. His dense and lustrous hair was dishevelled and in
agitation round his neck and huge shoulders. He held in his hand
two long spears with rings of walrus tooth where the timber met
the shank of the flashing blades; they trembled in his hand. His
lips were dry, his voice very low.

"There are horses in the stable of Macha," he said.

"I know it," answered the King.

Concobar called for water, and when he had washed his hands and
his face, he took from its place the chess-board of the realm,
arranged the men, and observed their movements and combinations.
He closed the board and put the men in their net of bronze wire,
and restored all to their place.

"Great things will happen on the morrow, O grandson of Iliach," he
said. "Take candles and go before me to the boys' dormitory."

They went to the boys' dormitory and to the couch of Cuculain.
Cuculain and Laeg were asleep together there. Their faces towards
each other and their hair mingled together. Cuculain's face was
very tranquil, and his breathing inaudible, like an infant's.

"O sweet and serene face," murmured the King, "I see great clouds
of sorrow coming upon you."

They returned to the hall.

"Go now to thy rest and thy slumber, O Loegairey," said the King.
"When the curse of Macha descends upon us I know one who will
withstand it."

"Surely it is not that stripling?" said Loegairey. But the King
made no answer.

On the morrow there was a great hosting of the Red Branch on the
plain of the Assemblies. It was May-Day morning and the sun shone
brightly, but at first through radiant showers. The trees were
putting forth young buds; the wet grass sparkled. All the martial
pomp and glory of the Ultonians were exhibited that day. Their
chariots and war-horses ringed the plain. All the horses' heads
were turned towards the centre where were Concobar Mac Nessa and
the chiefs of the Red Branch. The plain flashed with gold, bronze,
and steel, and glowed with the bright mantles of the innumerable
heroes, crimson and scarlet, blue, green, or purple. The huge
brooches on their breasts of gold and silver or gold-like bronze,
were like resplendent wheels. Their long hair, yellow for the most
part, was bound with ornaments of gold. Great, truly, were those
men, their like has not come since upon the earth. They were the
heroes and demigods of the heroic age of Erin, champions who
feared nought beneath the sun, mightiest among the mighty, huge,
proud, and unconquerable, and loyal and affectionate beyond all
others; all of the blood of Ir, [Footnote: On account of their
descent from Ir, son of Milesius, the Red Branch were also called
the Irians.] son of Milesius, the Clanna Rury of great renown,
rejoicing in their valour, their splendour, their fame and their
peerless king. Concobar had no crown. A plain circle of beaten
gold girt his broad temples. In the naked glory of his regal
manhood he stood there before them all, but even so a stranger
would have swiftly discovered the captain of the Red Branch, such
was his stature, his bearing, such his slowly-turning, steady-
gazing eyes and the majesty of his bearded countenance. Then
I understood why Lamela had been willing to come with me
without troubling about wages. I had fallen for a second time into
the hands of thieves.

They had hired the furnished house for a week, and had trapped
me in it. It was clear that I had boasted too much at Burgos about
the thousand ducats which Doña Mencia gave me. Now I found myself
at Valladolid quite penniless.

As I walked along the street in a very despondent mood, not
knowing how to get a meal, someone tapped me on the shoulder, and
said, "Good gracious, Gil Blas, I hardly knew you! What a princely
dress you've got on. A fine sword, silk stockings, a velvet
mantle and doublet with silver lacings! Have you come into a fortune?"

I turned around, and found it was Fabrice, an old schoolfellow, the
son of a barber at Oviedo. I told him of my adventure.

"Pride comes before a fall, you see," he said with a laugh. "But I
can get you a place if you care to take it. One of the principal
physicians of the town, Dr. Sang-Tado, is looking for a secretary.
I know you write a very good hand. Sell your fine raiment and
buy some plain clothes, and I will take you to the doctor."
I am glad to say that I obtained the post, but I wasn't
altogether satisfied with it. Dr. Sangrado believed in vegetarianism,
and he gave me only peas and beans and baked apples to eat,
and not much of those.
At the end of a fortnight I resolved to go as a servant in some
house:
where meat and wine were to be had.

"Don't be foolish," said Sangrado. "Your fortune is made if you
only stay with me. I am getting old and I require someone to
help me in my practice. You can do it. You need not waste your
time in studying all the nonsense written by other doctors. You
have only to follow my method. Never give a patient medicine.
Bleed him well, and tell him to drink a pint of hot water
every half hour. If that doesn't cure him--well, it's time he
died."
So I donned one of Sangrado's gowns, which gave me a very original
appearance, as it was much too long and ample for me, and then I
began to attend his patients.

A few of them, I believe, managed to recover.
One day a woman stopped me and took me into her house to look
at her niece. I recognised the girl as soon as I saw her.

It was the pretty adventuress, Camilla, who had decoyed me and
helped to rob me of my thousand ducats. When I took her hand to
feel her pulse I perceived that she was wearing my diamond ring.

Happily, she was too ill to know me.
After ordering her to be bled and given a pint of warm water
every half hour, I went out and talked the matter over with
Fabrice. We resolved not to call in the police, as they would
certainly keep whatever money of mine they recovered. The ways
of the law in Spain in the seventeenth century are very strange
and intricate.
Nevertheless, I returned late at night to the house accompanied by
a sergeant of the police and five of his men, all well armed. I
then awoke Camilla, and told her to dress herself and attend before
the magistrate.
"Oh, Gil Blas," she cried, "have pity on me. Lamela and Raphael
have run off with the money, and left me alone here on a bed of
sickness."
I knew this was true, as I had made inquiries; but I also knew that
Camilla had had a share of the spoil, and had bought some valuable
jewelry with it.He then beckoned to
one of his knights, who hastened away and returned bringing
Concobar's own shield and spears and sword out of the Tec Brac,
where they were kept, an equipment in reserve. And Cuculain shook
them and bent them and clashed them together, but they held firm.

"These are good arms, O son of Nessa," said Cuculain.

"Choose now thy charioteer," said the King, "for I will give thee
also war-horses and a chariot."

He caused to pass before Cuculain all the boys who in many and
severe tests had proved their proficiency in charioteering, in the
management and tending of steeds, in the care of weapons and
steed-harness, and all that related to charioteering science.
Amongst them was Laeg, with a pale face and dejected, his eyes red
and his cheeks stained from much weeping. Cuculain laughed when he
saw him, and called him forth from the rest, naming him by his
name with a loud, clear voice, heard to the utmost limit of the
great host.

"There was fear upon thee," said Cuculain.

"There is fear upon thyself," answered Laeg. "It was in thy mind
that I would refuse."

"Nay, there is no such fear upon me," said Cuculain.

"Then there is fear upon me," said Laeg. "A charioteer needs a
champion who is stout and a valiant and faithful. Yea, truly there
is fear upon me," answered Laeg.

"Verily, dear comrade and bed-fellow," answered Cuculain, "it is
through me that thou shalt get thy death-wound, and I say not this
as a vaunt, but as a prophecy."

And that prophecy was fulfilled, for the spear that slew Laeg went
through his master.

After that Laeg stood by Cuculain's side and held his peace, but
his face shone with excess of joy and pride. He wore a light
graceful frock of deerskin, joined in the front with a twine of
bronze wire, and a short, dark-red cape, secured by a pin of gold
with a ring to it. A band of gold thread confined his auburn hair,
rising into a peak behind his head. In his hands he held a goad of
polished red-yew, furnished with a crooked hand-grip of gold, and
pointed with shining bronze, and where the bronze met the timber
there was a circlet of diamond of the diamonds of Banba. He had
also a short-handled scourge with a haft of walrus tooth, and the
rope, cord, and lash of that scourge were made of delicate and
delicately-twisted thread of copper. This equipment was the
equipment of a proved charioteer; the apprentices wore only grey
capes with white fringes, fastened by loops of red cord.

Laeg was one of three brothers, all famous charioteers. Id and
Sheeling were the others. They were all three sons of the King of
Gabra, whose bright dun arose upon a green and sloping hill over
against Tara towards the rising of the sun. Thence sprang the
beautiful stream of the Nemnich, rich in lilies and reeds and
bulrushes, which to-day men call the Nanny Water. Laeg was grey-
eyed and freckled.

Then there were led forward by two strong knights a pair of great
and spirited horses and a splendid war-car. The King said, "They
are thine, dear nephew. Well I know that neither thou, nor Laeg,
will be a dishonour to this war equipage."

Cuculain sprang into the car, and standing with legs apart, he
stamped from side to side and shook the car mightily, till the
axle brake, and the car itself was broken in pieces.

"It is not a good chariot," said the lad.

Another was led forward, and he broke it in like manner.

"Give me a sound chariot, High Lord of the Clanna Rury, or give me
none," he said. "No prudent warrior would fight from such brittle
foothold."

He brake in succession nine war chariots, the greatest and
strongest in Emain. When he broke the ninth the horses of Macha
neighed from their stable. Great fear fell upon the host when they
heard that unusual noise and the reverberation of it in the woods
and hills.

"Let those horses be harnessed to the Chariot of Macha," cried
Concobar, "and let Laeg, son of the King of Gabra, drive them
hither, for those are the horses and that the chariot which shall
be given this day to Cuculain."

Then, son of Sualtam, how in thy guileless breast thy heart
leaped, when thou heardest the thundering of the great war-car and
the wild neighing of the immortal steeds, as they broke from the
dark stable into the clear-shining light of day, and heard behind
them the ancient roaring of the brazen wheels as in the days when
they bore forth Macha and her martial groom against the giants of
old, and mightily established in Eiriu the Red Branch of the
Ultonians! Soon they rushed to view from the rear of Emain,
speeding forth impetuously out of the hollow-sounding ways of the
city and the echoing palaces into the open, and behind them in the
great car green and gold, above the many-twinkling wheels, the
charioteer, with floating mantle, girt round the temples with the
gold fillet of his office, leaning backwards and sideways as he
laboured to restrain their fury unrestrainable; a grey long-maned
steed, whale-bellied, broad-chested, with mane like flying foam,
under one silver yoke, and a black lustrous, tufty-maned steed
under the other, such steeds as in power, size, and beauty the
earth never produced before and never will produce again.

Like a hawk swooping along the face of a cliff when the wind is
high, or like the rush of March wind over the smooth plain, or
like the fleetness of the stag roused from his lair by the hounds
and covering his first field, was the rush of those steeds when
they had broken through the restraint of the charioteer, as though
they galloped over fiery flags, so that the earth shook and
trembled with the velocity of their motion, and all the time the
great car brayed and shrieked as the wheels of solid and
glittering bronze went round, and strange cries and exclamations
were heard, for they were demons that had their abode in that car.

The charioteer restrained the steeds before the assembly, but nay-
the-less a deep purr, like the purr of a tiger, proceeded from the
axle. Then the whole assembly lifted up their voices and shouted
for Cuculain, and he himself, Cuculain, the son of Sualtam, sprang
into his chariot, all armed, with a cry as of a warrior springing
into his chariot in the battle, and he stood erect and brandished
his spears, and the war sprites of the Gael shouted along with
him, for the Bocanahs and Bananahs and the Geniti Glindi, the wild
people of the glens, and the demons of the air, roared around him,
when first the great warrior of the Gael, his battle-arms in his
hands, stood equipped for war in his chariot before all the
warriors of his tribe, the kings of the Clanna Rury and the people
of Emain Macha. After remarking on the value of photographs of
the Corona up to a certain point because of their automatic
accuracy Mrs. Todd very sensibly says, "but pencil drawings, while
ordinarily less trustworthy because involving the uncertain
element of personal equation are more valuable in delineating the
finest and faintest detail of which the sensitive plate rarely
takes note; the vast array of both, however, shows marked differences
in the structure and form of the Corona from one eclipse to another
though it has not yet revealed rapid changes during any one
observation. This last interesting feature can be studied only
by comparison of photographs near the beginning of an eclipse track
and its end, two or three hours of absolute time apart." Concerted
efforts to accomplish this were made in 1871, 1887, and 1889, but
they broke down because the weather failed at one or other end of
the chain of observing stations and a succession of photographs
not simultaneous but separated by sufficient intervals of time could
not be had.

The eclipse of 1893, however, yielded successful though negative
results.
Photographs in South America compared with photographs in Africa
two hours later in time disclosed no appreciable difference in the
structure of the Corona and its streamers.

The eclipse of May 28, 1900, will furnish the next favourable
opportunity for a repetition of this experiment by reason of the
fact that the line of totality begins in North America, crosses
Portugal and Spain and ceases in Africa.

In other words, traverses countries eminently calculated to facilitate
the establishment of photographic observing stations where observations
can be made not simultaneously but at successive intervals spread
over several hours.

Although of course the Corona had been observed long before
the year 1851, as indeed we have already seen, yet the eclipse of
1851 is the farthest back which we can safely take as a starting-point
for gathering up thoroughly precise details, because it was the
first at which photography was brought into use.

Starting, therefore, with that eclipse I want to lay before
the reader some of the very interesting and remarkable
generalisations which (thanks especially to Mr.

W. H.
Wesley's skilful review of many of the photographic results) are
now gradually unfolding themselves to astronomers. To put the
matter in the fewest possible words there seems little or no doubt
that according as spots on the Sun are abundant or scarce so the
Corona when visible during an eclipse varies in appearance from one
period of _eleven_ years to another like period.

Or, to put it in another way, given the date of a coming total
eclipse we can predict to a certain extent the probable shape and
character of the Corona if we know how the forthcoming date stands
as regards a Sun-spot maximum or minimum.

The most recent important eclipses up to date which have been
observed, namely those of April 16, 1893, Aug. 9, 1896, and
Jan. 21, 1898, do not add much to our useful records of the outward
appearances presented by the Corona.

The 1896 Corona is described as intermediate between the two Types
respectively associated with years of maximum and minimum Sun-spots,
and this is as it should have been, albeit there was one extension
which reached to about two diameters of the Sun. The 1898 Corona
yielded four long Coronal streamers reaching much farther from
the Sun than any previously seen, the two longest reaching to 4½
and 6 diameters of the Sun respectively. These dimensions are
quite unprecedented.

[Illustration: FIG. 10.--CORONA OF 1882. (SUN-SPOT MAXIMUM.)]
The application of the spectroscope to observations of eclipses of
the Sun demands a few words of notice in this place, but it would
not be consistent with the plan of this work to go into details.

Though the spectroscope has been applied under many different
circumstances to different parts of the Sun's surroundings in
connection with total eclipses yet it is in regard to the Corona
that most has been done and most has been discovered.

The substance of the discoveries made is that the Corona shines
with an intrinsic light of its own, that is to say, that it is
composed of constituents whose temperature is sufficiently
elevated to be self-luminous. These constituents are chiefly
hydrogen; the body which corresponds to the line D3 (of Fraunhofer's
scale), and which has been named "Helium"; and the body which
corresponds to the bright green line 1474 of Kirchoff's scale and
which, since its existence was first suspected and then assured,
has been named "Coronium."

Then Conall ceased laughing and said, "Not so, Setanta, for verily
thou shalt not be permitted;" and the great Champion sprang
forward to lay his fearless, never-foiled, and all conquering
hands on the bridles of the horses, but at a nod from Cuculain,
Laeg let the steeds go, and Conall sprang aside out of the way, so
terrible was the appearance of the horses as they reared against
him. "Harness my horses and yoke my chariot," cried Conall, "for
if this mad boy goes into the enemies' country and meets with harm
there, verily I shall never be forgiven by the Ultonians."

His horses were harnessed and his chariot yoked,--illustrious too
were those horses, named and famed in many songs--and Conall and
Ide in their chariot dashed through the ford enveloped with
rainbow-painted clouds of foam and spray, and like hawks on the
wing they skimmed the plain, pursuing the boys. Laeg heard the
roar and trampling, and looking back over his shoulder, said,--

"They are after us, dear master, namely the great son of Amargin
and my haughty brother Ide, who hath ever borne himself to me as
though I were a wayward child. They would spoil upon us this our
brave foray. But they will overtake the wind sooner than they will
overtake the Liath Macha and Black Shanglan, whose going truly is
like the going of eagles. O storm-footed steeds, great is my love
for you, and inexpressible my pride in your might and your beauty,
your speed and your terror, and sweet docility and affection."

"Nevertheless, O Laeg," said Cuculain, "slacken now their going,
for that Champion will be an impediment to us in our challengings
and our fightings; for when we stop for that purpose he will
overtake us, and, be our feats what they may, his and not ours
will be the glory. Slacken the going of the horses, for we must
rid ourselves of the annoyance and the pursuit of these gadflies."

Laeg slackened the pace, and as they went Cuculain leaped lightly
from his seat and as lightly bounded back again, holding a great
pebble in his hand, such as a man using all his strength could
with difficulty raise from the ground, and sat still, rejoicing in
his purpose, and grasping the pebble with his five fingers.

Conall and Ide came up to them after that, and Conall, as the
senior and the best man amongst the Ultonians, clamorously called
to them to turn back straightway, or he would hough their horses,
or draw the linch-pins of their wheels, or in some other manner
bring their foray to naught. Cuculain thereupon stood upright in
the car, and so standing, with feet apart to steady him in his
throwing and in his aim, dashed the stone upon the yoke of
Conall's chariot between the heads of the horses and broke the
yoke, so that the pole fell to the ground and the chariot tilted
forward violently. Then the charioteer fell amongst the horses,
and Conall Carna, the beauty of the Ultonians the battle-winning
and ever-victorious son of Amargin, was shot out in front upon the
road, and fell there upon his left shoulder, and his beautiful
raiment was defiled with dust; and when he arose his left hand
hung by his side, for the shoulder-bone was driven from the
socket, owing to the violence of the fall.

"I swear by all my gods," he cried, "that if a step would save thy
head from the hands of the men of Meath, I would not take it."

Cuculain laughed and replied, "Good, O Conall, and who asked thee
to take it, or craved of thee any succour or countenance? Was it a
straight shot? Are there the materials of a fighter in me at all,
dost thou think? Thou art in my debt now too, O Conall. I have
saved thee a broken vow, for it is one of the oaths of our Order
not to enter hostile territory with brittle chariot-gear!"

Then the boys laughed at him again, and Laeg let go the steeds,
and very soon they were out of sight. Conall returned slowly with
his broken chariot to Ath-na-Forairey and sent for Fingin of
Slieve Fuad, who was the most cunning physician and most expert of
bone-setters amongst the Ultonians. Conall's messengers
experienced no difficulty in finding the house of the leech, which
was very recognisable on account of its shape and appearance, and
because it had wide open doors, four in number, affording a
liberal ingress and free thoroughfare to all the winds. Also a
stream of pure water ran through the house, derived from a well of
healing properties, which sprang from the side of the uninhabited
hill. Such were the signs that showed the house of a leech.

When they drew nigh they heard the voice of one man talking and of
another who laughed. It happened that that day there had been
borne thither a champion, in whose body there was not one small
bone unbroken or uninjured. The man's bruises and fractures had
been dressed and set by Fingin and his intelligent and deft-handed
apprentices, and he lay now in his bed of healing listening
joyfully to the conversation of the leech, who was beyond all
others eloquent and of most agreeable discourse.

When Conall's messengers related the reason of their coming,
Fingin cried to his young men, "Harness me my horses and yoke my
chariot. There are few," he said, "in Erin for whom I would leave
my own house, but that youth is one of them. His father Amargin
was well known to me. We may reasonably suppose it then the best
private House in the Town; and her Majesty preferr'd it to the
_College_, which was in the Possession of the _Combe_-Family, who
did not so strongly favour the King's Party.

How much our Author employ'd himself in Poetry, after his Retirement
from the Stage, does not so evidently appear: Very few
posthumous Sketches of his Pen have been recover'd to ascertain
that Point. We have been told, indeed, in Print, but not till
very lately, That two large Chests full of this Great Man's
loose Papers and Manuscripts, in the Hands of an ignorant Baker
of _Warwick_, (who married one of the Descendants from our
_Shakespeare_) were carelesly scatter'd and thrown about, as
Garret-Lumber, and Litter, to the particular Knowledge of the late
Sir _William Bishop_, till they were all consumed in the general
Fire and Destruction, of that Town.

I cannot help being a little apt to distrust the Authority of this
Tradition; because as his Wife surviv'd him seven Years, and as his
Favourite Daughter _Susanna_ surviv'd her twenty six Years, 'tis
very improbable, they should suffer such a Treasure to be remov'd,
and translated into a remoter Branch of the Family, without a
Scrutiny first made into the Value of it.

This, I say, inclines me to distrust the Authority of the Relation:
but, notwithstanding such an apparent Improbability, if we really
lost such a Treasure, by whatever Fatality or Caprice of Fortune
they came into such ignorant and neglectful Hands, I agree with the
_Relater_, the Misfortune is wholly irreparable.

   
   Then Cuculain stood up in the chariot, and surveyed the land on
all sides, and said--

"What is that great, firm-based, indestructible mountain upon our
left hand, one of a noble range which, rising from the green
plain, runs eastward. The last peak there is the mountain of which
I speak, whose foot is in the Ictian sea and whose head neighbours
the firmament."

And Laeg said, "Men call it Slieve Modurn, after a giant of the
elder time, when men were mightier and greater than they are now.
He was of the children of Brogan, uncle of Milesius, and his
brothers were Fuad and Eadar and Breagh, and all these being very
great men are commemorated in the names of noble mountains and
sea-dividing promontories."

"Guide thither the horses," said Cuculain. "It is right that those
who take the road against an enemy should first spy out the land,
choosing judiciously their point of onset, and Slieve Modurn
yonder commands a most brave prospect."

Laeg did so. There, in a green valley, they unharnessed the horses
and tethered them to graze, and they themselves climbed the
mountain and stood upon the top in the most clear air. Thence Laeg
showed him the green plain of Meath extending far and wide, and
the great streams of Meath where they ran, the Boyne and the
Blackwater, the Liffey and the Royal Rye, and his own stream the
Nanny Water, clear and sparkling, which was very dear to Laeg,
because he had snared fish there and erected dams, and had done
divers boyish feats upon its shores.

Cuculain said, "I see a beautiful green hill, shaped like an
inverted ewer, on the south shore of the Boyne. There is a noble
palace there. I see the flashing of its lime-white sides, and the
colours of the variegated roof and around it are other beautiful
houses. How is that city named O Laeg, and who dwells there?"

"That is the hill of Temair," answered Laeg, "Tara's high citadel.
Well may that city be beautiful, for the seat of Erin's high
sovereignty is there. The man who holds it is Arch-king of all
Erin."

"Westward by south," said Cuculain, "I see another city widely
built, and unenclosed by ramparts and defensive works, and hard by
there is a most smooth plain. At one end of the plain I see a
glittering, and also at the other,"

And Laeg said, "That is the hill of Talteen, so named because the
mother of far-shooting Lu, the Deliverer, is worshipped there, and
every year, when the leaves change their colour, games and
contests of skill are celebrated there in her honour. So it was
enjoined on the men of Erin by her famous son. Chariot races are
run there on that smooth plain. The glittering points on either
side of it are the racing pillars of burnished brass, the
starting-post, and that which the charioteers graze with the
glowing axle. Many a noble chariot has been broken, and many a
gallant youth slain at the further of those twain. It was there
that Concobar raced his steeds against the woman with child,
concerning which things there are rumours and prophesyings."

So Cuculain questioned Laeg concerning the cities of Meath, and
concerning the noble raths and duns where the kings and lords and
chief men of Meath dwelt prosperously, rejoicing in their great
wealth. Cuculain said, "None of these kings and lords and chief
men whom thou hast enumerated have at any time injured my nation,
and there is not one upon whom I might rightly take vengeance. But
I see one other splendid dun, and of this thou hast said no word,
though thrice I have questioned thee concerning it."

Laeg grew pale at these words, and he said,

"What dun is that, my master?"

Cuculain said, "O fox that thou art, right well thou knowest. It
is not a little or mean one, but great, proud, and conspicuous,
and vauntingly it rears its head like a man who has never known
defeat, but on the contrary has caused many widows to lament. Its
white sides flashed against the dark waters of the Boyne, and its
bright roofs glitter above the green woods. At length we entered
Elverston. I think I was half wild. I could not speak, but ran,
with a loud, long scream, into Cousin Monica's arms.

I forget a great deal after that.

* * * * *
It was not till two years afterwards that I learnt that Uncle Silas
was found next morning dead of an overdose of laudanum, and that
Dudley had disappeared.

Milly married her good little clergyman. I am Lady Ilbury now,
happy in the affection of a beloved and noble-hearted husband.
A tiny voice is calling "Mamma;" the shy, useless girl you have
known is now a mother, thinking, and trembling while she smiles,
how strong is love, how frail is life.

* * * * *

RENÉ LE SAGE

Gil Blas

Except that he was born at Sarzeau, in Brittany, on May 8, 1668,
and that he was the son of the novelist Claude le Sage,
little is known of the youth of Alain René le Sage. Until he was
eighteen he was educated with the Jesuits at Vannes, when, it is
conjectured he went to Paris to continue his studies for the Bar.
An early marriage drove him to seek a livelihood by means of
literature, and shortly afterwards he found a valuable and sympathetic
friend and patron in the Abbé de Lyonne, who not only bestowed
upon him a pension of about £125, but also gave him the use of his
library. The first results of this favour were adaptations of two
plays from Rojas and Lope de Vega, which appeared some time
during the first two or three years of the eighteenth century. Le
Sage's reputation as a playwright and as a novelist rests, oddly
enough, in each case on one work. As the author of "Tuscaret,"
produced in 1709, he contributed to the stage one of the best
comedies in the French language; as author of "The Adventures
of Gil Blas of Santillana" he stands for all time in the front
rank of the world's novelists.

Here he brought the art of story-writing to the highest level of
artistic truth. The first and second parts of the work appeared
in 1715, the third in 1724, and the fourth in 1735. Le Sage died
at Boulogne on November 17, 1747.

_I.--I Start on my Travels_

My uncle, Canon Perez, was a worthy priest. To live well was,
in his opinion, the chief duty of man. He lived very well. He kept
the best table in the town of Oviedo. I was very glad of this, as
I lived with him, my parents being too poor to keep me.

My uncle gave me an excellent education.

He even learned to read so as to be able to teach me himself. There
were few ecclesiastics of his rank in Spain in the early part of
the seventeenth century who could read a breviary as well as
he could when I left him, at the age of seventeen, to continue
my duties at the University of Salamanca.

"Here are forty ducats, Gil Blas," he said to me when we parted.

"And you can take my old mule and sell it when you reach
Salamanca.

Then you will be able to live comfortable until you obtain a good
position."
It is, I suppose, about two hundred miles from Oviedo to Salamanca.
Not very far, you will say, but it took me two years to cover the
distance.

When one travels along a high road at the age of seventeen, master
of one's actions, of an old mule, and forty ducats, one is bound
to meet with adventures on the way.

I was out to see the world, and I meant to see it; my self-confidence
was equalled only by my utter inexperience.
Out of my first misadventure came an extraordinary piece of good
luck. I fell into the hands of some brigands, and lost my
mule and my money.
Among my fellow prisoners was a wealthy lady, Doña Mencia, of Burgos.
I helped her to escape and got away myself, and when I came to
Zurgos she rewarded me very handsomely with a diamond ring and a
thousand ducats.
This changed my plan of life completely. Why should I go and study
at Salamanca? Did I want to become a priest or a pedant? I was now
sure that I didn't.
"Gil Blas," I said, "you are a good-looking lad, clever, well-educated,
and ambitious. Why not go to Madrid and try to get some place at
the court of King Philip the Third?"
I spent sixty ducats in dressing myself out gaily in the manner of
a rich cavalier, and I engaged a man of about thirty years of age
to come with me as my servant.Very soon sweet slumber possessed him. Laeg meanwhile kept watch
and ward, and his great heart in his breast continually trembled
like the leaf of the poplar tree, or like a rush in a flooded
stream. The awakening birds unconscious sang in the trees, the dew
glittered on the grass; hard by the royal Boyne rolled silently.
The son of Sualtam slumbered without sound or motion, and the
charioteer stood beside him upright, like a pillar, his grey
bright eyes fixed upon the house of the sorcerers, the merciless,
bloody, and ever-victorious sons of Nectan, the son of Labrad.

Of the people of the dun, Foil, son of Nectan, was the first to
awake. It was his custom to wander forth by himself early in the
morning, devising snares and stratagems by which he might take and
destroy men at his leisure. He was more cruel than anything. By
him the great door of the dun, bound and rivetted with brass, was
flung open. With one hand he backshot the bar, which rushed into
its chamber with a roar and crash as of a great house when it
falls, and with the other he drew back the door. It grated on its
brazen hinges, and on the iron threshold, with a noise like
thunder. Then Foil stood black and huge in the wide doorway of the
dun, and he looked at Laeg and Laeg looked at him. The man was
ugly and fierce of aspect. His hair was thick and black; he was
bull-necked and large-eared. His mantle was black, bordered with
dark red; his tunic, a dirty yellow, was splashed with recent
blood. There were great shoes on his feet soled with wood and
iron. In his hand he bore a staff of quick-beam, as it were a
full-grown tree without its branches. He being thus, strode
forward in an ungainly manner to Laeg, and with a surly voice bade
him drive the horses off the lawn.

"Drive them off thyself," said Laeg.

He sought to do that, but owing to the behaviour of the steeds, he
desisted right soon, and turned again to Laeg.

"Who is the sleeping youth?" said he, "and wherefore hath he come
hither in an evil hour?"

"He is a certain mild and gentle youth of the Ultonians," replied
Laeg, "who yester morning prosperously assumed his arms of
chivalry for the first time, and hath come hither to prove his
valour upon the sons of Nectan."

"Many youths of his nation have come hither with the same intent,"
said the giant, "but they did not return."

"This youth will," said Laeg, "after having slain the sons of
Nectan, and after having sacked their dun and burned it with
fire."

Foil hearing that word became very angry, and he gripped his great
staff and advanced to make a sudden end of Laeg first, and then of
the sleeper, Laeg, on his side, drew Cuculain's sword. Hardly and
using all his strength, could he do so and at the same time hold
himself in an attitude of defence and attack, but he succeeded.
His aspect, too, was high and warlike, and his eyes shone
menacingly the while his heart trembled, for he knew too well that
he was no match for the man.

"Go back now for thy weapons of war," he cried, "and all thy war-
furniture, and thy instruments of sorcery and enchantment. Truly
thou art in need of them all."

When Foil saw how the enormous sword flashed in the lad's hand,
and saw the fierceness of his visage and heard his menacing words,
he returned to the dun. The people of the dun were now awake, and
they clustered like bees on the slope of the mound, and in the
covered ways beneath the eaves and along the rampart, and they
hissed and roared and shouted words of insult and contumely, lewd
and gross, concerning Laeg and concerning that other youth who
slept in such a place and at such a time. But Laeg stood still and
silent, with his eyes fixed on the dun, and with the point of his
sword leaning on the ground, for his right hand was weary on
account of its great weight. Very ardently he longed that his
master should awake out of that unreasonable slumber. Yet he made
no attempt to rouse him, for it was unlawful to awake Cuculain
when he slept. Conspicuous amongst the people of the dun were
Foil's brethren, Tuatha and Fenla, Tuatha vast in bulk, and Fenla,
tall and swift, wearing a mantle of pale blue. Around Fenla stood
the three cup-bearers, who drew water from the magic well, Flesc,
Lesc, and Leam were their names. At the same time that Foil
reappeared in the doorway of the dun, fully armed and equipped for
battle, Cuculain awoke and sat up. At first he was dazed and
bewildered, for divine voices were sounding in his ears, and
fleeting visionary presences were departing from him. Then he
heard the people how they shouted and saw his enemy descending the
slope of the dun, sights and sounds indeed diverse from those his
dreams and visions. With a cry he started from his bed, like a
deer starting from his lair, and the people of the dun fell
suddenly silent when they beheld the velocity of his movements,
the splendour of his beauty, and the rapidity with which he armed
himself and stood forth for war.

THE "SAROS" AND THE PERIODICITY OF ECLIPSES.

To bring about an eclipse of the Sun, two things must
combine: (1) the Moon must be at or near one of its Nodes; and (2),
this must be at a time when the Moon is also in "Conjunction"
with the Sun. Now the Moon is in Conjunction with the Sun (= "New
Moon") 12 or 13 times in a year, but the Sun only passes through
the Nodes of the Moon's orbit twice a year. Hence an eclipse of the
Sun does not and cannot occur at every New Moon, but only occasionally.
"Have no fear on that account," said Cuculain, "for it has been
revealed to me where he hides it. It is a ges to him to wear it
always on his breast above his armour, but beneath his mantle and
tunic. There it is suspended by a strong chain of brass around his
neck. With that ball I shall slay him in the manner in which I
have been directed by those who visited me while I slept."

Then they fought, and in the first close so vehement was the onset
of Foil, that Cuculain could do no more than defend himself, and
around the twain sparks flew up in showers as from a smithy where
a blacksmith and his lusty apprentices strongly beat out the red
iron. The second was similar to the first, and equally without
results. In the third close Cuculain, having sheathed his sword,
sprang upwards and dashed his shield into the giant's face, and at
the same time he tore from its place of concealment the magic
ball, rending mightily the brazen chain. And he leaped backwards,
and taking a swift aim, threw. The ball flew from the young hero's
hand like a bolt from a sling, and it struck the giant in the
middle of the forehead below the rim of his helmet, but above his
blazing eyes, and the ball crashed through the strong frontal
bone, and tore its way through the hinder part of his head, and
went forth, carrying the brains with it in its course, so that
there was a free tunnel and thoroughfare for all the winds of
heaven there. With a crash and a ringing, armour and weapons, the
giant fell upon the plain and his blood poured forth in a torrent
there where he himself invulnerable had shed the blood of so many
heroes. Laeg rejoiced greatly at that feat, and with a loud voice
bade the men of the dun bring forth their next champion. This was
Tuatha the second son of Nectan, and the fiercest of the three, he
buffeted his esquires and gillas, while they armed him, so that it
was a sore task for them to clasp and strap and brace his armour
upon him that day, for their faces were bloody from his hands, and
the floor of the armoury was strewn with their teeth. That armour
was a marvel and astonishment to all who saw it, so many thick,
hard skins of wild oxen of the mountains had been stitched
together to furnish forth the champion's coat of mail. It was
strengthened, too, with countless bars and rings of brass sewed
fast to it all over, and it encompassed the whole of his mighty
frame, from his shoulders to his feet. The helmet and neckpiece
were one, wrought in like manner, only stronger. The helmet
covered his face. There was no opening there save breathing slits
and two round holes through which his eyes shone terribly. On his
feet were strong shoes bound with brass. To any other man but
himself this armour would have been an encumbrance, for it was
good and sufficient loading for a car drawn by one yoke of oxen;
but so clad, this man was aware of no unusual weight. When they
had clasped him and braced him to his satisfaction, and, indeed,
that was not easy, they put upon him his tunic of dusky grey, and
over that his mantle of dark crimson, and fastened it on his
breast with a brooch whose wheel alone would task one man's full
strength to lift from the ground.

Then Tuatha went forth out of the dun, and when his people saw him
they shouted mightily, for before that they had been greatly
dismayed, and cast down on account of the slaying of Foil, whom
till then they had deemed invincible. They were all males dwelling
here together in sorcery and common lust for blood. No woman
brightened their dark assemblies and the voice of a child was
never heard within the dun or around it. So they rejoiced greatly
when they beheld Tuatha and saw him how wrathfully he came forth,
breathing slaughter, and heard his voice; for terribly he shouted
as he strode down from the dun, and he banned and cursed Cuculain
and Laeg, and devoted them to his gloomy gods. Beneath his feet
the massive timbers of the drawbridge bent and creaked.

The Ease and Sweetness of his Temper might not a little contribute
to his Facility in Writing; as his Employment, as a _Player_, gave
him an Advantage and Habit of fancying himself the very Character
he meant to delineate.

He used the Helps of his Function in forming himself to create
and express that _Sublime_, which other Actors can only copy,
and throw out, in Action and graceful Attitude. But _Nullum
fine Veniâ placuit Ingenium_, says _Seneca_. The Genius, that gives
us the greatest Pleasure, sometimes stands in Need of our Indulgence.

Whenever this happens with regard to _Shakespeare_, I would
willingly impute it to a Vice of _his Times_. We see
Complaisance enough, in our own Days, paid to a _bad Taste_. His
_Clinches_, _false Wit_, and descending beneath himself, seem to
be a Deference paid to _reigning Barbarism_. He was a _Sampson_
in Strength, but he suffer'd some such _Dalilah_ to give him
up to the _Philistines_.

As I have mention'd the Sweetness of his Disposition, I am tempted
to make a Reflexion or two on a Sentiment of his, which, I am
persuaded, came from the Heart.

The Man, that hath no Musick in himself, Nor is not mov'd with
Concord of sweet Sounds, Is fit for Treasons, Stratagems, and
Spoils:
The Motions of his Spirit are dull as Night, And his Affections
dark as _Erebus_:
Let no such Man be trusted.----
[Sidenote: A Lover of _Musick_.]
_Shakespeare_ was all Openness, Candour, and Complacence; and had
such a Share of Harmony in his Frame and Temperature, that we have
no Reason to doubt, from a Number of fine Passages, Allusions,
Similies, &_c._ fetch'd from _Musick_, but that He was a passionate
Lover of it. And to this, perhaps, we may owe that great Number
of _Sonnets_, which are sprinkled thro' his _Plays_. I have found,
that the Stanza's sung by the Gravedigger in _Hamlet_, are not of
_Shakespeare_'s own Composition, but owe their Original to the old
Earl of _Surrey_'s Poems.

Many other of his Occasional little Songs, I doubt not, but he
purposely copied from his Contemporary Writers; sometimes, out of
Banter; sometimes, to do them Honour. The Manner of their Introduction,
and the Uses to which he has assigned them, will easily determine
for which of the Reasons they are respectively employ'd. In _As
you like it_, there are several little Copies of Verses on
_Rosalind_, which are said to be the right _Butter-woman's Rank
to Market_, and the very _false Gallop of Verses_. Dr. _Thomas
Lodge_, a Physician who flourish'd early in Queen _Elizabeth_'s
Reign, and was a great Writer of the Pastoral Songs and Madrigals,
which were so much the Strain of those Times, composed a whole
Volume of Poems in Praise of his Mistress, whom he calls
_Rosalinde_. I never yet could meet with this Collection; but
whenever I do, I am persuaded, I shall find many of our Author's
Canzonets on this Subject to be Scraps of the Doctor's amorous
Muse:
as, perhaps, those by _Biron_ too, and the other Lovers in _Love's
Labour's lost_, may prove to be.

It has been remark'd in the Course of my Notes, that Musick in
our Author's time had a very different Use from what it has
now. At this Time, it is only employ'd to raise and inflame the
Passions; it, then, was apply'd to calm and allay all kinds of
Perturbations. And, agreeable to this Observation, throughout
all _Shakespeare_'s Plays, where Musick is either actually used,
or its Powers describ'd, it is chiefly said to be for these
Ends. His _Twelfth-Night_, particularly, begins with a fine
Reflexion that admirably marks its soothing Properties.

That Strain again;--It had a dying Fall.
Oh, it came o'er my Ear like the sweet South, That breathes upon a
Bank of Violets, Stealing and giving Odour!

[Sidenote*: _Milton_ an Imitator of him.]

This _Similitude_ is remarkable not only for the Beauty of the
Image that it presents, but likewise for the Exactness to the Thing
compared. This is a way of Teaching peculiar to the Poets; that,
when they would describe the Nature of any thing, they do it not
by a direct Enumeration of its Attributes or Qualities, but by
bringing something into Comparison, and describing those Qualities
of it that are of the Kind with those in the Thing compared.Forthwith, then, Fenla, wearing sword and shield, sprang at a
bound over the rampart and foss, and his course thence to the
Boyne was like a flash of blue and white and he plunged into the
dark stream like a bright spear, and diving beneath the flood he
emerged a great way off, and cried aloud for his foe.

"I am here," cried Cuculain, at his side. "Cease thy shouting and
look to thyself, for it is not my custom to take advantage of any
man."

Marvellous and terrible was the battle which then ensued between
these champions. For the spray and the froth and the flying spume
of the convulsed and agitated waters around that warring twain,
rose in white clouds, and owing to the fierceness of the combat
and the displacement of the waters around them, the Boyne on
either hand beat her green margin with sudden and unusual billows,
for the divine river was taken with a great surprise on that
occasion. Amid the roar of the waters ever sounded the dry clash
of the meeting swords and the clang of the smitten shields and the
ringing of helmets. Sometimes one champion would dive seeking an
advantage, and the other would dive too, in order to elude or meet
the assault. Then the frothing surface of the stream would clear
itself, and the Boyne run dark as before, though the mounted water
showed that the combat still raged in its depths. The swallows,
too, had been scared away, returning, skimmed the surface, and the
bird which is the most beautiful of all darted a bright streak low
across the dark water. Anon the submerged champions, coming to the
surface for breath, renewed their deadly combat amid foaming
waters and clouds of spray. The full particulars of this combat
are not related, only that the wizard-champion grew weaker, while
his vigour and strength continued unabated with the son of
Sualtam, and that in the end he slew the other, and in the sight
of all he cut off his head and flung it from the middle Boyne to
the shore, and that the headless trunk of Fenla, son of Nectan,
floated down-stream to the sea. When the people of the dun saw
that, they brake forth west-ward and fled. Then Cuculain and Laeg
invaded the dun, and they burst open the doors of the strong
chambers, and of the dungeons beneath the earth, and let loose the
prisoners and the hostages and the prepared victims, and they
broke the idols and the instruments of sorcery, and filled in the
well. After that they replenished the vacant places of the war-car
with things the most precious and such as were portable, and gave
all the rest to the liberated captives for a prey. Last of all
they applied fire to the vast dun, and quickly the devouring
flames shot heavenward, fed with pine and red yew, and rolled
forth a mighty pillar of black smoke, reddened with rushing sparks
and flaming embers. The men of Tara saw it, and the men of Tlatga,
and of Tailteen, and of Ben-Eadar, and they consulted their
prophets and wizards as to what this portent might mean, for it
was not a little smoke that the burning of Dun-Mic-Nectan sent
forth that day.


CHAPTER XVI

THE RETURN OF CUCULAIN


     "The golden gates of sleep unbar
     When strength and beauty met together
     Kindle their image like a star
     In a sea of glassy weather."

                      SHELLEY.


Then Laeg harnessed the horses and yoked the chariot. To the
brazen peaks of the chariot he fastened the heads of Foil and of
Tuatha, with Foil's on the left hand and Tuatha's on the right;
and the long-haired head of the water-wizard he made fast by its
own hair to the ornament of silver that was at the forward
extremity of the great chariot pole. When this was done, and when
he had secured his master's weapons and warlike equipments in
their respective places, the youths ascended the chariot, and Laeg
shook the ringing reins and called to the steeds to go, and they
went, and soon they were on the hard highway straining forward to
the north. The sound of the war-car behind them outroared the
roaring of the flames. Cuculain was a pale red all over, for ere
the last combat was at an end that pool of the Boyne was like one
bath of blood. His eyes blazed terribly in his head, and his face
was fearful to look upon. Like a reed in a river so he quaked and
trembled, and there went out from him a moaning like the moaning
of winds through deep woods or desolate glens, or over the waste
places of the earth when darkness is abroad. For the war-fury
which the Northmen named after the Barserkers enwrapped and
inflamed him, body and spirit, owing to those strenuous combats,
and owing to the venom and the poison which exhaled from those
children of sorcery, that spawn of Death and Hell, so that his
gentle mind became as it were the meeting-place of storms and the
confluence of shouting seas. A man ran before him whose bratta on
the wind roared like fire, and there was a sound of voices calling
and acclaiming, and a noontide darkness descended upon him and
accompanied him as he went, and all became obscure and shapeless,
and all the ways were murk. Preconceived ideas prejudiced
the observers, and their sketches were mostly structureless....

It should not be forgotten that the Coronal rays project outward
into space from a spherical Sun and do not lie in a plane as
they appear to the eye in photographs and drawings."I have not seen such at
any time. Lurid fire plays round them as they flee."

"No deer of the earth are they," said Laeg. "They are the
enchanted herd of Slieve Fuad, and from their abode subterrene
they have come up late into the world surrounded by night that
they may graze upon Eiriu's plains, and it is not lawful even to
look upon them."

"Pursue and run down those deer," said Cuculain.

"There is fear upon me," said Laeg.

"Alive or dead thou shalt come with me on this adventure, though
it lead us into the mighty realms of the dead," cried Cuculain.

Laeg relaxed his hands upon the reins and let the steeds go, and
they chased the enchanted herd of Slieve Fuad. Airy then
proceeds to point out that, with regard to the four eclipses which
he could not confirm, there cannot have been eclipses in April
645 B.C. or in June 592 B.C. It appears, however, from a note by
Williams, that the date attached to the eclipse of 645 B.C. is,
in reality, an erroneous repetition (in the Chinese mode of
expressing it) of that attached to the next following one, and
in the absence of correct date it must be rejected.

In the record of 592 B.C., June 16, no clerical error is found,
and there must be an error of a different class. The eclipses of
552 B.C., September 19, and 549 B.C., July 18, to which there is
nothing corresponding in the _Art de vérifier_, are in a different
category.

"From his vast and ever-during realms beneath the sea they
have come up through the dim night to feed on Banba's plains. Have
nought to do with those birds, dear master."

Cuculain stood up in his chariot with his sling in his hand, and
he fitted thereto small bolts, and slang. He did not make an end
before he had overthrown and laid low three score of the birds of
Lir.

"Go bring me those birds," said he to Laeg. The horses were
plunging terribly when he said that.

"I may not, O my master," said Laeg. "For even now, and with the
reins in my hand, I am unable to restrain their fury and their
madness, to such a degree have their noble minds been disturbed by
the sorcery and the druidism and the enchantment with which they
are surrounded. And I fear that soon the brazen wheels will fail
me, or that the axle-tree will fail me by reason of their
collidings with the rocks and cliffs of the land, when the horses
shall have escaped from my control and shall have rushed forth
like hurricanes over the earth."

Forthwith Cuculain sprang out in front of the chariot, and seized
them by their mouths and they in their rearing, and with his hands
bowed down their heads to the earth, and they knew their master
and stood still while they quaked. Laeg collected the birds, and
Cuculain secured them to the chariot and to the harness. The birds
returned to life and Cuculain cut the binding cords, so that the
birds flew over and on either side of the chariot, and singing
besides.

In that manner, speeding northward, Cuculain and Laeg drew nigh to
Emain Macha. Not a cloud was visible. We had made ample preparation,
laying in a stock of smoked glass several days in advance.
It was the grandest sight I ever beheld, but it frightened the
Indians badly. Some of them threw themselves upon their knees and
invoked the Divine blessing; others flung themselves flat on the
ground, face downward; others cried and yelled in frantic excitement
and terror.

Finally one old fellow stepped from the door of his lodge, pistol
in hand, and fixing his eyes on the darkened Sun, mumbled a few
unintelligible words and raising his arm took direct aim at the
luminary, fired off his pistol, and after throwing his arms about
his head in a series of extraordinary gesticulations retreated to
his own quarters.

He
cometh like night in raiment of darkness, Starry singing flocks
are round his head, Soon, O Concobar, his unendurable hand will he
upon you; Soon your dead will outnumber your living."

"Close all the gates of Emain," cried Concobar, "and treble-bar
all with bars. Look to your weapons ye heroes of the Red Branch.
Man the ramparts, and let every bridge be raised."

So the high king shouted, and his voice rang through the vast and
high dun and rolled along the galleries and far-stretching
corridors, and was heard by the women of Ulla in their secluded
chambers. And at the same time the watchman from the watch-tower
cried out. Then the women held council together, and they said:

"Moats and ramparts and strong doors will not repel Cuculain. He
will surely o'erleap the moat and burst through the doors and slay
many."

And as they debated together they said that they alone would save
the city and defeat the war-demons who had Cuculain in their
power. For they said--"His virginity is with him, and his
beautiful shamefastness, and his humility and reverence for women,
whether they be old or young, and whether they be comely or not
comely. And this was his way always, and now more than formerly
since young love hath descended upon him in the form of Emer,
daughter of Fargal Manach, King of Lusk in the south."

Then the women of the Ultonians did a great and memorable deed,
and such as was not known to have been done at any time in Erin.

They bade all the men retire into the dun after they had lowered
the bridge; and when that was done three tens of them, such as
were the most illustrious in rank and famous for accomplishments,
and they all in the prime of their youth and beauty, and clad only
in the pure raiment of their womanhood, came forth out of the
quarters of the women, and in that order, in spite of shame they
went to meet him. _IV.--The Open Door_

It was a very still night. A peculiar sound startled me and I
saw a man descend by a rope, and take his stand on the windowsill.
In a moment more, window, bars and all, swung noiselessly
open, and Dudley Ruthyn stepped into the room.

He stole, in a groping way, to the bed, and stooped over it.

Nearly at the same moment there came a scrunching blow; an unnatural
shriek, accompanied by a convulsive sound, as of the motion of
running, and the arms drumming on the bed, and then another blow--and
silence. The diabolical surgery was over. There came a little
tapping at the door.

"Who's that?" whispered Dudley hoarsely.
"A friend," answered a sweet voice, and Uncle Silas entered.
Coolness was given me in that dreadful moment.All were acclaiming and praising him, and he passed
up the great hall and made a reverence to the King, and he sat
down at the King's footstool. All who saw him marvelled then more
at his beauty than at his deeds. He was sick after that, and came
very near to death, but in the end he fell into a very deep sleep
from which he awoke whole and refreshed, though it was the opinion
of many that he would surely die. Cuculain was seventeen years of
age when he did these feats.