Produced by Mary Starr


BUCKY O'CONNOR

A Tale of the Unfenced Border

By William MacLeod Raine


               To My Brother

               EDGAR C. RAINE

MY DEAR WANDERER:

I write your name on this page that you may know we hold you not less in
our thoughts because you have heard and answered again the call of the
frozen North, have for the time disappeared, swallowed in some of its
untrodden wilds. As in those old days of 59 Below On Bonanza, the long
Winter night will be of interminable length. Armed with this note of
introduction then, Bucky O'Connor offers himself, with the best bow
of one Adventurer to another, as a companion to while away some few of
those lonely hours.

March, 1910, Denver.


BUCKY O'CONNOR


CONTENTS

     1. Enter "Bear-Trap" Collins
     2. Taxation Without Representation
     3. The Sheriff Introduces Himself
     4. A Bluff is Called
     5. Bucky Entertains
     6. Bucky Makes a Discovery
     7. In the Land of Revolutions
     8. First Blood!
     9. "Adore Has Only One D"
     10. The Hold-Up of the M. C. P. Flyer
     11. "Stone Walls Do Not a Prison Make"
     12. A Clean White Man's Option
     13. Bucky's First-Rate Reasons
     14. Le Roi Est Mort; Vive Le Roi
     15. In the Secret Chamber
     16. Juan Valdez Scores
     17. Hidden Valley
     18. A Dinner for Three
     19. A Villon of the Desert
     20. Back to God's Country
     21. The Wolf Pack
     22. For a Good Reason


CHAPTER 1. ENTER "BEAR-TRAP" COLLINS

She had been aware of him from the moment of his spectacular entrance,
though no slightest sign of interest manifested itself in her indolent,
incurious eyes. Indeed, his abundant and picturesque area was so vivid
that it would have been difficult not to feel his presence anywhere, let
alone on a journey so monotonous as this was proving to be.

It had been at a water-tank, near Socorro, that the Limited, churning
furiously through brown Arizona in pursuit of a lost half-hour,
jarred to a sudden halt that shook sleep from the drowsy eyes of bored
passengers. Through the window of her Pullman the young woman in Section
3 had glimpsed a bevy of angry train officials eddying around a sturdy
figure in the center, whose strong, lean head rose confidently above the
press. There was the momentary whirl of a scuffle, out of the tangle
of which shot a brakeman as if propelled from a catapult. The circle
parted, brushed aside by a pair of lean shoulders, muscular and broad.
Yet a few moments and the owner of the shoulders led down the aisle to
the vacant section opposite her a procession whose tail was composed of
protesting trainmen.

"You had no right to flag the train, Sheriff Collins, and you'll have
to get off; that's all there is to it," the conductor was explaining
testily.

"Oh, that's all right," returned the offender with easy good nature,
making himself at home in Section 4. "Tell the company to send in its
bill. No use jawing about it."

"You'll have to get off, sir."

"That's right--at Tucson."

"No, sir. You'll have to get off here. I have no authority to let you
ride."

"Didn't I hear you say the train was late? Don't you think you'd arrive
earlier at the end of your run if your choo-choo got to puffing?"

"You'll have to get off, sir."

"I hate to disoblige," murmured the owner of the jingling spurs, the
dusty corduroys, and the big, gray hat, putting his feet leisurely on
the cushion in front of him. "But doesn't it occur to you that you are a
man of one idea?"

"This is the Coast Limited. It doesn't stop for anybody--not even for
the president of the road."

"You don't say! Well, I ce'tainly appreciate the honor you did me in
stopping to take me on." His slight drawl was quite devoid of concern.

"But you had no right to flag the train. Can't you understand ANYTHING?"
groaned the conductor.

"You explain it again to me, sonny. I'm surely thick in the haid,"
soothed the intruder, and listened with bland good-humor to the
official's flow of protest.

"Well--well! Disrupted the whole transcontinental traffic, didn't I? And
me so innocent, too. Now, this is how I figured it out. Here's me in
a hurry to get to Tucson. Here comes your train a-foggin'--also and
likewise hittin' the high spots for Tucson. Seemed like we ought to
travel in company, and I was some dubious she'd forget to stop unless I
flagged her. Wherefore, I aired my bandanna in the summer breeze."

"But you don't understand." The conductor began to explain anew as to a
dull child. "It's against the law. You'll get into trouble."

"Put me in the calaboose, will they?"

"It's no joke."

"Well, it does seem to be worrying you," Mr. Collins conceded. "Don't
mind me. Free your mind proper."

The conductor, glancing about nervously, noticed that passengers were
smiling broadly. His official dignity was being chopped to mince-meat.
Back came his harassed gaze to the imperturbable Collins with the brown,
sun-baked face and the eyes blue and untroubled as an Arizona sky. Out
of a holster attached to the sagging belt that circled the corduroy
trousers above his hips gleamed the butt of a revolver. But in the
last analysis the weapon of the occasion was purely a moral one. The
situation was one not covered in the company's rule book, and in the
absence of explicit orders the trainman felt himself unequal to that
unwavering gaze and careless poise. Wherefore, he retreated, muttering
threats of what the company would do.

"Now, if I had only known it was against the law. My thick haid's always
roping trouble for me," the plainsman confided to the Pullman conductor,
with twinkling eyes.

That official unbent. "Talking about thick heads, I'm glad my porter
has one. If it weren't iron-plated and copper-riveted he'd be needing a
doctor now, the way you stood him on it."

"No, did I? Ce'tainly an accident. The nigger must have been in my way
as I climbed into the car. Took the kink out of his hair, you say? Here,
Sam!" He tossed a bill to the porter, who was rolling affronted eyes at
him. "Do you reckon this is big enough to plaster your injured feelings,
boy?"

The white smile flashed at him by the porter was a receipt for indemnity
paid in full.

Sheriff Collins' perception of his neighbor across the aisle was more
frank in its interest than the girl's had been of him. The level,
fearless gaze of the outdoors West looked at her unabashed, appreciating
swiftly her points as they impinged themselves upon his admiration. The
long, lithe lines of the slim, supple body, the languid grace missing
hauteur only because that seemed scarce worth while, the unconscious
pride of self that fails to be offensive only in a young woman so well
equipped with good looks as this one indubitably was the rider of the
plains had appraised them all before his eyes dismissed her from his
consideration and began a casual inspection of the other passengers.

Inside of half an hour he had made himself persona grata to everybody
in the car except his dark-eyed neighbor across the way. That this
dispenser of smiles and cigars decided to leave her out in the
distribution of his attentions perhaps spoke well for his discernment.
Certainly responsiveness to the geniality of casual fellow passengers
did not impress Mr. Collins as likely to be an outstanding, quality in
her. But with the drummer from Chicago, the young mining engineer going
to Sonora, the two shy little English children just in front of him
traveling to meet their father in California, he found intuitively
common ground of interest. Even Major Mackenzie, the engineer in charge
of the large irrigation project being built by a company in southern
Arizona, relaxed at one of the plainsman's humorous tales.

It was after Collins had half-depopulated the car by leading the more
jovial spirits back in search of liquid refreshments that an urbane
clergyman, now of Boston but formerly of Pekin, Illinois, professedly
much interested in the sheriff's touch-and-go manner as presumably quite
characteristic of the West, dropped into the vacant seat beside Major
Mackenzie.

"And who might our energetic friend be?" he asked, with an ingratiating
smile.

The young woman in front of them turned her head ever so slightly to
listen.

"Val Collins is his name," said the major. "Sometimes called 'Bear-trap
Collins.' He has always lived on the frontier. At least, I met him
twelve years ago when he was riding mail between Aravaipa and Mesa. He
was a boy then, certainly not over eighteen, but in a desperate fight
he had killed two men who tried to hold up the mail. Cow-puncher,
stage-driver, miner, trapper, sheriff, rough rider, politician--he's
past master at them all."

"And why the appellation of 'Bear-trap,' may I ask?" The smack of pulpit
oratory was not often missing in the edifying discourse of the Reverend
Peter Melancthon Brooks.

"Well, sir, that's a story. He was trapping in the Tetons about five
years ago thirty miles from the nearest ranch-house. One day, while
he was setting a bear-trap, a slide of snow plunged down from the tree
branches above and freed the spring, catching his hand between its jaws.
With his feet and his other hand he tried to open that trap for four
hours, without the slightest success. There was not one chance in a
million of help from outside. In point of fact, Collins had not seen a
human being for a month. There was only one thing to do, and he did it."

"And that was?"

"You probably noticed that he wears a glove over his left hand. The
reason, sir, is that he has an artificial hand."

"You mean--" The Reverend Peter paused to lengthen his delicious thrill
of horror.

"Yes, sir. That's just what I mean. He hacked his hand off at the wrist
with his hunting-knife."

"Why, the man's a hero!" cried the clergyman, with unction.

Mackenzie flung him a disgusted look. "We don't go much on heroes out
here. He's game, if that's what you mean. And able, too. Bucky O'Connor
himself isn't any smarter at following a trail."

"And who is Bucky O'Connor?"

"He's the man that just ran down Fernendez. Think I'll have a smoke,
sir. Care to join me?"

But the Pekin-Bostonian preferred to stay and jot down in his note-book
the story of the bear-trap, to be used later as a sermon illustration.
This may have been the reason he did not catch the quick look that
passed without the slightest flicker of the eyelids between Major
Mackenzie and the young woman in Section 3. It was as if the old officer
had wired her a message in some code the cipher of which was known only
to them.

But the sheriff, returning at the head of his cohorts, caught it,
and wondered what meaning might lie back of that swift glance. Major
Mackenzie and this dark-eyed beauty posed before others as strangers,
yet between them lay some freemasonry of understanding to which he had
not the key.

Collins did not know that the aloofness in the eyes of Miss
Wainwright--he had seen the name on her suit-case--gave way to horror
when her glance fell on his gloved hand. She had a swift, shuddering
vision of a grim-faced man, jaws set like a vise, hacking at his
wrist with a hunting-knife. But the engaging impudence of his eye, the
rollicking laughter in his voice, shut out the picture instantly.

The young man resumed his seat, and Miss Wainwright her listless
inspection of the flying stretches of brown desert. Dusk was beginning
to fall, and the porter presently lit the lamps. Collins bought a
magazine from the newsboy and relapsed into it, but before he was well
adjusted to reading the Limited pounded to a second unscheduled halt.

Instantly the magazine was thrown aside and Collins' curly head thrust
out of the window. Presently the head reappeared, simultaneously with
the crack of a revolver, the first of a detonating fusillade.

"Another of your impatient citizens eager to utilize the unspeakable
convenience of rapid transit," suggested the clergyman, with ponderous
jocosity.

"No, sir; nothing so illegal," smiled the cattleman, a whimsical light
in his daredevil eyes. He leaned forward and whispered a word to the
little girl in front of him, who at once led her younger brother back to
his section.

"I had hoped it would prove to be more diverting experience for a
tenderfoot," condescended the gentleman of the cloth.

"It's ce'tainly a pleasure to be able to gratify you, sir. You'll be
right pleased to know that it is a train hold-up." He waved his hand
toward the door, and at the word, as if waiting for his cue, a masked
man appeared at the end of the passage with a revolver in each hand.


CHAPTER 2. TAXATION WITHOUT REPRESENTATION

"Hands up!"

There was a ring of crisp menace in the sinister voice that was a spur
to obedience. The unanimous show of hands voted "Aye" with a hasty
precision that no amount of drill could have compassed.

It was a situation that might have made for laughter had there been
spectators to appreciate. But of whatever amusement was to be had one
of the victims seemed to hold a monopoly. Collins, his arm around the
English children by way of comfort, offered a sardonic smile at the
consternation his announcement and its fulfillment had created, but none
of his fellow passengers were in the humor to respond.

The shock of an earthquake could not have blanched ruddy faces more
surely. The Chicago drummer, fat and florid, had disappeared completely
behind a buttress of the company's upholstery.

"God bless my soul!" gasped the Pekin-Bostonian, dropping his eyeglass
and his accent at the same moment. The dismay in his face found a
reflection all over the car. Miss Wainwright's hand clutched at her
breast for an instant, and her color ebbed till her lips were ashen, but
her neighbor across the aisle noticed that her eyes were steady and her
figure tense.

"Scared stiff, but game," was his mental comment.

"Gents to the right and ladies to the left; line up against the walls;
everybody waltz." called the man behind the guns, with grim humor.

The passengers fell into line as directed, Collins with the rest.

"You're calling this dance, son; it's your say-so, I guess," he
conceded.

"Keep still, or I'll shoot you full of holes," growled the autocrat of
the artillery.

"Why, sure! Ain't you the real thing in Jesse Jameses?" soothed the
sheriff.

At the sound of Collins' voice, the masked man had started perceptibly,
and his right hand had jumped forward an inch or two to cover the
speaker more definitely. Thereafter, no matter what else engaged his
attention, the gleaming eyes behind the red bandanna never wandered
for a moment from the big plainsman. He was taking no risks, for he
remembered the saying current in Arizona, that after Collins' hardware
got into action there was nothing left to do but plant the deceased and
collect the insurance. He had personal reasons to know the fundamental
accuracy of the colloquialism.

The train-conductor fussed up to the masked outlaw with a ludicrous
attempt at authority. "You can't rob the passengers on this train. I'm
not responsible for the express-car, but the coaches--"

A bullet almost grazed his ear and shattered a window on its way to the
desert.

"Drift, you red-haired son of a Mexican?" ordered the man behind the
red bandanna. "Git back to that seat real prompt. This here's taxation
without representation."

The conductor drifted as per suggestion.

The minutes ticked themselves away in a tense strain marked by pounding
hearts. The outlaw stood at the end of the aisle, watching the sheriff
alertly.

"Why doesn't the music begin?" volunteered Collins, by way of
conversation, and quoted: "On with the dance. Let joy be unconfined."

A dull explosion answered his question. The bandits were blowing open
the safe in the express-car with dynamite, pending which the looting of
the passengers was at a standstill.

A second masked figure joined his companion at the end of the passage
and held a hurried conversation with him. Fragments of their low-voiced
talk came to Collins.

"Only thirty thousand in the express-car. Not a red cent on the old man
himself."

"Where's the rest?" The irritation in the newcomer's voice was
pronounced.

Collins slewed his head and raked him with keen eyes that missed not
a detail. He was certain that he had never seen the man before, yet
he knew at once that the trim, wiry figure, so clean of build and so
gallant of bearing, could belong only to Wolf Leroy, the most ruthless
outlaw of the Southwest. It was written in his jaunty insolence, in the
flashing eyes. He was a handsome fellow, white-toothed, black-haired,
lithely tigerish, with masterful mouth and eyes of steel, so far as one
might judge behind the white mask he wore. Alert, cruel, fearless
from the head to the heel of him, he looked the very devil to lead an
enterprise so lawless and so desperate as this. His vigilant eyes swept
contemptuously up and down the car, rested for a moment on the young
woman in Section 3, and came back to his partner.

"Bah! A flock of sheep--tamest bunch of spring lambs we ever struck.
I'll send Scott in to go through them. If anybody gets gay, drop him."
And the outlaw turned on his heel.

Another of the highwaymen took his place, a stout, squat figure in the
flannel shirt, spurs, and chaps of a cow-puncher. It took no second
glance to tell Collins this bandy-legged fellow had been a rider of the
range.

"Come, gentlemen, get a move on you," Collins implored. "This train's
due at Tucson by eight o'clock. We're more than an hour late now. I'm
holding down the job of sheriff in that same town, and I'm awful anxious
to get a posse out after a bunch of train-robbers. So burn the wind, and
go through the car on the jump. Help yourself to anything you find. Who
steals my purse takes trash. 'Tis something, nothing. 'Twas mine; 'tis
his. That's right, you'll find my roll in that left-hand pocket. I hate
to have you take that gun, though. I meant to run you down with that
same old Colt's reliable. Oh, well, just as you say. No, those kids get
a free pass. They're going out to meet papa at Los Angeles, boys. See?"

Collins' running fire of comment had at least the effect of restoring
the color to some cheeks that had been washed white and of snatching
from the outlaws some portion of their sense of dominating the
situation. But there was a veiled vigilance in his eyes that belied his
easy impudence.

"That lady across the aisle gets a pass, too, boys," continued the
sheriff. "She's scared stiff now, and you won't bother her, if you're
white men. Her watch and purse are on the seat. Take them, if you want
them, and let it go at that."

Miss Wainwright listened to this dialogue silently. She stood before
them cool and imperious and unwavering, but her face was bloodless and
the pulse in her beautiful soft throat fluttered like a caged bird.

"Who's doing this job?" demanded one of the hold-ups, wheeling savagely
on the impassive officer "Did I say we were going to bother the lady?
Who's doing this job, Mr. Sheriff?"

"You are. I'd hate to be messing the job like you--holding up the wrong
train by mistake." This was a shot in the dark, and it did not quite
hit the bull's-eye. "I wouldn't trust you boys to rob a hen-roost,
the amateur way you go at it. When you get through, you'll all go to
drinking like blue blotters. I know your kind--hell-bent to spend what
you cash in, and every mother's son of you in the pen or with his toes
turned up inside of a month."

"Who'll put us there?" gruffly demanded the bowlegged one.

Collins smiled at him with confidence superb "Mebbe I will--and if I
don't Bucky O'Connor will--those of you that are left alive when you
go through shooting each other in the back. Oh, I see your finish to a
fare-you-well."

"Cheese it, or I'll bump you off." The first out law drove his gun into
the sheriff's ribs.

"That's all right. You don't need to punctuate that remark. I line up
with the sky-pilot and chew the cud of silence. I merely wanted to frame
up to you how this thing's going to turn out. Don't come back at me and
say I didn't warn you, sonnie."

"You make my head ache," snarled the bandy-legged outlaw sourly, as he
passed down with his sack, accumulating tribute as he passed down the
aisle with his sack, accumulating tribute as he went.

The red-kerchiefed robber whooped when they came to the car conductor.
"Dig up, Mr. Pullman. Go way down into your jeans. It's a right smart
pleasure to divert the plunder of your bloated corporation back to the
people. What! Only fifty-seven dollars. Oh, dig deeper, Mr. Pullman."

The drummer contributed to the sack eighty-four dollars, a diamond ring,
and a gold watch. His hands were trembling so that they played a tattoo
on the sloping ceiling above him.

"What's the matter, Fatty? Got a chill?" inquired one of the robbers, as
he deftly swept the plunder into the sack.

"For--God's sake--don't shoot. I have--a wife--and five children," he
stammered, with chattering teeth.

"No race suicide for Fatty. But whyfor do they let a sick man like you
travel all by his lone?"

"I don't know--I--Please turn that weapon another way."

"Plumb chuck full of malaria," soliloquized the owner of the weapon,
playfully running its business end over the Chicago man's anatomy.
"Shakes worse'n a pair of dice. Here, Fatty. Load up with quinine and
whisky. It's sure good for chills." The man behind the bandanna gravely
handed his victim back a dollar. "Write me if it cures you. Now for the
sky-pilot. No white chips on this plate, parson. It's a contribution to
the needy heathen. You want to be generous. How much do you say?"

The man of the cloth reluctantly said thirty dollars, a Lincoln penny,
and a silver-plated watch inherited from his fathers. The watch was
declined with thanks, the money accepted without.

The Pullman porter came into the car under compulsion of a revolver in
the hand of a fourth outlaw, one in a black mask. His trembling finger
pointed out the satchel and suit-case of Major Mackenzie, and under
orders he carried out the baggage belonging to the irrigation engineer.
Collin observed that the bandit in the black mask was so nervous that
the revolver in his hand quivered like an aspen in the wind. He was
slenderer and much shorter than the Mexican, so that the sheriff decided
he was a mere boy.

It was just after he had left that three shots in rapid succession rang
out in the still night air.

The red-bandannaed one and his companion, who had apparently been
waiting for the signal, retreated backward to the end of the car, still
keeping the passengers covered. They flung rapidly two or three bullets
through the roof, and under cover of the smoke slipped out into the
night. A moment later came the thud of galloping horses, more shots,
and, when the patter of hoofs had died away--silence.

The sheriff was the first to break it. He thrust his brown hands deep
into his pockets and laughed--laughed with the joyous, rollicking
abandon of a tickled schoolboy.

"Hysterics?" ventured the mining engineer sympathetically.

Collins wiped his eyes. "Call 'em anything you like. What pleases me is
that the reverend gentleman should have had this diverting experience
so prompt after he was wishing for it." He turned, with concern, to
the clergyman. "Satisfied, sir? Did our little entertainment please, or
wasn't it up to the mark?"

But the transported native of Pekin was game. "I'm quite satisfied, if
you are. I think the affair cost you a hundred dollars or so more than
it did me."

"That's right," agreed the sheriff heartily. "But I don't grudge it--not
a cent of it. The show was worth the price of admission."

The car conductor had a broadside ready for him. "Seems to me you shot
off your mouth more than you did that big gun of yours, Mr. Sheriff."

Collins laughed, and clapped him on the back. "That's right. I'm a
regular phonograph, when you wind me up." He did not think it necessary
to explain that he had talked to make the outlaws talk, and that he had
noted the quality of their voices so carefully that he would know them
again among a thousand. Also he had observed--other things--the garb
of each of the men he had seen, their weapons, their manner, and their
individual peculiarities.

The clanking car took up the rhythm of the rails as the delayed train
plunged forward once more into the night. Again the clack of tongues,
set free from fear, buzzed eagerly. The glow of the afterclap of danger
was on them, and in the warm excitement each forgot the paralyzing fear
that had but now padlocked his lips. Courage came flowing back into
flabby cheeks and red blood into hearts of water.

At the next station the Limited stopped, and the conductor swung from
a car before the wheels had ceased rolling and went running into the
telegraph office.

"Fire a message through for me, Pat. The Limited has been held up," he
announced.

"Held up?" gasped the operator.

"That's right. Get this message right through to Sabin. I'm not going
to wait for an answer. Tell him I'll stop at Apache for further
instructions."

With which the conductor was out again waving his lantern as a signal
for the train to start. Sheriff Collins and Major Mackenzie had entered
the office at his heels. They too had messages to send, but it was not
until the train was already plunging into the night that the station
agent read the yellow slips they had left and observed that both of them
went to the same person.

"Lieutenant Bucky O'Connor, Douglas, Arizona," was the address he read
at the top of each. His comment serves to show the opinion generally in
the sunburned territory respecting one of its citizens.

"You're wise guys, gents, both of yez. This is shure a case for the
leftenant. It's send for Bucky quick when the band begins to play," he
grinned.

Sitting down, he gave the call for Tucson, preparatory to transmitting
the conductor's message to the division superintendent. His fingers were
just striking the first tap when a silken voice startled him.

"One moment, friend. No use being in a hurry."

The agent looked up and nearly fell from his stool. He was gazing
into the end of a revolver held carelessly in the hand of a masked man
leaning indolently on the counter.

"Whe--where did you come from?" the operator gasped.

"Kaintucky, but I been here a right smart spell. Why? You takin' the
census?" came the drawling answer.

"I didn't hear youse come in."

"I didn't hear you come in, either," the man behind the mask mocked. But
even as he spoke his manner changed, and crisp menace rang in his voice.
"Have you sent those messages yet?"

"Wha--what messages?"

"Those lying on your desk. I say, have you sent them?"

"Not yet."

"Hand them over here."

The operator passed them across the counter without demur.

"Now reach for the roof."

Up shot the station agent's hands. The bandit glanced over the written
sheets and commented aloud:

"Huh! One from the conductor and one from Mackenzie. I expected those.
But this one from Collins is ce'tainly a surprise party. I didn't know
he was on the train. Lucky for him I didn't, or mebbe I'd a-put his
light for good and all. Friend, I reckon we'll suppress these messages.
Military necessity, you understand." And with that he lightly tore up
the yellow sheets and tossed them away.

"The conductor will wire when he reaches Apache," the operator
suggested, not very boldly.

The outlaw rolled a cigarette deftly and borrowed a match. "He most
surely will. But Apache is seventy miles from here. That gives us
an extra hour and a half, and with us right now time is a heap more
valuable than money. You may tell Bucky O'Connor when you see him that
that extra hour and a half cinches our escape, and we weren't on the
anxious seat any without it."

It may have been true, as the train robber had just said, that time was
more valuable to him then than money, but if so he must have held the
latter of singularly little value. For he sat him down on the counter
with his back against the wall and his legs stretched full length in
front of him and glanced over the Tucson Star in leisurely fashion,
while Pat's arms still projected roofward.

The operator, beginning to get over his natural fright, could not
withhold a reluctant admiration of this man's aplomb. There was a
certain pantherish lightness about the outlaw's movements, a trim grace
of figure which yet suggested rippling muscles perfectly under control,
and a quiet wariness of eye more potent than words at repressing
insurgent impulses. Certainly if ever there was a cool customer and one
perfectly sure of himself, this was he.

"Not a thing in the Star to-day," Pat's visitor commented, as he
flung it away with a yawn. "I'll let a thousand dollars of the express
company's money that there will be something more interesting in it
to-morrow."

"That's right," agreed the agent.

"But I won't be here to read it. My engagements take me south. I'll make
a present to the great Lieutenant O'Connor of the information. We're
headed south, tell him. And tell Mr. Sheriff Collins, too--happy to
entertain him if he happens our way. If it would rest your hands
any there's no law against putting them in your trousers pockets, my
friend."

From outside there came a short sharp whistle. The man on the counter
answered it, and slipped at once to the floor. The door opened, to let
in another masked form, but one how different from the first! Here was
no confidence almost insolent in its nonchalance. The figure was slight
and boyish, the manner deprecating, the brown eyes shy and shrinking
He was so obviously a novice at outlawry that fear sat heavy upon his
shoulders. When he spoke, almost in a whisper, his teeth chattered.

"All ready, sir."

"The wires are cut?" demanded his leader crisply.

"Yes, sir."

"On both sides?"

"On both sides."

His chief relieved the operator of the revolver in his desk, broke it,
emptied out the shells, and flung them through the window, then tossed
the weapon back to its owner.

"You'll not shoot yourself by accident now," he explained, and with that
he had followed his companion into the night.

There came to the station agent the sound of galloping horses, growing
fainter, until a heavy silence seemed to fill the night. He stole to the
door and locked it, pulled down the window blinds, and then reloaded
his revolver with feverish haste. This done, he sat down before his keys
with the weapon close at hand and frantically called for Tucson over and
over again. No answer came to him, nor from the other direction when he
tried that. The young bandit had told the truth. His companions had cut
the wires and so isolated from the world for the time the scene of the
hold-up. The agent understood now why the leader of the outlaws had
honored him with so much of his valuable time. He had stayed to hold
back the telegrams until he knew the wires were cut.


CHAPTER 3. THE SHERIFF INTRODUCES HIMSELF

Bear-trap Collins, presuming on the new intimacy born of an exciting
experience shared in common, stepped across the aisle, flung aside Miss
Wainwright's impedimenta, and calmly seated himself beside her. She
was a young woman capable of a hauteur chillier than ice to undue
familiarity, but she did not choose at this moment to resent his
assumption of a footing that had not existed an hour ago. Picturesque
and unconventional conduct excuses itself when it is garbed in
picturesque and engaging manners. She had, besides, other reasons for
wanting to meet him, and they had to do with a sudden suspicion that
flamed like tow in her brain. She had something for which to thank
him--much more than he would be likely to guess, she thought--and she
was wondering, with a surge of triumph, whether the irony of fate had
not made his pretended consideration for her the means of his undoing.

"I am sorry you lost so much, Miss Wainwright," he told her.

"But, after all, I did not lose so much as you. Her dark, deep-pupiled
eyes, long-lashed as Diana's, swept round to meet his coolly.

"That's a true word. My reputation has gone glimmering for fair, I
guess." He laughed ruefully. "I shouldn't wonder, ma'am, when election
time comes round, if the boys ain't likely to elect to private life the
sheriff that lay down before a bunch of miscreants."

"Why did you do it?"

His humorous glance roamed round the car. "Now, I couldn't think it
proper for me to shoot up this sumptuous palace on wheels. And wouldn't
some casual passenger be likely to get his lights put out when the band
began to play? Would you want that Boston church to be shy a preacher,
ma'am?"

Her lips parted slightly in a curve of scorn. "I suppose you had your
reasons for not interfering."

"Surely, ma'am. I hated to have them make a sieve of me."

"Were you afraid?"

"Most men are when Wolf Leroy's gang is on the war path."

"Wolf Leroy?"

"That was Wolf who came in to see they were doing the job right. He's
the worst desperado on the border--a sure enough bad proposition, I
reckon. They say he's part Spanish and part Indian, but all pisen.
Others say he's a college man of good family. I don't know about that,
for nobody knows who he really is. But the name is a byword in the
country. People lower their voices when they speak of him and his
night-riders."

"I see. And you were afraid of him?"

"Very much."

Her narrowed eyes looked over the strong lines of his lean face and
were unconvinced. "I expect you found a better reason than that for not
opposing them."

He turned to her with frank curiosity. "I'd like real well to have you
put a name to it."

But he was instantly aware that her interest had been side tracked.
Major Mackenzie had entered the car and was coming down the aisle.
Plainer than words his eyes asked a question, and hers answered it.

The sheriff stopped him with a smiling query: "Hit hard, major?"

Mackenzie frowned. "The scoundrels took thirty thousand from the express
car, I understand. Twenty thousand of it belonged to our company. I was
expecting to pay off the men next Tuesday."

"Hope we'll be able to run them down for you," returned Collins
cheerfully. "I suppose you lay it to Wolf Leroy's gang?"

"Of course. The work was too well done to leave any doubt of that." The
major resumed his seat behind Miss Wainwright.

To that young woman the sheriff repeated his unanswered question in the
form of a statement. "I'm waiting to learn that better reason, ma'am."

She was possessed of that spice of effrontery more to be desired than
beauty. "Shall we say that you had no wish to injure your friends?"

"My friends?"

Her untender eyes mocked his astonishment. "Do I choose the wrong word?"
she asked, with an audacity of a courage that delighted him. "Perhaps
they are not your friends--these train robbers? Perhaps they are mere
casual acquaintances?"

His bold eyes studied with a new interest her superb, confident
youth--the rolling waves of splendid Titian hair, the lovely, subtle
eyes with the depths of shadowy pools in them, the alluring lines of
long and supple loveliness. It was impossible that these great movements
of Venice should be unknown at Padua. Petrarch, ever zealous for the
common good of Italy, saw with pain the kindling of a war which could
not but be fatal to her, and thought it his duty to open his heart
to the Doge of Venice, who had shown him so much friendship.

He addressed to him, therefore, the following letter from Padua,
on the 14th of March, 1351:--
"My love for my country forces me to break silence; the goodness
of your character encourages me.

Can I hold my peace whilst I hear the symptoms of a coming storm that
menaces my beloved country?

Two puissant people are flying to arms; two flourishing cities are
agitated by the approach of war.

These cities are placed by nature like the two eyes of Italy; the
one in the south and west, and the other in the east and north, to
dominate over the two seas that surround them; so that, even after
the destruction of the Roman empire, this beautiful country was
still regarded as the queen of the world.

I know that proud nations denied her the empire of the land, but
who dared ever to dispute with her the empire of the sea?

"I shudder to think of our prospects. If Venice and Genoa turn their
victorious arms against each other, it is all over with us; we lose our
glory and the command of the sea.

In this calamity we shall have a consolation which we have ever
had, namely, that if our enemies rejoice in our calamities, they
cannot at least derive any glory from them.

"In great affairs I have always dreaded the counsels of the young.
Youthful ignorance and inexperience have been the ruin of many
empires.

I, therefore, learn with pleasure that you have named a council of
elders, to whom you have confided this affair.

I expected no less than this from your wisdom, which is far beyond your
years.

"The state of your republic distresses me. I know the difference
that there is between the tumult of arms and the tranquillity of
Parnassus.

I know that the sounds of Apollo's lyre accord but ill with the
trumpets of Mars; but if you have abandoned Parnassus, it has been
only to fulfil the duties of a good citizen and of a vigilant chief. I
am persuaded, at the same time, that in the midst of arms you think
of peace; that you would regard it as a triumph for yourself, and
the greatest blessing you could procure for your country.

Did not Hannibal himself say that a sure peace was more valuable
than a hoped-for victory!

If truth has extorted this confession from the most warlike man that
ever lived, is it not plain that a pacific man ought to prefer peace
even to a certain victory?

Who does not know that peace is the greatest of blessings, and that war
is the source of all evils?

"Do not deceive yourself; you have to deal with a keen people
who know not what it is to be conquered.

Would it not be better to transfer the war to Damascus, to Susa, or to
Memphis? Think besides, that those whom you are going to attack are
your brothers.

At Thebes, of old, two brothers fought to their mutual destruction.

Must Italy renew, in our days, so atrocious a spectacle?

"Let us examine what may be the results of this war.

Whether you are conqueror or are conquered, one of the eyes of Italy
will necessarily be blinded, and the other much weakened; for it would
be folly to flatter yourself with the hopes of conquering so strong
an enemy without much effusion of blood.

"Brave men, powerful people! (I speak here to both of you) what is your
object--to what do you aspire? What will be the end of your dissensions?

It is not the blood of the Carthaginians or the Numantians that you
are about to spill, but it is Italian blood; the blood of a people
who would be the first to start up and offer to expend their blood,
if any barbarous nation were to attempt a new irruption among us.

In that event, their bodies would be the bucklers and ramparts of
our common country; they would live, or they would die with us. Ought
the pleasure of avenging a slight offence to carry more weight
with you than the public good and your own safety?

Let revenge be the delight of women.

Is it not more glorious for men to forget an injury than to avenge it?
to pardon an enemy than to destroy him?

"If my feeble voice could make itself heard among those grave men who
compose your council, I am persuaded that you would not only _not_
reject the peace which is offered to you, but go to meet and embrace
it closely, so that it might not escape you.

Consult your wise old men who love the republic; they will speak the
same language to you that I do.

"You, my lord, who are at the head of the council, and who govern your
republic, ought to recollect that the glory or the shame of these events
will fall principally on you.

Raise yourself above yourself; look into, examine everything with attention.
Compare the success of the war with the evils which it brings in
its train.

Weigh in a balance the good effects and the evil, and you will say
with Hannibal, that an hour is sufficient to destroy the work of many
years.

"The renown of your country is more ancient than is generally
believed.
Several ages before the city of Venice was built, I find not only the
name of the Venetians famous, but also that of one of their dukes.
Would you submit to the caprices of fortune a glory acquired for so long
a time, and at so great a cost? You will render a great service to your
republic, if, preferring her safety to her glory, you give her incensed
and insane populace prudent and useful counsels, instead of offering
them brilliant and specious projects. The wise say that we cannot purchase
a virtue more precious than what is bought at the expense of glory. If
you adopt this axiom, your character will be handed down to posterity,
like that of the Duke of the Venetians, to whom I have alluded.

All the world will admire and love you.

[Illustration: VICENZA.]

"To conceal nothing from you, I confess that I have heard with grief
of your league with the King of Arragon.

What!

shall Italians go and implore succour of barbarous kings to destroy
Italians?

You will say, perhaps, that your enemies have set you the example.

My answer is, that they are equally culpable. According to report,
Venice, in order to satiate her rage, calls to her aid tyrants of
the west; whilst Genoa brings in those of the east.

This is the source of our calamities.
Carried away by the admiration of strange things, despising, I know
not why, the good things which we find in our own climate, we
sacrifice sound Italian faith to barbarian perfidy.

Madmen that we are, we seek among venal souls that which we could
find among our own brethren.

"Nature has given us for barriers the Alps and the two seas.

Avarice, envy, and pride, have opened these natural defences to the
Cimbri, the Huns, the Goths, the Gauls, and the Spaniards.

How often have we recited the words of Virgil:--
"'Impius hæc tam culta novalia miles habebit, Barbarus has segetes.'

"Athens and Lacedemon had between them a species of rivalship similar
to yours: but their forces were not by any means so nearly balanced.

Lacedemon had an advantage over Athens, which put it in the power
of the former to destroy her rival, if she had wished it; but she
replied, 'God forbid that I should pull out one of the eyes of
Greece!'

If this beautiful sentiment came from a people whom Plato reproaches
with their avidity for conquest and dominion, what still softer
reply ought we not to expect from the most modest of nations!

"Amidst the movements which agitate you, it is impossible for me to be
tranquil. When I see one party cutting down trees to construct vessels,
and others sharpening their swords and darts, I should think myself
guilty if I did not seize my pen, which is my only weapon, to counsel
peace.

I am aware with what circumspection we ought to speak to our
superiors; but the love of our country has no superior.

If it should carry me beyond bounds, it will serve as my excuse before
you, and oblige you to pardon me.

"Throwing myself at the feet of the chiefs of two nations who are
going to war, I say to them, with tears in my eyes, 'Throw away
your arms; give one another the embrace of peace!

unite your hearts and your colours.

By this means the ocean and the Euxine shall be open to you.

Your ships will arrive in safety at Taprobane, at the Fortunate
Isles, at Thule, and even at the poles.

The kings and their people will meet you with respect; the Indian,
the Englishman, the Æthiopian, will dread you.

May peace reign among you, and may you have nothing to fear!'

Adieu! greatest of dukes, and best of men!"

This letter produced no effect.

Andrea Dandolo, in his answer to it, alleges the thousand and one
affronts and outrages which Venice had suffered from Genoa.

At the same time he pays a high compliment to the eloquence of
Petrarch's epistle, and says that it is a production which could
emanate only from a mind inspired by the divine Spirit.

During the spring of this year, 1351, Petrarch put his last finish
to a canzone, on the subject still nearest to his heart, the death
of his Laura, and to a sonnet on the same subject.

In April, his attention was recalled from visionary things by
the arrival of Boccaccio, who was sent by the republic of Florence
to announce to him the recall of his family to their native land,
and the restoration of his family fortune, as well as to invite him
to the home of his ancestors, in the name of the Florentine republic.

The invitation was conveyed in a long and flattering letter; but
it appeared, from the very contents of this epistle, that the
Florentines wished our poet's acceptance of their offer to be as
advantageous to themselves as to him.

They were establishing a University, and they wished to put
Petrarch at the head of it. Petrarch replied in a letter apparently full
of gratitude and satisfaction, but in which he by no means pledged
himself to be the gymnasiarch of their new college; and, agreeably
to his original intention, he set out from Padua on the 3rd of May, 1351,
for Provence.

Petrarch took the road to Vicenza, where he arrived at sunset. He hesitated
whether he should stop there, or take advantage of the remainder of the
day and go farther.

But, meeting with some interesting persons whose conversation beguiled
him, night came on before he was aware how late it was. Their
conversation, in the course of the evening, ran upon Cicero. Many were
the eulogies passed on the great old Roman; but Petrarch, after having
lauded his divine genius and eloquence, said something about his
inconsistency. Every one was astonished at our poet's boldness, but
particularly a man, venerable for his age and knowledge, who was an
idolater of Cicero. Petrarch argued pretty freely against the political
character of the ancient orator.

The same opinion as to Cicero's weakness seems rather to have gained
ground in later ages.

At least, it is now agreed that Cicero's political life will not
bear throughout an uncharitable investigation, though the political
difficulties of his time demand abundant allowance.

Petrarch departed next morning for Verona, where he reckoned on
remaining only for a few days; but it was impossible for him to
resist the importunities of Azzo Correggio, Guglielmo di Pastrengo,
and his other friends.

By them he was detained during the remainder of the month. "The requests
of a friend," he said, on this occasion, "are always chains upon
me."

Petrarch arrived, for the sixth time, at Vaucluse on the 27th of June,
1351. He first announced himself to Philip of Cabassoles, Bishop of
Cavaillon, to whom he had already sent, during his journey, some
Latin verses, in which he speaks of Vaucluse as the most charming
place in the universe.

"When a child," he says, "I visited it, and it nourished my youth in
its sunny bosom. When grown to manhood, I passed some of the pleasantest
years of my life in the shut-up valley.

Grown old, I wish to pass in it my last years."

The sight of his romantic hermitage, of the capacious grotto which had
listened to his sighs for Laura, of his garden, and of his library,
was, undoubtedly, sweet to Petrarch; and, though he had promised
Boccaccio to come back to Italy, he had not the fortitude to determine
on a sudden return.

He writes to one of his Italian friends, "When I left my native
country, I promised to return to it in the autumn; but time, place,
and circumstances, often oblige us to change our resolutions.

As far as I can judge, it will be necessary for me to remain here
for two years.

My friends in Italy, I trust, will pardon me if I do not keep my promise
to them. The inconstancy of the human mind must serve as my excuse.

I have now experienced that change of place is the only thing which can
long keep from us the _ennui_ that is inseparable from a sedentary life."

At the same time, whilst Vaucluse threw recollections tender, though
melancholy, over Petrarch's mind, it does not appear that Avignon
had assumed any new charm in his absence: on the contrary, he found
it plunged more than ever in luxury, wantonness, and gluttony.

Clement VI.
had replenished the church, at the request of the French king, with
numbers of cardinals, many of whom were so young and licentious,
that the most scandalous abominations prevailed amongst them. "At this
time," says Matthew Villani, "no regard was paid either to learning
or virtue; and a man needed not to blush for anything, if he could cover
his head with a red hat.

Pietro Ruggiero, one of those exemplary new cardinals, was only eighteen
years of age."

Petrarch vented his indignation on this occasion in his seventh
eclogue, which is a satire upon the Pontiff and his cardinals, the
interlocutors being Micione, or Clement himself, and Epi, or the
city of Avignon. The poem, if it can be so called, is clouded with
allegory, and denaturalized with pastoral conceits; yet it is worth
being explored by any one anxious to trace the first fountains of reform
among Catholics, as a proof of church abuses having been exposed, two
centuries before the Reformation, by a Catholic and a churchman.

At this crisis, the Court of Avignon, which, in fact, had not known
very well what to do about the affairs of Rome, were now anxious
to inquire what sort of government would be the most advisable, after
the fall of Rienzo. Since that event, the Cardinal Legate had
re-established the ancient government, having created two senators,
the one from the house of Colonna, the other from that of the Orsini.

But, very soon, those houses were divided by discord, and the city was
plunged into all the evils which it had suffered before the existence
of the Tribuneship.
"The community at large," says Matthew Villani, "returned to such
condition, that strangers and travellers found themselves like sheep
among wolves."

Clement VI. was weary of seeing the metropolis of Christianity a
prey to anarchy. He therefore chose four cardinals, whose united
deliberations might appease these troubles, and he imagined that he
could establish in Rome a form of government that should be durable.

The cardinals requested Petrarch to give his opinion on this important
affair.

Petrarch wrote to them a most eloquent epistle, full of enthusiastic ideas
of the grandeur of Rome. It is not exactly known what effect he produced
by his writing on this subject; but on that account we are not to
conclude that he wrote in vain.

Petrarch had brought to Avignon his son John, who was still very
young.

He had obtained for him a canonicate at Verona. Thither he immediately
despatched him, with letters to Guglielmo di Pastrengo and Rinaldo di
Villa Franca, charging the former of these friends to superintend
his son's general character and manners, and the other to cultivate
his understanding.

Petrarch, in his letter to Rinaldo, gives a description of John,
which is neither very flattering to the youth, nor calculated to
give us a favourable opinion of his father's mode of managing his
education.

By his own account, it appears that he had never brought the boy to
confide in him. This was a capital fault, for the young are naturally
ingenuous; so that the acquisition of their confidence is the very
first step towards their docility; and, for maintaining parental
authority, there is no need to overawe them.

"As far as I can judge of my son," says Petrarch, "he has a tolerable
understanding; but I am not certain of this, for I do not sufficiently
know him.

When he is with me he always keeps silence; whether my presence is irksome
and confusing to him, or whether shame for his ignorance closes
his lips.

I suspect it is the latter, for I perceive too clearly his antipathy
to letters. I never saw it stronger in any one; he dreads and detests
nothing so much as a book; yet he was brought up at Parma, Verona,
and Padua. I sometimes direct a few sharp pleasantries at this
disposition. 'Take care,' I say, 'lest you should eclipse your neighbour,
Virgil.' When I talk in this manner, he looks down and blushes. On this
behaviour alone I build my hope. He is modest, and has a docility
which renders him susceptible of every impression."

This is a melancholy confession, on the part of Petrarch, of his own
incompetence to make the most of his son's mind, and a confession
the more convincing that it is made unconsciously.

In the summer of 1352, the people of Avignon witnessed the impressive
spectacle of the far-famed Tribune Rienzo entering their city, but in
a style very different from the pomp of his late processions in Rome.
He had now for his attendants only two archers, between whom he walked
as a prisoner. It is necessary to say a few words about the circumstances
which befell Rienzo after his fall, and which brought him now to
the Pope's tribunal at Avignon.

Petrarch says of him at this period, "The Tribune, formerly so
powerful and dreaded, but now the most unhappy of men, has been
brought hither as a prisoner.

I praised and I adored him. I loved his virtue, and I admired his
courage. I thought that Rome was about to resume, under him, the empire
she formerly held.

Ah!

had he continued as he began, he would have been praised and admired by
the world and by posterity. On entering the city," Petrarch continues,
"he inquired if I was there. I knew not whether he hoped for succour
from me, or what I could do to serve him.

In the process against him they accuse him of nothing criminal. They cannot
impute to him having joined with bad men. All that they charge him
with is an attempt to give freedom to the republic, and to make
Rome the centre of its government.

And is this a crime worthy of the wheel or the gibbet? A Roman citizen
afflicted to see his country, which is by right the mistress of the
world, the slave of the vilest of men!"
Clement was glad to have Rienzo in his power, and ordered him into his
presence.

Thither the Tribune came, not in the least disconcerted.

He denied the accusation of heresy, and insisted that his cause should be
re-examined with more equity.

The Pope made him no reply, but imprisoned him in a high tower, in which
he was chained by the leg to the floor of his apartment. In other respects
he was treated mildly, allowed books to read, and supplied with
dishes from the Pope's kitchen.

Rienzo begged to be allowed an advocate to defend him; his request was
refused. This refusal enraged Petrarch, who wrote, according to De Sade
and others, on this occasion, that mysterious letter, which is
found in his "Epistles without a title."

A thumb was hitched
carelessly in the front pocket of his chaps, which pocket served also as
a holster for the .45 that protruded.

Even in the moment that he sat there a change came over Aravaipa. As a
summer shower sweeps across a lake so something had ruffled the town to
sudden life. From stores and saloons men dribbled, converging toward a
common centre hurriedly.

"I reckon, Bucky, the band has begun to play," the rider told himself
aloud. "Mebbe we better move on down in time for the music."

But no half-expected revolver shots shattered the stillness, even though
interest did not abate.

"There's ce'tainly something doing at the Silver Dollar this glad
mo'ning. Chinks, greasers, and several other kinds of citizens driftin'
that way, not to mention white men. I expect there will be room for you,
Bucky, if you hurry before the seats are all sold out."

He cantered down the plaza, swung from the saddle, threw the rein over
the pony's head to the ground, and jingled across the sidewalk into the
gambling house. It was filled with a motley crowd of miners, vaqueros,
tourists, cattlemen, Mexicans, Chinese, and a sample of the rest of the
heterogeneous population of the Southwest. Behind this assemblage
the newcomer tiptoed in vain to catch a glimpse of the cause of the
excitement. Wherefore, he calmly removed an almond-eyed Oriental from a
chair on which he was standing, tipped the ex-Cantonese a half dollar,
and appropriated the point of vantage himself.

There was a cleared space in the corner by the roulette table, and here,
his chair tipped back against the wall and a glass of whisky in front
of him, sat a sufficiently strange specimen of humanity. He was a man
of about fifty years, large boned and gaunt. Dressed in fringed buckskin
trousers and a silver-laced Mexican sombrero, he affected the long hair,
the sweeping mustache, and the ferocious aspect that are the custom
of the pseudo-Westerners who do business in the East with fake medical
remedies. Around his waist was a belt garnished with knives by the
dozen. These were long and pointed, sharpened to a razor edge. One of
them was in his hand poised for a throw at the instant Bucky mounted the
chair and looked over the densely packed mass of heads in front of him.

The ranger's keen glance swept to the wall and took in the target. A
slim lad of about fifteen stood against it with his arms outstretched.
Above and below each hand and on either side of the swelling throat
knives quivered in the frame wall. There was a flash of steel, and the
seventh knife sank into the wood so close to the crisp curls that a lock
hung by a hair, almost completely severed by the blade. The boy choked
back a scream, his big brown eyes dilating with terror.

The bully sipped at his highball and deliberately selected another
knife. To Bucky's swift inspection it was plain he had drunk too much
and that a very little slip might make an end of the boy. The fascinated
horror in the lad's gaze showed that he realized his danger.

"Now, f'ler cit'zens, I will continue for your 'musement by puttin' next
two knives on right and lef' sides of his cheek. Observe, pleash, that
these will land less than an inch from hish eyes. As the champion knife
thrower in the universe I claim--"

What he claimed his audience had to guess, for at this instant another
person took a part in the act. Bucky had stepped lightly across the
intervening space on the shoulders of the tightly packed crowd and had
dropped as lightly to the ground in front of the astonished champion of
the universe.

"I reckon you've about wore out that target. What's the matter with
trying a brand new one," drawled the ranger, his quiet, unwavering eye
fixed on the bloated, mottled face of the imitation "bad man."

The bully, half seas over, leaned forward and gripped his knife. He was
sober enough to catch the jeer running through the other's words without
being sufficiently master of himself to appreciate the menace that
underlay them.

"Wha's that? Say that again!" he burst out, purple to the collar line.
He was not used to having beardless boys with long, soft eyelashes
interfering with his amusements, and a blind rage flooded his heart.

"I allowed that a change of targets would vary the entertainment, if you
haven't any objections, seh," the blue-eyed stranger explained mildly.

"Who is this kid?" demanded the bully, with a sweep of his arm toward
the intruder.

Nobody seemed to know, wherefore the ranger himself gave the information
mildly:

"Bucky O'Connor they call me."

A faint murmur of surprise soughed through the crowd, for Bucky O'Connor
of the Arizona Rangers was by way of being a public hero just now on
account of his capture of Fernendez, the stage robber. But the knife
thrower had but lately arrived in the country. The youth carried with
him none of the earmarks of his trade, unless it might be that quiet,
steady gaze that seemed to search the soul. His voice was soft and
drawling, his manner almost apologetic. In the smile that came and went
was something sweet and sunny, in his bearing a gay charm that did
not advertise the recklessness that bubbled from his daredevil spirit.
Surely here was an easy victim upon whom to vent his spleen, thought the
other in his growing passion.

"You want to be my target, do you?" he demanded, tugging ferociously at
his long mustache.

"If you please, seh."

The fellow swore a vile oath. "Just as you say. Line up beside the other
kid."

With three strides Bucky reached the wall, and turned.

"Let 'er go," his gentle voice murmured.

He was leaning back easily against the wall, his thumb hitched
carelessly in the revolver pocket of his worn leather chaps. He looked
at ease, every jaunty inch of him, but a big bronzed cattleman who had
just pushed his way in noticed that the frosty blue eyes never released
for an instant those of the enemy.

The bully at the table passed an uncertain hand over his face to clear
his blurred vision, poised the cruel blade in his hand, and sent it
flashing forward with incredible swiftness. The steel buried itself two
inches deep in the soft pine beside Bucky's head. So close had it shaved
him that a drop of blood gathered and dropped from his ear to the floor.

"Good shot," commented the ranger quietly, and on the instant his
revolver seemed to leap from its holster to his hand. Without raising or
moving his arm in the least, Bucky fired.

Again a murmur eddied through the crowd. The bullet had neatly bored
the bully's ear. He raised his hand in dazed fashion and brought it
away covered with blood. With staring eyes he looked at his moist red
fingers, then at his latest victim, who was proving such an unexpected
surprise.

The big cattleman, who by this time had pushed a way with his broad
shoulders to the front, observed the two men attentively with a derisive
smile on his frank face. He was seeing a bluff called, and he enjoyed
it.

"You'll be able to wear earrings, Mr. Champion of the Universe, after I
have ventilated the other," suggested the ranger affably. "Come again,
seh."

But his opponent had had enough, and more than enough. It was one thing
to browbeat a harmless boy, quite another to measure courage with a
young gamecock like this. He had all the advantage of the first move.
He was an expert and could drive his first throw into the youth's
heart. But at bottom he was a coward and lacked the nerve, if not the
inclination, to kill. If he took up that devil-may-care challenge he
must fight it out alone. Moreover, as his furtive glance went round the
ring of faces, he doubted whether a rope and the nearest telegraph pole
might not be his fate if he went the limit. Sourly he accepted defeat,
raging in his craven spirit at the necessity.

"Hell! I don't fight with boys," he snarled,

"So?"

Bucky moved forward with the curious lightness of a man spring-footed.
His gaze held the other's shifting eyes as he plucked the knife from his
opponent's hand.

"Unbuckle that belt," he ordered.

All said, the eye is a prince of weapons. It is a moral force more
potent than the physical, and by it men may measure strength to a
certainty. So now these two clinched and battled with it till the best
man won. The showman's look gave way before the stark courage of
the other. His was no match for the inscrutable, unwavering eye that
commanded him. His fingers began to twitch, edged slowly toward his
waist. For an instant they fumbled at the buckle of the belt, which
presently fell with a rattle to the floor.

"Now, roll yore trail to the wall. Face this way! Arms out! That's good!
You rest there comfortable while I take these pins down and let the kid
out."

He removed the knives that hemmed in the boy and supported the
half-fainting figure to a chair beside the roulette table. But always he
remained in such a position as to keep the big bully he was baiting
in view. The boy dropped into the chair and covered his face with his
hands, sobbing with deep, broken breaths. The ranger touched caressingly
the crisp, fair hair that covered the head in short curls.

"Don't you worry, bub. Now, don't you. It's all over with now. That
coyote won't pester you any more. Will you, Mr. False Alarm Bad Man?"

At the last words he wheeled suddenly to the showman. "You're right
sorry already you got so gay, ain't you? Come! Speak yore little piece,
please."

He waited for an answer, and his gaze held fast to the bloated face that
cringed before his attack.

"What's your name?"

"Jay Hardman," quavered the now thoroughly sobered bad man.

"Dead easy jay, I reckon you mean. Now, chirp, up and tell the boy how
sorry you are you got fresh with your hardware."

"He's my boy. I guess I can do what I like with him," the man burst out
angrily. "I wasn't hurting him any, either. That's part of our show,
to--"

Bucky fondled suggestively the revolver in his hand. A metallic click
came to his victim.

"Don't you shoot at me again," the man broke off to scream.

The Colt clipped the sentence and the man's other ear.

"You can put in your order now for them earrings we were mentionin', Mr.
Deadeasy. You see, I had to puncture this one so folks would know they
were mates."

"I'll put you in the pen for this," the fellow whined, in terror.

"Funny how you will get off the subject. We were discussin' an apology
when you got to wandering in yore haid."

The mottled face showed white in patches. Beads of perspiration stood
out on the forehead of Hardman. "I didn't aim to hurt him any. I'll be
right glad to explain to you--"

A bullet plowed a path through the long hair that fell to the showman's
shoulders and snipped a lock from it.

"You don't need to explain a thing to me, seh. I'm sure resting easy
in my mind. But as you were about to re-mark you're fair honin' for a
chance to ask the kid's pardon. Now, ain't I a mind reader, seh?"

A trembling voice stammered huskily an apology.

"Better late than too late. Now, I've a good mind to take a vote whether
I'd better unload the rest of the pills in this old reliable medicine
box at you. Mebbe I ought to pump one into that coyote heart of yours."

The fellow went livid. "My God, you wouldn't kill an unarmed man, would
you?"

For answer the ranger tossed the weapon on the table with a scornful
laugh and strode up to the other. The would-be bad man towered six
inches above him, and weighed half as much again. But O'Connor whirled
him round, propelled him forward to the door, and kicked him into the
street.

"I'd hate to waste a funeral on him," he said, as he sauntered back to
the boy at the table.

The lad was beginning to recover, though his breath still came with
a catch. His rag of a handkerchief was dabbing tears out of his eyes.
O'Connor noticed how soft his hands and how delicate his features.

"This kid ain't got any more business than a rabbit going around in
the show line with that big scoundrel. He's one of these gentle,
rock-me-to-sleep-mother kids that ought to stay in the home nest and
not go buttin' into this hard world. I'll bet a doughnut he's an orphan,
though."

Bucky had been brought up in the school of experience, where every
student keeps his own head or goes to the wall. All his short life he
had played a lone hand, as he would have phrased it. He had campaigned
in Cuba as a mere boy. He had ridden the range and held his own on the
hurricane deck of a bucking broncho. From cowpunching he had graduated
into the tough little body of territorial rangers at the head of which
was "Hurry Up" Millikan. This had brought him a large and turbulent
experience in the knack of taking care of himself under all
circumstances. Naturally, a man of this type, born and bred to the code
of the outdoors West, could not fail of a certain contempt for a boy
that broke down and cried when the game was going against him.

But Bucky's contempt was tolerant, after all. He could not deny his
sympathy to a youngster in trouble. Again he touched gently the lad's
crisp curls of burnished gold.

"Brace up, bub. The worst is yet to come," he laughed awkwardly. "I
reckon there's no use spillin' any more emotion over it. He ain't your
dad, is he?"

The lad's big brown eyes looked up into the serene blue ones and found
comfort in their strength. "No, he's my uncle--and my master."

"This is a free country, son. We don't have masters if we're good
Americans, though we all have to take orders from our superior officers.
You don't need to serve this fellow unless you want to. That's a cinch."

The boy's troubled eyes were filmed with reminiscent terror. "You don't
know him. He is terrible when he is angry," he murmured.

"I don't think it," returned Bucky contemptuously. "He's the worst
blowhard ever. Say the word and I'll run the piker out of town for you."

The boy whipped up the sleeve of the fancy Mexican jacket he wore and
showed a long scar on his arm. "He did that one day when he was angry at
me. He pretended to others that it was an accident, but I knew better.
This morning I begged him to let me leave him. He beat me, but he was
still mad; and when he took to drinking I was afraid he would work
himself up to stick me again with one of his knives."

Bucky looked at the scar in the soft, rounded arm and swept the boy with
a sudden puzzled glance that was not suspicion but wonder.

"How long have you been with him, kid?"

"Oh, for years. Ever since I was a little fellow. He took me after my
father and mother died of yellow fever in New Orleans. His wife hates me
too, but they have to have me in the show."

"Then I guess you had better quit their company. What's your name?"

"Frank Hardman. On the show bills I have all sorts of names."

"Well, Frank, how would you like to go to live on a ranch?"

"Where he wouldn't know I was?" whispered the boy eagerly.

"If you like. I know a ranch where you'd be right welcome."

"I would work. I would do anything I could. Really, I would try to pay
my way, and I don't eat much," Frank cried, his eyes as appealing as a
homeless puppy's.

Bucky smiled. "I expect they can stand all you eat without going to the
poorhouse. It's a bargain then. I'll take you out there to-morrow."

"You're so good to me. I never had anybody be so good before." Tears
stood in the big eyes and splashed over.

"Cut out the water works, kid. You want to take a brace and act like a
man," advised his new friend brusquely.

"I know. I know. If you knew what I have done maybe you wouldn't ask
me to go with you. I--I can't tell you anything more than that," the
youngster sobbed.

"Oh, well. What's the diff? You're making a new start to-day. Ain't that
right?"

"Yes, sir."

"Call me Bucky."

"Yes, sir. Bucky, I mean."

A hand fell on the ranger's shoulder and a voice in his ear. "Young man,
I want you."

The lieutenant whirled like a streak of lightning, finger on trigger
already. "I'll trouble you for yore warrant, seh," he retorted.

The man confronting him was the big cattleman who had entered the Silver
Dollar in time to see O'Connor's victory over the showman. Now he stood
serenely under Bucky's gun and laughed.

"Put up your .45, my friend. It's a peaceable conference I want with
you."

The level eyes of the young man fastened on those of the cattleman, and,
before he spoke again, were satisfied. For both of these men belonged to
the old West whose word is as good as its bond, that West which will go
the limit for a cause once under taken without any thought of retreat,
regardless of the odds or the letter of the law. Though they had never
met before, each knew at a glance the manner of man the other was.

"All right, seh. If you want me I reckon I'm here large as life," the
ranger said,

"We'll adjourn to the poker room upstairs then, Mr. O'Connor."

Bucky laid a hand on the shoulder of the boy. "This kid goes with me.
I'm keeping an eye on him for the present."

"My business is private, but I expect that can be arranged. We'll take
the inner room and let him have the outer."

"Good enough. Break trail, seh. Come along, Frank."

Having reached the poker room upstairs, that same private room which had
seen many a big game in its day between the big cattle kings and
mining men of the Southwest, Bucky's host ordered refreshments and then
unfolded his business.

"You don't know me, lieutenant, do you?"

"I haven't that pleasure, seh."

"I am Major Mackenzie's brother."

"Webb Mackenzie, who came from Texas last year and bought the Rocking
Chair Ranch?"

"The same."

"I'm right glad to meet you, seh."

"And I can say the same."

Webb Mackenzie was so distinctively a product of the West that no other
segment of the globe could have produced him. Big, raw-boned, tanned
to a leathery brick-brown, he was as much of the frontier as the ten
thousand cows he owned that ran the range on half as many hills and
draws. He stood six feet two and tipped the beam at two hundred twelve
pounds, not an ounce of which was superfluous flesh. Temperamentally,
he was frank, imperious, free-hearted, what men call a prince. He wore
a loose tailor-made suit of brown stuff and a broad-brimmed light-gray
Stetson. For the rest, you may see a hundred like him at the yearly
stock convention held in Denver, but you will never meet a man even
among them with a sounder heart or better disposition.

"I've got a story to tell you, Lieutenant O'Connor," he began. "I've
been meaning to see you and tell it ever since you made good in that
Fernendez matter. It wasn't your gameness. Anybody can be game. But it
looked to me like you were using the brains in the top of your head, and
that happens so seldom among law officers I wanted to have a talk with
you. Since yesterday I've been more anxious. For why? I got a letter
from my brother telling me Sheriff Collins showed him a locket he found
at the place of the T. P. Limited hold-up. That locket has in it a
photograph of my wife and little girl. For fifteen years I haven't seen
that picture. When I saw it last 'twas round my little baby's neck.
What's more, I haven't seen her in that time, either."

Mackenzie stopped, swallowed hard, and took a drink of water.

"You haven't seen your little girl in fifteen years," exclaimed Bucky.

"Haven't seen or heard of her. So far as I know she may not be alive
now. This locket is the first hint I have had since she was taken away,
the very first news of her that has reached me, and I don't know what
to make of that. One of the robbers must have been wearing it, the way I
figure it out. Where did he get it? That's what I want to know."

"Suppose you tell me the story, seh," suggested the ranger gently.

The cattleman offered O'Connor a cigar and lit one himself. For a minute
he puffed slowly at his Havana, leaning far back in his chair with eyes
reminiscent and half shut. Then he shook himself back into the present
and began his tale.

"I don't reckon you ever heard tell of Dave Henderson. It was back in
Texas I knew him, and he's been missing sixteen years come the eleventh
of next August. For fifteen years I haven't mentioned his name, because
Dave did me the dirtiest wrong that one man ever did another. Back in
the old days he and I used to trail together. We was awful thick, and
mostly hunted in couples. We began riding the same season back on
the old Kittredge Ranch, and we went in together for all the kinds of
spreeing that young fellows who are footloose are likely to do. Fact is,
we suited each other from the ground up. We frolicked round a-plenty,
like young colts will, and there was nothing on this green earth Dave
could have asked from me that I wouldn't have done for him. Nothing
except one, I reckon, and Dave never asked that of me."

Mackenzie puffed at his cigar a silent moment before resuming. "It
happened we both fell in love with the same girl, little Frances Clark,
of the Double T Ranch. Dave was a better looker than me and a more
taking fellow, but somehow Frances favored me from the start. Dave
stayed till the finish, and when he seen he had lost he stood up with
me at the wedding. We had agreed, you see, that whoever won it wasn't to
break up our friendship.

"Well, Frankie and I were married, and in course of time we had two
children. My boy, Tom, is the older. The other was a little girl, named
after her mother." The cattleman waited a moment to steady his voice,
and spoke through teeth set deep in his Havana. "I haven't seen her, as
I said, since she was two years and ten months old--not since the night
Dave disappeared."

Bucky looked up quickly with a question on his lips, but he did not need
to word it.

Mackenzie nodded. "Yes, Dave took her with him when he lit out across
the line for Mexico."

But I'll have to go back to something that happened earlier. About three
months before this time Dave and me were riding through a cut in the
Sierra Diablo Mountains, when we came on a Mexican who had been wounded
by the Apaches. I reckon we had come along just in time to scare them
off before they finished him. We did our best for him, but he died in
about two hours. Before dying, he made us a present of a map we found
in his breast pocket. It showed the location of a very rich mine he had
found, and as he had no near kin he turned it over to us to do with as
we pleased.

"Just then the round-up came on, and we were too busy to pay much
attention to the mine. Each of us would have trusted the other with his
life, or so I thought. But we cut the paper in half, each of us keeping
one part, in order that nobody else could steal the secret from the one
that held the paper. The last time I had been in El Paso I had bought my
little girl a gold chain with two lockets pendent. These lockets opened
by a secret spring, and in one of them I put my half of the map. It
seemed as safe a place as I could devise, for the chain never left the
child's neck, and nobody except her mother, Dave, and I knew that it was
placed there. Dave hid his half under a rock that was known to both of
us. The strange thing about the story is that my false friend, in the
hurry of his flight, forgot to take his section of the map with him. I
found it under the rock next day, so that his vile treachery availed him
nothing from a mercenary point of view."

"Didn't take his half of the map with him. That's right funny," Bucky
mused aloud.

"We never could understand why he didn't."

"Mebbe if you understood that a heap of things might be clear that are
dark now."

"Mebbe. Knowing Dave Henderson as I did, or, rather, as I thought I
did, such treachery as his was almost unbelievable. He was the sweetest,
sunniest soul I ever knew, and no two brothers could have been as fond
of each other as we seemed to be. But there was no chance of mistake. He
had gone, and taken our child with him, likely in accordance with a plan
of revenge long cherished by him. We never heard of him or the child
again. They disappeared as completely as if the earth had swallowed them
up. Our cook, too, left with him that evil night."

"Your cook?" It was the second comment Bucky had ventured, and it came
incisively. "What manner of man was he?"

"A huge, lumbering braggart. I could never understand why Dave took the
man with him."

"If he did."

"But I tell you he did. They disappeared the same night, and the trail
showed they went the same road. We followed them for about an hour next
day, but a heavy rain came up and blotted out the tracks."

"What was the cook's name?"

"Jeff Anderson."

"Have you a picture of him, or one of your friend?"

"Back at the ranch I had pictures of Dave, but I burned them after he
left. Yes, I reckon we have one of Anderson, standing in front of the
chuck wagon."

"Send it to me, please."

"All right."

The ranger asked a few questions that made clearer the situation on
the day of the kidnapping, and some more concerning Anderson, then fell
again into the role of a listener while Mackenzie concluded his story.

"All these years I have kept my eyes open, confident that at last I
would discover something that would help me to discover the whereabouts
of my child, or, at least, give me a chance to punish the scoundrel who
betrayed my confidence. Yesterday my brother's letter gave the first
clue we have had. I want that lead worked. Ferret this thing out to the
bottom, lieutenant. Get me something definite to go on. That's what I
want you to do. Run the thing to earth, get at the facts, and find
my child for me. I'll give you carte blanche up to a hundred thousand
dollars. All I ask of you is to make good. Find the little girl, or else
bring me face to face with that villain Henderson. Can you do it?"

O'Connor was strangely interested in this story of treachery and
mystery. He rose with shining eyes and held out his hand. "I don't know,
seh, but I'll try damned hard to do three things: find out what has
become of the little girl, of Dave Henderson, and of the scoundrel who
stole your baby because he thought the map was in the pocket."

"You mean that you don't think Dave--"

"That is exactly what I mean. Your cook, Anderson, kidnapped the child,
looks like to me. I saw that locket Collins found. My guess was that the
marks on the end of the chain were deep teeth marks. The man that stole
your baby tried first to cut the chain with his teeth so as to steal the
chain. You see, he could not find the clasp in the dark. Then the child
wakened and began to cry. He clapped a hand over its mouth and carried
the little girl out of the room. Then he heard somebody moving about,
lost his nerve, and jumped on the horse that was waiting, saddled, at
the door. He took the child along simply because he had to in order to
get the chain and the secret he thought it held."

"Perhaps; but that does not prove it was not Dave."

"It's contributory evidence, seh. Your friend could have slipped the
chain from her neck any day, or he could have opened the locket and
taken the map. No need for him to steal in at night. Do you happen to
remember whether your little girl had any particular aversion to the
cook?"

The cattleman's forehead frowned in thought. "I do remember, now, that
she was afraid of him. She always ran screaming to her mother when he
tried to be friendly with her. He was a sour sort of fellow."

"That helps out the case a heap, for it shows that he wanted to make
friends with her and she refused. He was thus forced to take the chain
when she was asleep instead of playing with her till he had discovered
the spring and could simply take the map."

"But he didn't know anything about the map. He was not in our
confidence."

"You and your friend talked it over evenings when he was at the ranch,
and other places, too, I expect."

"Yes, our talk kind of gravitated that way whenever we got together."

"Well, this fellow overheard you. That's probable, at least."

"But you're ignoring the important fact. Dave disappeared too that
night, with my little girl."

Bucky cut in sharply with a question. "Did he? How do you know he
disappeared WITH her? Why not AFTER? That's the theory my mind is
groping on just now."

"That's a blind trail to me. Why AFTER? And what difference does it
make?"

"All the difference in the world. If he left after the cook, you have
been doing him an injustice for fifteen years, seh."

Mackenzie leaned forward, excitement burning in his eyes. "Prove that,
young man, and I'll thank you to the last day of my life. It's for my
wife's sake more than my own I want my little girl back. She jes' pines
for her every day of her life. But for my friend--if you can give me
back the clean memory of Dave you'll have done a big thing for me, Mr.
O'Connor."

"It's only a working theory, but this is what I'm getting at. You and
Henderson had arranged to take an early start on a two days' deer hunt
next mo'ning. That's what you told me, isn't it?"

"We were to start about four. Yes, sir."

"Well, let's suppose a case. Along comes Dave before daybreak, when the
first hooters were beginning to call. Just as he reaches your ranch
he notices a horse slipping away in the darkness. Perhaps he hears
the little girl cry out. Anyhow, instead of turning in at the gate, he
decides to follow. Probably he isn't sure there's anything wrong, but
when he finds out how the horse he's after is burning the wind his
suspicions grow stronger. He settles down to a long chase. In the
darkness, we'll say, he loses his man, but when it gets lighter he picks
up the trail again. The tracks lead south, across the line into Mexico.
Still he keeps plodding on. The man in front sees him behind and gets
scared because he can't shake him off. Very likely he thinks it is you
on his track. Anyhow, while the child is asleep he waits in ambush, and
when Henderson rides up he shoots him down. Then he pushes on deeper
into Chihuahua, and proceeds to lose himself there by changing his
name."

"You think he murdered Dave?" The cattleman got up and began to pace up
and down the floor.

"I think it possible."

Webb Mackenzie's face was pallid, but there was a new light of hope
in it. "I believe you're right. God knows I hope so. That may sound a
horrible thing to say of my best friend, but if it has got to be one or
the other--if it is certain that my old bunkie came to his death
foully in Chihuahua while trying to save my baby, or is alive to-day,
a skulking coward and villain--with all my heart I hope he is dead." He
spoke with a passionate intensity which showed how much he had cared for
his early friend, and how much the latter's apparent treachery had cut
him. "I hope you'll never have a friend go back on you, Mr. O'Connor,
the one friend you would have banked on to a finish. Why, Dave Henderson
saved my life from a bunch of Apaches once when it was dollars to
doughnuts he would lose his own if he tried it. We were prospecting in
the Galiuros together, and one mo'ning when he went down to the creek
to water the hawsses he sighted three of the red devils edging up toward
the cabin. There might have been fifty of them there for all he knew,
and he had a clear run to the plains if he wanted to back one of the
ponies and take it. Most any man would have saved his own skin, but not
Dave. He hoofed it back to the cabin, under fire every foot of the
way, and together we made it so hot for them that they finally gave up
getting us. We were in the Texas Rangers together, and pulled each other
through a lot of close places. And then at the end--Why, it hurt me more
than it did losing my own little girl."

Bucky nodded. Since he was a man and not a father, he could understand
how the hurt would rankle year after year at the defalcation of his
comrade.

"That's another kink we have got to unravel in this tangle. First off,
there's your little girl, to find if she is still alive. Second, we must
locate Dave Henderson or his grave. Third, there's something due the
scoundrel who is responsible for this. Fourthly, brethren, there's that
map section to find. And lastly, we've got to find just how this story
you've told me got mixed with the story of the holdup of the Limited.
For it ce'tainly looks as if the two hang together. I take it that the
thing to do is to run down the gang that held up the Limited. Once we
do that, we ought to find the key to the mystery of your little girl's
disappearance. Or, at least, there is a chance we shall. And it's
chances we've got to gamble on in this thing."

"Good enough. I like the way you go at this. Already I feel a heap
better than I did."

"If the cards fall our way you're going to get this thing settled once
for all. I can't promise my news will be good news when I get it, but
anything will be better than the uncertainty you've been in, I take it,"
said Bucky, rising from his chair.

"You're right there. But, wait a moment. Let's drink to your success."

"I'm not much of a sport," Bucky smiled. "Fact is, I never drink, seh."

"Of course. I remember, now. You're the good bad man of the West,"
Mackenzie answered amiably. "Well, I drink to you. Here's good hunting,
lieutenant."

"Thank you."

"I suppose you'll get right at this thing?"

"I've got to take that kid in the next room out to my ranch first. I
won't stand for that knife thrower making a slave of him."

"What's the matter with me taking the boy out to the Rocking Chair with
me? My wife and I will see he's looked after till you return."

"That would be the best plan, if it won't trouble you too much. We'd
better keep his whereabouts quiet till this fellow Hardman is out of the
country."

"Yes, though I hardly think he'd be fool enough to show up at the
Rocking Chair. If my vaqueros met up with him prowling around they might
show him as warm a welcome as you did half an hour ago."

"A chapping would sure do him a heap of good," grinned Bucky, and so
dismissed the Champion of the World from his mind.


CHAPTER 5. BUCKY ENTERTAINS

Bucky began at once to tap the underground wires his official position
made accessible to him. These ran over Southern Arizona, Sonora, and
Chihuahua. All the places to which criminals or frontiersmen with money
were wont to resort were reported upon. For the ranger's experience had
taught him that since the men he wanted had money in their pockets to
burn gregarious impulse would drive them from the far silent places of
the desert to the roulette and faro tables where the wolf and the lamb
disport themselves together.

The photograph from Webb Mackenzie of the cook Anderson reached him at
Tucson the third day after his interview with that gentleman, at the
same time that Collins dropped in on him to inquire what progress he was
making.

O'Connor told him of the Aravaipa episode, and tossed across the table
to him the photograph he had just received.

"If we could discover the gent that sat for this photo it might help us.
You don't by any chance know him, do you, Val?"

The sheriff shook his head. "Not in my rogues' gallery, Bucky."

The ranger again examined the faded picture. A resemblance in it to
somebody he had met recently haunted vaguely his memory. As he looked
the indefinite suggestion grew sharp and clear. It was a photograph
of the showman who had called himself Hardman. All the trimmings were
lacking, to be sure--the fierce mustache, the long hair, the buckskin
trappings, none of them were here. But beyond a doubt it was the same
shifty-eyed villain. Nor did it shake Bucky's confidence that Mackenzie
had seen him and failed to recognize the man as his old cook. The fellow
was thoroughly disguised, but the camera had happened to catch that
curious furtive glance of his. But for that O'Connor would never have
known the two to be the same.

Bucky was at the telephone half an hour. In the middle of the next
afternoon his reward came in the form of a Western Union billet. It
read:

"Eastern man says you don't want what is salable here."

The lieutenant cut out every other word and garnered the wheat of the
message:

"Man you want is here."

The telegram was marked from Epitaph, and for that town the ranger and
the sheriff entrained immediately.

Bucky's eye searched in vain the platform of the Epitaph depot for
Malloy, of the Rangers, whose wire had brought him here. The cause
of the latter's absence was soon made clear to him in a note he found
waiting for him at the hotel:

"The old man has just sent me out on hurry-up orders. Don't know when
I'll get back. Suggest you take in the show at the opera house to-night
to pass the time."

It was the last sentence that caught Bucky's attention. Jim Malloy had
not written it except for a reason. Wherefore the lieutenant purchased
two tickets for the performance far back in the house. From the local
newspaper he gathered that the showman was henceforth to be a resident
of Epitaph. Mr. Jay Hardman, or Signor Raffaello Cavellado, as he was
known the world over by countless thousands whom he had entertained, had
purchased a corral and livery stable at the corner of Main and Boothill
Streets and solicited the patronage of the citizens of Hualpai County.
That was the purport of the announcement which Bucky ringed with a
pencil and handed to his friend.

That evening Signor Raffaello Cavellado made a great hit with his
audience. He swaggered through his act magnificently, and held his
spectators breathless. Bucky took care to see that a post and the
sheriff's big body obscured him from view during the performance.

After it was over O'Connor and the sheriff returned to the hotel, where
also Hardman was for the present staying, and sent word up to his
room that one of the audience who had admired very much the artistic
performance would like the pleasure of drinking a glass of wine with
Signor Cavellado if the latter would favor him with his company in room
seven. The Signor was graciously pleased to accept, and followed his
message of acceptance in person a few minutes later.

Bucky remained quietly in the corner of the room back of the door until
the showman had entered, and while the latter was meeting Collins he
silently locked the door and pocketed the key.

The sheriff acknowledged Hardman's condescension brusquely and without
shaking hands. "Glad to meet you, seh. But you're mistaken in one thing.
I'm not your host. This gentleman behind you is."

The man turned and saw Bucky, who was standing with his back against the
door, a bland smile on his face.

"Yes, seh. I'm your host to-night. Sheriff Collins, hyer, is another
guest. I'm glad to have the pleasure of entertaining you, Signor
Raffaello Cavellado," Bucky assured him, in his slow, gentle drawl,
without reassuring him at all.

For the fellow was plainly disconcerted at recognition of his host.
He turned with a show of firmness to Collins. "If you're a sheriff, I
demand to have that door opened at once," he blustered.

Val put his hands in his pockets and tipped back his chair. "I ain't
sheriff of Hualpai County. My jurisdiction don't extend here," he said
calmly.

"I'm an unarmed man," pleaded Cavellado.

"Come to think of it, so am I."

"I reckon I'm holding all the aces, Signor Cavellado," explained the
ranger affably. "Or do you prefer in private life to be addressed as
Hardman--or, say, Anderson?"

The showman moistened his lips and offered his tormentor a blanched
face.

"Anderson--a good plain name. I wonder, now, why you changed it?"
Bucky's innocent eyes questioned him blandly as he drew from his pocket
a little box and tossed it on the table. "Open that box for me, Mr.
Anderson. Who knows? It might explain a heap of things to us."

With trembling fingers the big coward fumbled at the string. With all
his fluent will he longed to resist, but the compelling eyes that met
his so steadily were not to be resisted. Slowly he unwrapped the paper
and took the lid from the little box, inside of which was coiled up a
thin gold chain with locket pendant.

"Be seated," ordered Bucky sternly, and after the man had found a chair
the ranger sat down opposite him.

From its holster he drew a revolver and from a pocket his watch. He laid
them on the table side by side and looked across at the white-lipped
trembler whom he faced.

"We had better understand each other, Mr. Anderson. I've come here to
get from you the story of that chain, so far as you know it. If you
don't care to tell it I shall have to mess this floor up with your
remains. Get one proposition into your cocoanut right now. You don't get
out of this room alive with your secret. It's up to you to choose."

Quite without dramatics, as placidly as if he were discussing railroad
rebates, the ranger delivered his ultimatum. It seemed plain that he
considered the issue no responsibility of his.

Anderson stared at him in silent horror, moistening his dry lips with
the tip of his tongue. Once his gaze shifted to the sheriff but found
small comfort there. Collins had picked up a newspaper and was absorbed
in it.

"Are you going to let him kill me?" the man asked him hoarsely.

He looked up from his newspaper in mild protest at such unreason. "Me? I
ain't sittin' in this game. Seems like I mentioned that already."

"Better not waste your time, signor, on side issues," advised the man
behind the gun. "For I plumb forgot to tell you I'm allowing only three
minutes to begin your story, half of which three has already slipped
away to yesterday's seven thousand years. Without wantin' to hurry you,
I suggest the wisdom of a prompt decision."

"Would he do it?" gasped the victim, with a last appeal to Collins.

"Would he what? Oh, shoot you up. Cayn't tell till I see. If he says he
will he's liable to. He always was that haidstrong."

"But--why--why--"

"Yes, it's sure a heap against the law, but then Bucky ain't a lawyer.
I don't reckon he cares sour grapes for the law--as law. It's a right
interesting guess as to whether he will or won't."

"There's a heap of cases the law don't reach prompt. This is one of
them," contributed the ranger cheerfully. He pocketed his watch and
picked up the .45. "Any last message or anything of that sort, signor? I
don't want to be unpleasant about this, you understand."

The whilom bad man's teeth chattered. "I'll tell you anything you want
to know."

"Now, that's right sensible. I hate to come into another man's house and
clutter it up. Reel off your yarn."

"I don't know--what you want."

"I want the whole story of your kidnapping of the Mackenzie child, how
came you to do it, what happened to Dave Henderson, and full directions
where I may locate Frances Mackenzie. Begin at the beginning, and I'll
fire questions at you when you don't make any point clear to me. Turn
loose your yarn at me hot off the bat."

The man told his story sullenly. While he was on the round-up as cook
for the riders he had heard Mackenzie and Henderson discussing together
the story of their adventure with the dying Spaniard and their hopes
of riches from the mine he had left them. From that night he had set
himself to discover the secret of its location, had listened at windows
and at keyholes, and had once intercepted a letter from one to the
other. By chance he had discovered that the baby was carrying the secret
in her locket, and he had set himself to get it from her.

But his chance did not come. He could not make friends with her, and at
last, in despair of finding a better opportunity, he had slipped into
her room one night in the small hours to steal the chain. But it was
wound round her neck in such a way that he could not slip it over her
head. She had awakened while he was fumbling with the clasp and had
begun to cry. Hearing her mother moving about in the next room, he had
hastily carried the child with him, mounted the horse waiting in the
yard, and ridden away.

In the road he became aware, some time later, that he was being pursued.
This gave him a dreadful fright, for, as Bucky had surmised, he thought
his pursuer was Mackenzie. All night he rode southward wildly, but still
his follower kept on his trail till near morning, when he eluded him. He
crossed the border, but late that afternoon got another fright. For it
was plain he was still being followed. In the endless stretch of rolling
hills he twice caught sight of a rider picking his way toward him. The
heart of the guilty man was like water. He could not face the outraged
father, nor was it possible to escape so dogged a foe by flight. An
alternative suggested itself, and he accepted it with sinking courage.
The child was asleep in his arms now, and he hastily dismounted,
picketed his horse, and stole back a quarter of a mile, so that the
neighing of his bronco might not betray his presence. Then he lay down
in a dense mesquit thicket and waited for his foe. It seemed an eternity
till the man appeared at the top of a rise fifty yards away. Hastily
Anderson fired, and again. The man toppled from his horse, dead before
he struck the ground. But when the cook reached him he was horrified to
see that the man he had killed was a member of the Rurales, or Mexican
border police. In his guilty terror he had shot the wrong man.

He fled at once, pursued by a thousand fears. Late the next night he
reached a Chihuahua village, after having been lost for many hours. The
child he still carried with him, simply because he had not the heart
to leave it to die in the desert alone. A few weeks later he married
an American woman he met in Sonora. They adopted the child, but it died
within the year of fever.

Meanwhile, he was horrified to learn that Dave Henderson, following
hard on his trail, had been found bending over the spot where the dead
soldier lay, had been arrested by a body of Rurales, tried hurriedly,
and convicted to life imprisonment. The evidence had been purely
circumstantial. The bullet found in the dead body of the trooper was one
that might have come from his rifle, the barrel of which was empty and
had been recently fired. For the rest, he was a hated Americano, and, as
a matter of course, guilty. His judges took pains to see that no message
from him reached his friends in the States before he was buried alive in
the prison. In that horrible hole an innocent man had been confined for
fifteen years, unless he had died during that time.

That, in substance, was the story told by the showman, and Bucky's
incisive questions were unable to shake any portion of it. As to
the missing locket, the man explained that it had been broken off by
accident and lost. When he discovered that only half the secret was
contained on the map section he had returned the paper to the locket and
let the child continue to carry it. Some years after the death of the
child, Frances, his wife had lost the locket with the map.

"And this chain and locket--when did you lose them?" demanded Bucky
sharply.

"It must have been about two months ago, down at Nogales, that I sold it
to a fellow. I was playing faro and losing. He gave me five dollars for
it."

And to that he stuck stoutly, nor could he be shaken from it. Both
O'Connor and the sheriff believed he was lying, for they were convinced
that he was the bandit with the red wig who had covered the engineer
while his companions robbed the train. But of this they had no proof.
Nor did Bucky even mention his suspicion to Hardman, for it was his
intention to turn him loose and have him watched. Thus, perhaps, he
would be caught corresponding or fraternizing with some of the other
outlaws. Collins left the room before the showman, and when the latter
came from the hotel he followed him into the night.

Meanwhile, Bucky went out and tapped another of his underground wires.
This ran directly to the Mexican consul at Tucson, to whom Bucky
had once done a favor of some importance, and from him to Sonora and
Chihuahua. It led to musty old official files, to records already
yellowed with age, to court reports and prison registers. In the end
it flashed back to Bucky great news. Dave Henderson, arrested for the
murder of the Rurales policeman, was still serving time in a Mexican
prison for another man's crime. There in Chihuahua for fifteen years he
had been lost to the world in that underground hole, blotted out from
life so effectually that few now remembered there had been such a
person. It was horrible, unthinkable, but none the less true.


CHAPTER 6. BUCKY MAKES A DISCOVERY

For a week Bucky had been in the little border town of Noches, called
there by threats of a race war between the whites and the Mexicans.
Having put the quietus on this, he was returning to Epitaph by way of
the Huachuca Mountains. There are still places in Arizona where rapid
transit can be achieved more expeditiously on the back of a bronco than
by means of the railroad, even when the latter is available. So now
Bucky was taking a short cut across country instead of making the two
train changes, with the consequent inevitable delays that would have
been necessary to travel by rail.

He traveled at night and in the early morning, to avoid the heat of the
midday sun, and it was in the evening of the second and last day that
the skirts of happy chance led him to an adventure that was to affect
his whole future life. He knew a waterhole on the Del Oro, where cows
were wont to frequent even in the summer drought, and toward this he was
making in the fag-end of the sultry day. While still some hundred yards
distant he observed a spiral of smoke rising from a camp-fire at the
spring, and he at once made a more circumspect approach. For it might be
any one of a score of border ruffians who owed him a grudge and would be
glad to pay it in the silent desert that tells no tales and betrays no
secrets to the inquisitive.

He flung the bridle-rein over his pony's neck and crept forward on foot,
warily and noiselessly. While still some little way from the water-hole
he was arrested by a sound that startled him. He could make out a
raucous voice in anger and a pianissimo accompaniment of womanish sobs.

"You're mine to do with as I like. I'm your uncle. I've raised you
from a kid, and, by the great mogul! you can't sneak off with the first
good-for nothing scoundrel that makes eyes at you. Thought you had
slipped away from me, you white-faced, sniveling little idiot, but I'll
show you who is master."

The lash of a whip rose and fell twice on quivering flesh before Bucky
leaped into the fireglow and wrested the riding-whip from the hands of
the angry man who was plying it.

"Dare to touch a woman, would you?" cried the ranger, swinging the
whip vigorously across the broad shoulders of the man. "Take that--and
that--and that, you brute!"

But when Bucky had finished with the fellow and flung him a limp,
writhing huddle of welts to the ground, three surprises awaited him. The
first was that it was not a woman he had rescued at all, but a boy, and,
as the flickering firelight played on his face, the ranger came to an
unexpected recognition. The slim lad facing him was no other than Frank
Hardman, whom he had left a few days before at the Rocking Chair under
the care of motherly Mrs. Mackenzie. The young man's eyes went back with
instant suspicion to the fellow he had just punished, and his suspicions
were verified when the leaping light revealed the face of the showman
Anderson.

Bucky laughed. "I ce'tainly seem to be interfering in your affairs a
good deal, Mr. Anderson. You may take my word for it that you was the
last person in the world I expected to meet here, unless it might be
this boy. I left him safe at a ranch fifty miles from here, and I left
you a staid business man of Epitaph. But it seems neither of you stayed
hitched. Why for this yearning to travel?"

"He found me where I was staying. I was out riding alone on an errand
for Mrs. Mackenzie when he met me and made me go with him. He has
arranged to have me meet his wife in Mexico. The show wouldn't draw well
without me. You know I do legerdemain," Frank explained, in his low,
sweet voice.

"So you had plans of your own, Mr. Anderson. Now, that was right
ambitious of you. But I reckon I'll have to interfere with them again.
Go through him, kid, and relieve him of any guns he happens to be
garnished with. Might as well help yourself to his knives, too. He's so
fond of letting them fly around promiscuous he might hurt himself. Good.
Now we can sit down and have a friendly talk. Where did you say you was
intending to spend the next few weeks before I interrupted so unthinking
and disarranged your plans? I'm talking to you, Mr. Anderson."

"I was heading for Sonora," the man whined.

What Bucky thought was: "Right strange direction to be taking for
Sonora. I'll bet my pile you were going up into the hills to meet some
of Wolf Leroy's gang. But why you were taking the kid along beats me,
unless it was just cussedness." What he said was:

"Oh, you'll like Epitaph a heap better. I allow you ought to stay at
that old town. It's a real interesting place. Finished in the adobe
style and that sort of thing. The jail's real comfy, too."

"Would you like something to eat, sir?" presently asked Frank timidly.

"Would I? Why, I'm hungry enough to eat a leather mail-sack. Trot on
your grub, young man, and watch my smoke."

Bucky did ample justice to the sandwiches and lemonade the lad set in
front of him, but he ate with a wary eye on a possible insurrection on
the part of his prisoner.

"I'm a new man," he announced briskly, when he had finished. "That veal
loaf sandwich went sure to the right spot. If you had been a young lady
instead of a boy you couldn't fix things up more appetizing."

The lad's face flushed with embarrassment, apparently at the ranger's
compliment, and the latter, noticed how delicate the small face was. It
made an instinctive, wistful appeal for protection, and Bucky felt an
odd little stirring at his tender Irish heart.

"Might think I was the kid's father to see what an interest I take in
him," the young man told himself reprovingly. "It's all tommyrot, too.
A boy had ought to have more grit. I expect he needed that licking all
right I saved him from."

When Bucky had eaten, the camp things were repacked for travel. Epitaph
was only twenty-three miles away, and the ranger preferred to ride
in the cool of the night rather than sit up till daybreak with his
prisoner. Besides, he could then catch the morning train from that town
and save almost a day.

So hour after hour they plodded on, the prisoner in front, O'Connor in
the center, and Frank Hardman bringing up the rear. It was an Arizona
night of countless stars, with that peculiar soft, velvety atmosphere
that belongs to no other land or time. In the distance the jagged,
violet line of mountains rose in silhouette against a sky not many
shades lighter, while nearer the cool moonlight flooded a land grown
magical under its divine touch.

The ranger rode with a limp ease that made for rest, his body shifting
now and again in the saddle, so as to change the weight and avoid
stiffness.

It must have been well past midnight that he caught the long breath of
a sigh behind him. The trail had broadened at that point, for they were
now down in the rolling plain, so that two could ride abreast in the
road. Bucky fell back and put a sympathetic hand on the shoulder of the
boy.

"Plumb fagged out, kid?" he asked.

"I am tired. Is it far?"

"About four miles. Stick it out, and we'll be there in no time."

"Yes, sir."

"Don't call me sir. Call me Bucky."

"Yes, sir."

Bucky laughed. "You're ce'tainly the queerest kid I've run up against.
I guess you didn't scramble up in this rough-and-tumble West like I did.
You're too soft for this country." He let his firm brown fingers travel
over the lad's curly hair and down the smooth cheek. "There it is again.
Shrinking away as if I was going to hurt you. I'll bet a biscuit you
never licked the stuffing out of another fellow in your life."

"No, sir," murmured the youth, and Bucky almost thought he detected a
little, chuckling laugh.

"Well, you ought to be ashamed of it. When come back from old Mexico I'm
going to teach you how to put up your dukes. You're going to ride the
range with me, son, and learn to stick to your saddle when the bronc and
you disagrees. Oh, I'll bet all you need is training. I'll make a man
out of you yet," the ranger assured his charge cheerfully. "Will you?"
came the innocent reply, but Bucky for a moment had the sense of being
laughed at.

"Yes, I 'will you,' sissy," he retorted, without the least exasperation.
"Don't think you know it all. Right now you're riding like a wooden man.
You want to take it easy in the saddle. There's about a dozen different
positions you can take to rest yourself." And Bucky put him through a
course of sprouts. "Don't sit there laughing at folks that knows a heap
more than you ever will get in your noodle, and perhaps you won't be so
done up at the end of a little jaunt like this," he concluded. And to
his conclusion he presently added a postscript: "Why, I know kids your
age can ride day and night for a week on the round-up without being all
in. How old are you, son?"

"Eighteen."

"That's a lie," retorted the ranger, with immediate frankness. "You're
not a day over fifteen, I'll bet."

"I meant to say fifteen," meekly corrected the youth.

"That's another of them. You meant to say eighteen, but you found I
wouldn't swallow it. Now, Master Frank, you want to learn one thing
prompt if you and I are to travel together. I can't stand a liar. You
tell the truth, or I'll give you the best licking you ever had in your
life."

"You're as bad a bully as he is," the boy burst out, flushing angrily.

"Oh, no, I'm not," came the ranger's prompt unmoved answer. "But just
because you're such a weak little kid that I could break you in two
isn't any reason why I should put up with any foolishness from you.
I mean to see that you act proper, the way an honest kid ought to do.
Savvy?"

"I'd like to know who made you my master?" demanded the boy hotly.

"You've ce'tainly been good and spoiled, but you needn't ride your high
hawss with me. Here's the long and the short of it. To tell lies ain't
square. If I ask you anything you don't want to answer tell me to go to
hell, but don't lie to me. If you do I'll punish you the same as if you
were my brother, so long as you trail with me. If you don't like it, cut
loose and hit the pike for yourself."

"I've a good mind to go."

Bucky waved a hand easily into space. "That's all right, too, son.
There's a heap of directions you can hit from here. Take any one you
like. But if I was as beat as you are, I think I'd keep on the Epitaph
road." He laughed his warm, friendly laugh, before the geniality of
which discord seemed to melt, and again his arm went round the other's
weary shoulders with a caressing gesture that was infinitely protecting.

The boy laughed tremulously. "You're awfully good to me. I know I'm a
cry-baby, sissy boy, but if you'll be patient with me I'll try to be
gamer."

It certainly was strange the way Bucky's pulse quickened and his blood
tingled when he touched the little fellow and heard that velvet
voice's soft murmur. Yes, it surely was strange, but perhaps the young
Irishman's explanation was not the correct one, after all. The cause he
offered to himself for this odd joy and tender excitement was perfectly
simple.

"I'm surely plumb locoed, or else gone soft in the haid," he told
himself grimly.

But the reason for those queer little electric shocks that pulsed
through him was probably a more elemental and primeval one than even
madness.

Arrived at Epitaph, Bucky turned loose his prisoner with a caution and
made his preparations to leave immediately for Chihuahua. Collins had
returned to Tucson, but was in touch with the situation and ready to set
out for any point where he was needed.

Bucky, having packed, was confronted with a difficulty. He looked at it,
and voiced his perplexity.

"Now, what am I going to do with you, Curly Haid? I expect I had better
ship you back to the Rocking Chair."

"I don't want to go back there. He'll come out again and find me after
you leave."

"Where do you want to go, then? If you were a girl I could put you in
the convent school here," he reflected aloud.

Again that swift, deep blush irradiated the youth's cheeks. "Why can't I
go with you?" he asked shyly.

The ranger laughed. "Mebbe you think I'm going on a picnic. Why, I'm
starting out to knock the chip off Old Man Trouble's shoulder. Like as
not some greaser will collect Mr. Bucky's scalp down in manyana land.
No, sir, this doesn't threaten to be a Y. P. S. C. E. excursion."

"If it is so dangerous as that, you will need help. I'm awful good at
making up, and I can speak Spanish like a native."

"Sho! You don't want to go running your neck into a noose. It's a
jail-break I'm planning, son. There may be guns a-popping before we
get back to God's country--if we ever do. Add to that, trouble and then
some, for there's a revolution scheduled for old Chihuahua just now, as
your uncle happens to know from reliable information."

"Two can always work better than one. Try me, Bucky," pleaded the boy,
the last word slipping out with a trailing upward inflection that was
irresistible.

"Sure you won't faint if we get in a tight pinch, Curly?" scoffed
O'Connor, even though in his mind he was debating a surrender. For he
was extraordinarily taken with the lad, and his judgment justified what
the boy had said.

"I shall not be afraid if you are with me."

"But I may not be with you. That's the trouble. Supposing I should be
caught, what would you do?"

"Follow any orders you had given me before that time. If you had not
given any, I would use my best judgment."

"I'll give them now," smiled Bucky. "If I'm lagged, make straight for
Arizona and tell Webb Mackenzie or Val Collins."

"Then you will take me?" cried the boy eagerly.

"Only on condition that you obey orders explicitly. I'm running this
cutting-out expedition."

"I wouldn't think of disobeying."

"And I don't want you to tell me any lies."

"No."

Bucky's big brown fist caught the little one and squeezed it. "Then it's
a deal, kid. I only hope I'm doing right to take you."

"Of course you are. Haven't you promised to make a man of me?" And again
Bucky caught that note of stifled laughter in the voice, though the big
brown eyes met his quite seriously.

They took the train that night for El Paso, Bucky in the lower berth and
his friend in the upper of section six of one of the Limited's Pullman
cars. The ranger was awake and up with the day. For a couple of hours
he sat in the smoking section and discussed politics with a Chicago
drummer. He knew that Frank was very tired, and he let him sleep till
the diner was taken on at Lordsburg. Then he excused himself to the
traveling man.

"I reckon I better go and wake up my pardner. I see the chuck-wagon is
toddling along behind us."

Bucky drew aside the curtains and shook the boy gently by the shoulder.
Frank's eyes opened and looked at the ranger with that lack of
comprehension peculiar to one roused suddenly from deep sleep.

"Time to get up, Curly. The nigger just gave the first call for the
chuck-wagon."

An understanding of the situation flamed over the boy's face. He
snatched the curtains from the Arizonian and gathered them tightly
together. "I'll thank you not to be so familiar," he said shortly from
behind the closed curtains.

"I beg your pahdon, your royal highness. I should have had myself
announced and craved an audience, I reckon," was Bucky's ironic retort;
and swiftly on the heels of it he added. "You make me tired, kid."

O'Connor was destined to be "made tired" a good many times in the
course of the next few days. In all the little personal intimacies
Frank possessed a delicate fastidiousness outside the experience of the
ranger. He was a scrupulously clean man himself, and rather nice as
to his personal habits, but it did not throw him into a flame of
embarrassment to brush his teeth before his fellow passengers. Nor did
it send him into a fit if a friend happened to drop into his room while
he was finishing his dressing. Bucky agreed with himself that this
excess of shyness was foolishness, and that to indulge the boy was
merely to lay up future trouble for him. A dozen times he was on the
point of speaking his mind on the subject, but some unusual quality of
innocence in the lad tied his tongue.

"Blame it all, I'm getting to be a regular old granny. What Master Frank
needs is a first-class dressing-down, and here the little cuss has got
me bluffed to a fare-you-well so that I'm mum as a hooter on the nest,"
he admitted to himself ruefully. "Just when something comes up that
needs a good round damn I catch that big brown Sunday school eye of his,
and it's Bucky back to Webster's unabridged. I've got to quit trailing
with him, or I'll be joining the church first thing I know. He makes me
feel like I want to be good, confound the little swindle."

Notwithstanding the ranger's occasional moments of exasperation, the two
got along swimmingly. Each of them found a continued pleasure in delving
into the other's unexplored mental recesses. They drifted into one of
those quick, spontaneous likings that are rare between man and man. Some
subtle quality of affection bubbled up like a spring in the hearts of
each for the other. Young Hardman could perhaps have explained what lay
at the roots of it, but O'Connor admitted that he was "buffaloed" when
he attempted an analysis of his unusual feeling.

From El Paso a leisurely run on the Mexican Central Pacific took them to
Chihuahua, a quaint old city something about the size of El Paso. Both
Bucky and his friend were familiar with the manners of the country, so
that they felt at home among the narrow adobe streets, the lounging,
good-natured peons, and the imitation Moorish architecture. They found
rooms at a quiet, inconspicuous hotel, and began making their plans for
an immediate departure in the event that they succeeded in their object.

At a distance it had seemed an easy thing to plan the escape of David
Henderson and to accomplish it by craft, but a sight of the heavy stone
walls that encircled the prison and of the numerous armed guards who
paced to and fro on the walls, put a more chilling aspect on their
chances.

"It isn't a very gay outlook," Bucky admitted cheerfully to his
companion, "but I expect we can pull it off somehow. If these Mexican
officials weren't slower than molasses in January it might have been
better to wait and have him released by process of law on account of
Hardman's confession. But it would take them two or three years to come
to a decision. They sure do hate to turn loose a gringo when they have
got the hog-tie on him. Like as not they would decide against him at the
last, then. Course I've got the law machinery grinding, too, but I'm not
banking on it real heavy. We'll get him out first any old way, then get
the government to O. K. the thing."

"How were you thinking of proceeding?"

"I expect it's time to let you in on the ground floor, son. I reckon you
happen to know that down in these Spanish countries there's usually a
revolution hatching. There s two parties among the aristocrats, those
for the government and those ferninst. The 'ins' stand pat, but the
'outs' have always got a revolution up their sleeves. Now, there's
mostly a white man mixed up in the affair. They have to have him to run
it and to shoot afterward when the government wins. You see, somebody
has to be shot, and it's always so much to the good if they can line
up gringoes instead of natives. Nine times out of ten it's an
Irish-American lad that is engineering the scheme. This time it happens
to be Mickey O'Halloran, an old friend of mine. I'm going to put it up
to Mick to find a way."

"But it isn't any affair of his. He won't do it, will he?"

"Oh, I thought I told you he was Irish."

"Well?"

"And spoiling for trouble, of course. Is it likely he could keep his
fist out of the hive when there's such a gem of a chance to get stung?"

It had been Frank's suggestion that they choose rooms at a hotel which
open into each other and also connect with an adjoining pair. The reason
for this had not at first been apparent to the ranger, but as soon as
they were alone Frank explained.

"It is very likely that we shall be under surveillance after a day or
two, especially if we are seen around the prison a good deal. Well,
we'll slip out the back way to-night, disguised in some other rig, come
boldly in by the front door, and rent the rooms next ours. Then we shall
be able to go and come, either as ourselves or as our neighbors. It will
give us a great deal more liberty."

"Unless we should get caught. Then we would have a great deal less.
What's your notion of a rig-up to disguise us, kid?"

"We might have several, in case of emergencies. For one thing, we
could easily be street showmen. You can do fancy shooting and I can do
sleight-of-hand tricks or tell fortunes."

"You would be a gipsy lad?"

The youngster blushed. "A gipsy girl, and you might be my husband."

"I'm no play actor, even if you are," said Bucky. "I don't want to be
your husband, thank you."

"All you would have to do is to be sullen and rough. It is easy enough."

"And you think you could pass for a girl? You're slim and soft enough,
but I'll bet you would give it away inside of an hour."

The boy laughed, and shot a swift glance at O'Connor under his long
lashes. "I appeared as a girl in one of the acts of the show for years.
Nobody ever suspected that I wasn't."

"We might try it, but we have no clothes for the part."

"Leave that to me. I'll buy some to-day while you are looking the ground
over for our first assault an the impregnable fortress."

"I don't know. It seems to me pretty risky. But you might buy the
things, and we'll see how you look in them. Better not get all the
things at the same store. Sort of scatter your purchases around."

They separated at the door of the hotel, Frank to choose the materials
he needed, and O'Connor to look up O'Halloran and get a permit to
visit the prison from the proper authorities. When the latter returned
triumphantly with his permit he found the boy busy with a needle and
thread and surrounded by a litter of dress-making material.

"I'm altering this to fit me and fixing it up," he explained.

"Holy smoke! Who taught you to sew?" asked Bucky, in surprise.

"My aunt, Mrs. Hardman. I used to do all the plain sewing on my
costumes. Did you see your friend and get your permit?"

"You bet I did, and didn't. Mickey was out, but I left him a note.
The other thing I pulled off all right. I'm to be allowed to visit the
prison and make a careful inspection of it at my leisure There's nothing
like a pull, son."

"Does the permit say you are to be allowed to steal any one of the
prisoners you take a fancy to? asked Frank, with a smile.

"No, it forgot to say that. When do you expect to have that toggery
made?"

"A good deal of it is already made, as you see. I'm just making a few
changes. Do you want to try on your suit?"

"Is THIS mine?" asked the ranger, picking up with smiling contempt the
rather gaudy blouse that lay on a chair.

"Yes, sir, that is yours. Go and put it on and we'll see how it fits."

Bucky returned a few minutes later in his gipsy uniform, with a
deprecating grin.

"I'll have to stain your face. Then you'll do very well," said Frank,
patting and pulling at the clothes here and there. "It's a good fit, if
I do say it that chose it. The first thing you want to do when you get
out in it is to roll in the dust and get it soiled. No respectable gipsy
wears new clothes. Better have a tear or two in it, too."

"You ce'tainly should have been a girl, the way you take to clothes,
Curly."

"Making up was my business for a good many years, you know," returned
the lad quietly. "If you'll step into the other room for about fifteen
minutes I'll show you how well I can do it."

It was a long half-hour later that Bucky thumped on the door between
the rooms. "Pretty nearly ready, kid? Seems to me it is taking you a
thundering long time to get that outfit on."

"How long do you think it ought to take a lady to dress?"

"Ten minutes is long enough, and fifteen, say, if she is going to a
dance. You've been thirty-five by my Waterbury."

"It's plain you never were married, Mr. Innocent. Why, a girl can't fix
her hair in less than half an hour."

"Well, you got a wig there, ain't you? It doesn't take but about five
seconds to stick that on. Hurry up, gringo! I'm clean through this old
newspaper."

"Read the advertisements," came saucily through the door.

"I've read the durned things twice."

"Learn them by heart," the sweet voice advised.

"Oh, you go to Halifax!"

Nevertheless, Mr. Bucky had to wait his comrade's pleasure. But when he
got a vision of the result, it was so little what he had expected
that it left him staring in amazement, his jaw fallen and his eyes
incredulous.

The vision swept him a low bow. "How do you like Bonita?" it demanded
gaily.

Bucky's eyes circled the room, to make sure that the boy was not hidden
somewhere, and came back to rest on his surprise with a look that was
almost consternation. Was this vivid, dazzling creature the boy he had
been patronizing, lecturing, promising to thrash any time during the
past four days? The thing was unbelievable, not yet to be credited by
his jarred brain. How incredibly blind he had been! What an idiot of
sorts! Why, the marks of sex sat on her beyond any possibility of
doubt. Every line of the slim, lissom figure, every curve of the soft,
undulating body, the sweep of rounded arm, of tapering waist-line, of
well-turned ankle, contributed evidence of what it were folly to ask
further proof. How could he have ever seen those lovely, soft-lashed
eyes and the delicate little hands without conviction coming home to
him? And how could he have heard the low murmur of her voice, the catch
of her sobs, without knowing that they were a denial of masculinity?

She was dressed like a Spanish dancing girl, in short kilts, red sash,
and jaunty little cap placed sidewise on her head. She wore a wig of
black hair, and her face was stained to a dusky, gipsy hue. Over her
thumb hung castanets and in her hand was a tambourine. Roguishly
she began to sway into a slow, rhythmic dance, beating time with her
instruments as she moved. Gradually the speed quickened to a faster
time. She swung gracefully to and fro with all the lithe agility of
the race she personified. No part could have been better conceived or
executed. Even physically she displayed the large, brilliant eyes, the
ringleted, coal-black hair, the tawny skin, and the flashing smile that
showed small teeth of dazzling ivory, characteristic of the Romanies
he had met. It was a daring part to play, but the young man watching
realized that she had the free grace to carry it out successfully.
She danced the fandango to a finish, swept him another low bow, and
presented laughingly to him the tambourine for his donation. Then,
suddenly flinging aside the instrument, she curtsied and caught at his
hand.

"Will the senor have his fortune told?"

Bucky drew a handful of change from his pocket and selected a gold
eagle. "I suppose I must cross your palm with gold," he said, even while
his subconscious mind was running on the new complication presented to
him by this discovery.

He was very clear about one thing. He must not let her know that he knew
her for a girl. To him she must still be a boy, or their relation would
become impossible. She had trusted in her power to keep her secret from
him. On no other terms would she have come with him; of so much he was
sure, even while his mind groped for a sufficient reason to account for
an impulse that might have impelled her. If she found out that he knew,
the knowledge would certainly drive her at once from him. For he knew
that not the least charm of the extraordinary fascination she had
for him lay in her sweet innocence of heart, a fresh innocence
that consisted with this gay Romany abandon, and even with a mental
experience of the sordid, seamy side of life as comprehensive as that of
many a woman twice her age. She had been defrauded out of her childish
inheritance of innocence, but, somehow, even in her foul environment
the seeds of a rare personal purity had persistently sprung up and
flourished. Some flowers are of such native freshness that no nauseous
surroundings can kill their fragrance. And this was one of them.

Meanwhile, her voice ran on with the patter of her craft. There was the
usual dark woman to be circumvented and the light one to be rewarded.
Jealousies and rivalries played their part in the nonsense she glibly
recited, and somewhere in the future lay, of course, great riches and
happiness for him.

With a queer little tug at his heart he watched the dainty finger
that ran so lightly over his open palm, watched, too, the bent head so
gracefully fine of outline and the face so mobile of expression when the
deep eyes lifted to his in question of the correctness of her reading.
He would miss the little partner that had wound himself so tightly
round his heart. He wondered if he would find compensating joy in this
exquisite creature whom a few moments had taken worlds distant from him.

Suddenly tiring of her diversion, she dropped his hand. "You don't say
I do it well," she charged, aware suspiciously, at last, of his grave
silence.

"You do it very well indeed. I didn't think you had it in you, kid.
What's worrying me is that I can never live up to such a sure enough
gipsy as you."

"All you have to do is to look sour and frown if anybody gets too
familiar with me. You can do that, can't you?"

"You bet I can," he answered promptly, with unnecessary emphasis.

"And look handsome," she teased.

"Oh, that will be easy for me--since you are going to make me up. As a
simple child of nature I'm no ornament to the scenery, but art's a heap
improving sometimes."

She thought, but did not say, that art would go a long way before it
could show anything more pleasing than this rider of the plains. It was
not alone his face, with the likable blue eyes that could say so many
things in a minute, but the gallant ease of his bearing. Such a springy
lightness, such sinewy grace of undulating muscle, were rare even on
the frontier. She had once heard Webb Mackenzie say of him that he could
whip his weight in wildcats, and it was easy of belief after seeing how
surely he was master of the dynamic power in him. It is the emergency
that sifts men, and she had seen him rise to several with a readiness
that showed the stuff in him.

That evening they slipped out unobserved in the dusk, and a few minutes
later a young gipsy and his bride presented themselves at the inn to be
put up. The scowling young Romany was particular, considering that he
spent most nights in the open, with a sky for a roof. So the master of
the inn thought when he rejected on one pretense or another the first
two rooms that were shown him. He wanted two rooms, and they must
connect. Had the innkeeper such apartments? The innkeeper had, but he
would very much like to see the price in advance if he was going to
turn over to guests of such light baggage the best accommodations in the
house. This being satisfactorily arranged, the young gipsies were left
to themselves in the room they had rented.

The first thing that the man did when they were alone was to roll a
cigarette, which operation he finished deftly with one hand, while the
other swept a match in a circular motion along his trousers leg. In very
fair English the Spanish gipsy said: "You ce'tainly ought to learn to
smoke, kid. Honest, it's more comfort than a wife."

"How do you know, since you are not married?" she asked archly.

"I been noticing some of my poor unfortunate friends," he grinned.


CHAPTER 7. IN THE LAND OF REVOLUTIONS

The knock that sounded on the door was neither gentle nor apologetic. It
sounded as if somebody had flung a baseball bat at it.

O'Connor smiled, remembering that soft tap of yore. "I reckon--" he was
beginning, when the door opened to admit a visitor.

This proved to be a huge, red-haired Irishman, with a face that served
just now merely as a setting for an irresistible smile. The owner of the
flaming head looked round in surprise on the pair of Romanies and began
an immediate apology to which a sudden blush served as accompaniment.

"Beg pardon. I didn't know The damned dago told me--" He stopped in
confusion, with a scrape and a bow to the lady.

"Sir, I demand an explanation of this most unwarrantable intrusion,"
spoke the ranger haughtily, in his best Spanish.

A patter of soft foreign vowels flowed from the stranger's
embarrassment.

"You durned old hawss-stealing greaser, cayn't you talk English?"
drawled the gipsy, with a grin.

The other's mouth fell open with astonishment He stared at the slim,
dusky young Spaniard for an instant before he fell upon him and began to
pound his body with jovial fists.

"You would, would you, you old pie-eating fraud! Try to fool your Uncle
Mick and make him think you a greaser, would you? I'll learn yez to play
horse with a fullgrown, able-bodied white man." He punctuated his points
with short-arm jolts that Bucky laughingly parried.

"Before ladies, Mick! Haven't you forgot your manners, Red-haid?"

Swiftly Mr. O'Halloran came to flushed rigidity. "Madam, I must still
be apologizing. The surprise of meeting me friend went to me head, I
shouldn't wonder."

Bucky doubled up with apparent mirth. "Get into the other room, Curly,
and get your other togs on," he ordered. "Can't you see that Mick is
going to fall in love with you if he sees you a minute longer, you young
rascal? Hike!"

"Don't you talk that way to a lady, Bucky," warned O'Halloran, again
blushing vividly, after she had disappeared into the next room. "And I
want to let yez have it right off the bat that if you've been leading
that little Mexican senorita into trouble you've got a quarrel on with
Mike O'Halloran."

"Keep your shirt on, old fire-eater. Who told you I was wronging her
any?"

"Are you married to her?"

"You bet I ain't. You see, Mick, that handsome lady you're going to lick
the stuffing out of me about is only a plumb ornery sassy young boy,
after all."

"No!" denied Mick, his eyes two excited interrogation-points. "You can't
stuff me with any such fairy-tale, me lad."

"All right. Wait and see," suggested the ranger easily. "Have a smoke
while you're falling out of love."

"You young limb, I want you to tell me all about it this very minute,
before I punch holes in yez."

Bucky lit his cigar, leaned back, and began to tell the story of Frank
Hardman and the knife-thrower. Only one thing he omitted to tell, and
that was the conviction that had come home to him a few moments ago that
his little comrade was no boy, but a woman. O'Halloran was a chivalrous
Irishman, a daredevil of an adventurer, with a pure love of freedom that
might very likely in the end bring him to face a row of loaded carbines
with his back to a wall, but Bucky had his reticencies that even loyal
friendship could not break down. This girl's secret he meant to guard
until such time as she chose of her own free will to tell it.

Frank returned just as he finished the tale of the knife episode, and
Mick's frank open eyes accused him of idiocy for ever having supposed
that this lad was a woman. Why, he was a little fellow not over
fifteen--not a day past fifteen, he would swear to that. He was, to be
sure, a slender, girlish young fellow, a good deal of a sissy by the
look of him, but none the less a sure enough boy. Convinced of this,
the big Irishman dismissed him promptly from his thoughts and devoted
himself to Bucky.

"And what are yez doing down in greaser land? Thought you was rustling
cows for a living somewheres in sunburnt Arizona," he grinned amiably.

"Me? Oh, I came down on business. We'll talk about that presently. How's
your one-hawss revolution getting along, Reddy? I hope it's right peart
and healthy."

O'Halloran's eyes flashed a warning, with the slightest nod in the world
toward the boy.

"Don't worry about him. He's straight as a string and knows how to keep
his mouth shut. You can tell him anything you would me." He turned to
the boy sitting quietly in an inconspicuous corner. "Mum's the word,
Frank. You understand that, of course?"

The boy nodded. "I'll go into the next room, if you like."

"It isn't necessary. Fire ahead, Mike."

The latter got up, tiptoed to each door in turn, flung it suddenly open
to see that nobody was spying behind it, and then turned the lock. "I
have use for me head for another year or two, and it's just as well to
see that nobody is spying. You understand, Bucky, that I'm risking me
life in telling you what I'm going to. If you have any doubts about this
lad--" He stopped, keen eyes fixed on Frank.

"He's as safe as I am, Mike. Is it likely I would take any risks about
a thing of that sort with my old bunkie's tough neck inviting the
hangman?" asked O'Connor quietly.

"Good enough. The kid looks stanch, and, anyhow, if you guarantee him
that's enough for me." He accepted another of the ranger's cigars,
puffed it to a red glow, and leaned back to smile at his friend. "Glory,
but it's good to see ye, Bucky, me bye. You'll never know how a man's
eyes ache to see a straight-up white man in this land of greasers. It's
the God's truth I'm telling ye when I say that I haven't had a scrimmage
with me hands since I came here. The only idea this forsaken country
has of exchanging compliments is with a knife in the dark." He shook his
flaming head regretfully at the deplorably lost condition of a country
where the shillalah was unknown as a social institution.

"If I wasn't tied up with this Valdez bunch I'd get out to-morrow, and
sometimes I have half a mind to pull out anyhow. If you've never been
associated, me lad, with half a dozen most divilishly polite senors,
each one of them watching the others out of the corner of his slant eyes
for fear they are going to betray him or assassinate him first, you'll
never know the joys of life in this peaceful and contented land of
indolence. Life's loaded to the guards with uncertainties, so eat,
drink, and be merry, for to-morrow you hang, or your friend will carve
ye in the back with a knife, me old priest used to say, or something
like it. 'Tis certain he must have had in mind the Spanish-American, my
son."

"Which is why you're here, you old fraud," smiled Bucky. "You've got
to grumble, of course, but you couldn't be dragged away while there's a
chance of a row. Don't I know you of old, Reddy?"

"Anyway, here I am, with me neck so near to the rope it fairly aches
sometimes. If you have any inclinations toward suicide, I'll be glad to
introduce ye to me revolutionary friends."

"Thank you, no. The fact is that we have a little private war of our
own on hand, Mike. I was thinking maybe you'd like to enlist, old
filibuster."

"Is the pay good?"

"Nothing a day and find yourself," answered Bucky promptly.

"No reasonable man could ask fairer than that," agreed O'Halloran,
his grin expanding. "Well, then, what's the row? Would ye like to be
dictator of Chihuahua or Emperor of Mexico?"

"There's an American in the government prison here under a life
sentence. He is not guilty, and he has already served fifteen years."

"He is like to serve fifteen more, if he lives that long."

"Wrong guess. I mean to get him out."

"And I'm meaning to go to Paradise some day, but will I?"

"You're going to help me get him out, Mike."

"Who told ye that, me optimistic young friend?"

"I didn't need to be told."

"Well, I'll not lift a finger, Bucky--not a finger."

"I knew you wouldn't stand to see a man like Henderson rot in a dungeon.
No Irishman would."

"You needn't blarney me. I'm too old a bird to be caught with chaff.
It's a dirty shame, of course, about this man Henderson, but I'm not
running the criminal jurisprudence of Mexico meself."

"And I said to Webb Mackenzie: 'Mickey O'Halloran is the man to see;
he'll know the best way to do it as nobody else would.' I knew I could
depend on you."

"You've certainly kissed the blarney stone, Mr. O'Connor," returned the
revolutionist dryly. "Well, then, what do you want me to do?"

"Nothing much. Get Henderson out and help us to get safely from the
country whose reputation you black-eye so cheerfully."

"Mercy of Hiven! Bring me the moon and a handful of stars, says he, as
cool as you please."

The ranger told the story of Henderson and Mackenzie's lost child in
such a way that it lost nothing in the telling. O'Halloran was moved.
"'Tis a damned shame about this man Henderson," he blurted out.

Bucky leaned back comfortably and waved airily his brown hand. "It's up
to you," his gay, impudent eyes seemed to say.

"I don't say I won't be able to help you," conceded O'Halloran. "It
happens, me bye, that you've dropped in on me just before the band
begins to play." He lowered his voice almost to a whisper. "There's
a shipment of pianos being brought down the line this week. The night
after they arrive I'm looking for music."

"I see. The piano boxes are filled with rifles and ammunition."

"You have a mind like a tack, Bucky. Rifles is the alias of them pianos.
They'll make merry music once we get them through."

"That's all very well, but have you reckoned with the government at
Mexico? Chihuahua isn't the whole country, Mickey. Suppose President
Diaz takes a hand in the game and sends troops in on you?"

"He won't," answered the other, with a wink. "He's been seen. The
president isn't any too friendly to that old tyrant Megales, who is now
governor here. There's an election next week. The man that gets most
votes will be elected, and I'm thinking, Bucky, that the man with most
rifles will the most votes. Now, says Diaz, in effect, with an official
wave of his hand, 'Settle your own rows, gintlemen. I don't give a damn
whether Megales or Valdez is governor of Chihuahua, subject, of coorse,
to the will of the people.' Then he winks at Valdez wid his off eye as
much as to say: 'Go in an' win, me boy; me prayers are supporting ye.
But be sure ye do nothing too illegal.' So there ye are, Bucky. If ould
Megales was to wake up election morning and find that the polling-places
was in our hands, his soldiers disarmed or bought over, and everything
contributing smoothly to express the will of the people in electing him
to take a swift hike out of Chihuahua, it is likely that he might accept
the inevitable as the will of fate and make a strategic retreat to
climes more healthy."

"And if in the meantime he should discover those rifles, or one of
those slant-eyed senors should turn out a Benedict Arnold, what then, my
friend?"

"Don't talk in that cruel way. You make me neck ache in anticipation,"
returned O'Halloran blithely.

"I think we'll not travel with you in public till after the election,
Mr. O'Halloran," reflected Bucky aloud.

"'Twould be just as well, me son. My friends won't be overpopular with
Megales if the cards fall his way."

"If you win, I suppose we may count Henderson as good as a free man?"

"It would be a pity if me pull wouldn't do a little thing like that,"
scoffed the conspirator genially.

"But, win or lose, I may be able to help you. We need musicians to play
those pianos we're bringing in. Well, the most dependable men we can set
to play some of them are the prisoners in the fortress. There's likely
to be a wholesale jail delivery the night before the election. Now, it's
just probable that the lads we free will fight to keep their freedom.
That's why we use them. They HAVE to be true to us because, if they
don't, WHICHEVER SIDE WINS back they go to jail."

"Of course. I wish I could take a hand myself. But I can't, because I'm
a soldier of a friendly power. We'll get Henderson out the night before
the election and leave on the late train. You'll have to arrange the
program in time for us to catch that train."

O'Halloran looked drolly at him. "I'm liking your nerve, young man.
I pull the chestnuts out of the fire for yez and, likely enough, get
burned. You walk off with your chestnut, and never a 'Thank ye' for poor
Mickey the catspaw."

"It doesn't look like quite a square deal, does it?" laughed the ranger.
"Well, we might vary the program a bit. Bucky O'Connor, Arizona ranger,
can't stop and take a hand in such a game, but I don't know anything to
prevent a young gipsy from Spain staying over a few days."

"If you stay, I shall," announced the boy Frank.

"You'll do nothing of the kind, seh. You'll do just as I say, according
to the agreement you made with me when I let you come," was Bucky's curt
answer. "We're not playing this game to please you, Master Frank."

Yet though the ranger spoke curtly, though he still tried to hold toward
his comrade precisely the same attitude as he had before discovering her
sex, he could not put into his words the same peremptory sting that, he
had done before when he found that occasionally necessary. For no matter
how severely he must seem to deal with her to avoid her own suspicions
as to what he knew, as well as to keep from arousing those of others,
his heart was telling a very different story all the time. He could see
again the dainty grace with which she had danced for him, heard again
that low voice breaking into a merry piping lilt, warmed once more to
the living, elusive smile, at once so tender and mocking. He might set
his will to preserve an even front to her gay charm, but it was beyond
him to control the thrills that shot his pulses.


CHAPTER 8. FIRST BLOOD!

Occasionally Alice Mackenzie met Collins on the streets of Tucson. Once
she saw him at the hotel where she was staying, deep in a discussion
with her father of ways and means of running down the robbers of the
Limited. He did not, however, make the least attempt to push their train
acquaintanceship beyond the give and take of casual greeting. Without
showing himself unfriendly, he gave her no opportunity to determine how
far they would go with each other. This rather piqued her, though
she would probably have rebuffed him if he had presumed far. Of which
probability Val Collins was very well aware.

They met one morning in front of a drug store downtown. She carried a
parasol that was lilac-trimmed, which shade was also the outstanding
note of her dress. She was looking her very best, and no doubt knew it.
To Val her dainty freshness seemed to breathe the sweetness of spring
violets.

"Good morning, Miss Mackenzie. Weather like this I'm awful glad I ain't
a mummy," he told her. "The world's mighty full of beautiful things this
glad day."

"Essay on the Appreciation of Nature, by Professor Collins," she smiled.

"To be continued in our next," he amended. "Won't you come in and have
a sundae? You look as if you didn't know it, but the rest of us have
discovered it's a right warm morning."

Looking across the little table at him over her sundae, she questioned
him with innocent impudence. "I saw you and dad deep in plans Tuesday. I
suppose by now you have all the train robbers safely tucked away in the
penitentiary?"

"Not yet," he answered cheerfully.

"Not yet!" Her lifted eyebrows and the derisive flash beneath mocked
politely his confidence. "By this time I should think they might be
hunting big game in deepest Africa."

"They might be, but they're not."

"What about that investment in futurities you made on the train? The
month is more than half up. Do you see any chance of realizing?"

"It looks now as if I might be a false prophet, but I feel way down deep
that I won't. In this prophet's business confidence is half the stock in
trade."

"Really. I'm very curious to know what it is you predicted. Was it
something good?"

"Good for me," he nodded.

"Then I think you'll get it," she laughed. "I have noticed that it
is the people that expect things--and then go out and take them--that
inherit the earth these days. The meek have been dispossessed."

"I'm glad I have your good wishes."

"I didn't say you had, but you'll get along just as well without them,''
she answered with a cool little laugh as she rose.

"I'd like to discuss that proposition with you more at length. May I
call on you some evening this week, Miss Mackenzie?"

There was a sparkle of hidden malice in her answer. "You're too late,
Mr. Collins. We'll have to leave it undiscussed. I'm going to leave
to-day for my uncle s ranch, the Rocking Chair."

He was distinctly disappointed, though he took care not to show it.
Nevertheless, the town felt empty after her train had gone. He was glad
when later in the day a message came calling him to Epitaph. It took him
at least seventy-five miles nearer her.

Before he had been an hour at Epitaph the sheriff knew he had struck
gold this time. Men were in town spending money lavishly, and at a rough
description they answered to the ones he wanted. Into the Gold Nugget
Saloon that evening dropped Val Collins, big, blond, and jaunty.
He looked far less the vigorous sheriff out for business than the
gregarious cowpuncher on a search for amusement.

Del Hawkes, an old-time friend of his staging days, pounced on him and
dragged him to the bar, whence his glance fell genially on the roulette
wheel and its devotees, wandered casually across the impassive poker
and Mexican monte players, took in the enthroned musicians, who were
industriously murdering "La Paloma," and came to rest for barely an
instant at a distant faro table. In the curly-haired good-looking young
fellow facing the dealer he saw one of the men he had come seeking. Nor
did he need to look for the hand with the missing trigger finger to be
sure it was York Neil--that same gay, merry-hearted York with whom he
used to ride the range, changed now to a miscreant who had elected to
take the short cut to wealth.

But the man beside Neil, the dark-haired, pallid fellow from whose
presence something at once formidable and sinister and yet gallant
seemed to breathe--the very sight of him set the mind of Collins at work
busily upon a wild guess. Surely here was a worthy figure upon whom to
set the name and reputation of the notorious Wolf Leroy.

Yet the sheriff's eyes rested scarce an instant before they went
traveling again, for he wanted to show as yet no special interest in the
object of his suspicions. The gathering was a motley one, picturesque in
its diversity. For here had drifted not only the stranded derelicts of
a frontier civilization, but selected types of all the turbid elements
that go to make up its success. Mexican, millionaire, and miner brushed
shoulders at the roulette-wheel. Chinaman and cow-puncher, Papago and
plainsman, tourist and tailor, bucked the tiger side by side with a
democracy found nowhere else in the world. The click of the wheel, the
monotonous call of the croupier, the murmur of many voices in alien
tongues, and the high-pitched jarring note of boisterous laughter, were
all merged in a medley of confusion as picturesque as the scene itself.

"Business not anyways slack at the Nugget," ventured Collins, to the
bartender.

"No, I don't know as 'tis. Nearly always somethin' doing in little old
Epitaph," answered the public quencher of thirsts, polishing the glass
top of the bar with a cloth.

"Playing with the lid off back there, ain't they?" The sheriff's nod
indicated the distant faro-table.

"That's right, I guess. Only blue chips go."

"It's Wolf Leroy--that Mexican-looking fellow there," Hawkes explained
in a whisper. "A bad man with the gun, they say, too. Well, him and
York Neil and Scott Dailey blew in last night from their mine, up at
Saguache. Gave it out he was going to break the bank, Leroy did. Backing
that opinion usually comes high, but Leroy is about two thousand to the
good, they say."

"Scott Dailey? Don't think I know him."

"That shorthorn in chaps and a yellow bandanna is the gentleman; him
that's playing the wheel so constant. You don't miss no world-beater
when you don't know Scott. He's Leroy's Man Friday. Understand they've
struck it rich. Anyway, they're hitting high places while the mazuma
lasts."

"I can't seem to locate their mine. What's its brand?"

"The Dalriada. Some other guy is in with them; fellow by the name of
Hardman, if I recollect; just bought out a livery barn in town here."

"Queer thing, luck; strikes about as unexpected as lightning. Have
another, Del?"

"Don't care if I do, Val. It always makes me thirsty to see people I
like. Anything new up Tucson way?"

The band had fallen on "Manzanilla," and was rending it with variations
when Collins circled round to the wheel and began playing the red. He
took a place beside the bow-legged vaquero with the yellow bandanna
knotted loosely round his throat. For five minutes the cow-puncher
attended strictly to his bets. Then he cursed softly, and asked Collins
to exchange places with him.

"This place is my hoodoo. I can't win--" The sentence died in the man's
throat, became an inarticulate gurgle of dismay.

He had looked up and met the steady eyes of the sheriff, and the
surprise of it had driven the blood from his heart. A revolver thrust
into his face could not have shaken him more than that serene smile.

Collins took him by the arm with a jovial laugh meant to cover their
retreat, and led him into one of the curtained alcove rooms. As they
entered he noticed out of the corner of his eye that Leroy and Neil
were still intent on their game. Not for a moment, not even while the
barkeeper was answering their call for liquor, did the sheriff release
Scott from the rigor of his eyes, and when the attendant drew the
curtain behind him the officer let his smile take on a new meaning.

"What did I tell you, Scott?"

"Prove it," defied Scott. "Prove it--you can't prove it."

"What can't I prove?"

"Why, that I was in that--" Scott stopped abruptly, and watched the
smile broaden on the strong face opposite him. His dull brain had come
to his rescue none too soon.

"Now, ain't it funny how people's thoughts get to running on the same
thing? Last time I met up with you there you was collecting a hundred
dollars and keep-the-change cents from me, and now here you are spending
it. It's ce'tinly curious how both of us are remembering that little
seance in the Pullman car."

Scott took refuge in a dogged silence. He was sweating fear.

"Yes, sir. It comes up right vivid before me. There was you a-trainin'
your guns on me--"

"I wasn't," broke in Scott, falling into the trap.

"That's right. How come I to make such a mistake? Of cou'se you carried
the sack and York Neil held the guns."

The man cursed quietly, and relapsed into silence.

"Always buy your clothes in pairs?"

The sheriff's voice showed only a pleasant interest, but the outlaw's
frightened eyes were puzzled at this sudden turn.

"Wearing a bandanna same color and pattern as you did the night of our
jamboree on the Limited, I see. That's mightily careless of you, ain't
it?"

Instinctively a shaking hand clutched at the kerchief. "It don't cut any
ice because a hold-up wears a mask made out of stuff like this."

"Did I say it was a mask he wore?" the gentle voice quizzed.

Scott, beads of perspiration on his forehead, collapsed as to his
defense. He fell back sullenly to his first position: "You can't prove
anything."

"Can't I?" The sheriff's smile went out like a snuffed candle. Eyes
and mouth were cold and hard as chiseled marble. He leaned forward far
across the table, a confident, dominating assurance painted on his face.
"Can't I? Don't you bank on that. I can prove all I need to, and your
friends will prove the rest. They'll be falling all over themselves to
tell what they know--and Mr. Dailey will be holding the sack again, while
Leroy and the rest are slipping out."

The outlaw sprang to his feet, white to the lips.

"It's a damned lie. Leroy would never--" He stopped, again just in time
to bite back the confession hovering on his lips. But he had told what
Collins wanted to know.

The curtain parted, and a figure darkened the doorway--a slender, lithe
figure that moved on springs. Out of its sardonic, devil-may-care face
gleamed malevolent eyes which rested for a moment on Dailey, before they
came home to the sheriff.

"And what is it Leroy would never do?" a gibing voice demanded silkily.

Scott pulled himself together and tried to bluff, but at the look on his
chief's face the words died in his throat.

Collins did not lift a finger or move an eyelash, but with the first
word a wary alertness ran through him and starched his figure to
rigidity. He gathered himself together for what might come.

"Well, I am waiting. What it is Leroy would never do?" The voice carried
a scoff with it, the implication that his very presence had stricken
conspirators dumb.

Collins offered the explanation.

"Mr. Dailey was beginning a testimonial of your virtues just as you
right happily arrived in time to hear it. Perhaps he will now proceed."

But Dailey had never a word left. His blunders had been crying ones,
and his chief's menacing look had warned him what to expect. The courage
oozed out of his heart, for he counted himself already a dead man.

"And who are you, my friend, that make so free with Wolf Leroy's name?"
It was odd how every word of the drawling sentence contrived to carry a
taunt and a threat with it, strange what a deadly menace the glittering
eyes shot forth.

"My name is Collins."

"Sheriff of Pica County?"

"Yes."

The eyes of the men met like rapiers, as steady and as searching as cold
steel. Each of them was appraising the rare quality of his opponent in
this duel to the death that was before him.

"What are you doing here? Ain't Pica County your range?"

"I've been discussing with your friend the late hold-up on the
Transcontinental Pacific."

"Ah!" Leroy knew that the sheriff was serving notice on them of his
purpose to run down the bandits. Swiftly his mind swept up the factors
of the situation. Should he draw now and chance the result, or wait for
a more certain ending? He decided to wait, moved by the consideration
that even if he were victorious the lawyers were sure to draw out of the
fat-brained Scott the cause of the quarrel.

"Well, that don't interest me any, though I suppose you have to explain
a heap how come they to hold you up and take your gun. I'll leave you
and your jelly-fish Scott to your gabfest. Then you better run back home
to Tucson. We don't go much on visiting sheriffs here." He turned on his
heel with an insolent laugh, and left the sheriff alone with Dailey.

The superb contempt of the man, his readiness to give the sheriff a
chance to pump out of Dailey all he knew, served to warn Collins that
his life was in imminent danger. On no hypothesis save one--that Leroy
had already condemned them both to death in his mind--could he account
for such rashness. And that the blow would fall soon, before he had time
to confer with other officers, was a corollary to the first proposition.

"He'll surely kill me on sight," Scott burst out.

"Yes, he'll kill you," agreed the sheriff, "unless you move first."

"Move how?"

"Against him. Protect yourself by lining up with me. It's your only show
on earth."

Dailey's eyes flashed. "Then, by thunder, I ain't taking it! I'm no
coyote, to round on my pardners."

"I give it to you straight. He means murder."

Perspiration poured from the man's face. "I'll light out of the
country."

The sheriff shook his head. "You'd never get away alive. Besides, I want
you for holding up the Limited. The safest place for you is in jail, and
that's where I'm going to put you. Drop that gun! Quick! That's right.
Now, you and I are going out of this saloon by the back door. I'm going
to walk beside you, and we're going to laugh and talk as if we were the
best of friends, but my hand ain't straying any from the end of my gun.
Get that, amigo? All right. Then we'll take a little pasear."

As Collins and his prisoner reappeared in the main lobby of the Gold
Nugget, a Mexican slipped out of the back door of the gambling-house.
The sheriff called Hawkes aside.

"I want you to call a hack for me, Del. Bring it round to the back door,
and arrange with the driver to whip up for the depot as soon as we get
in. We ought to catch that 12:20 up-train. When the hack gets here just
show up in the door. If you see Leroy or Neil hanging around the door,
put your hand up to your tie. If the coast is clear, just move off to
the bar and order something."

"Sure," said Hawkes, and was off at once, though just a thought unsteady
from his frequent libations.

Both hands of the big clock on the wall pointed to twelve when Hawkes
appeared again in the doorway at the rear of the Gold Nugget. With a
wink at Collins, he made straight for the cocktail he thought he needed.

"Now," said the sheriff, and immediately he and Dailey passed through
the back door.

Instantly two shots rang out. Collins lurched forward to the ground,
drawing his revolver as he fell. Scott, twisting from his grasp, ran
in a crouch toward the alley along the shadow of the buildings. Shots
spattered against the wall as his pursuers gave chase. When the Gold
Nugget vomited from its rear door a rush of humanity eager to see the
trouble, the noise of their footsteps was already dying in the distance.

Hawkes found his friend leaning against the back of the hack, his
revolver smoking in his hand.

"For God's sake, Val!" screamed Hawkes. "Did they get you?"

"Punctured my leg. That's all. But I expect they'll get Dailey."

"How come you to go out when I signaled you to stay?"

"Signaled me to stay, why--"

Collins stopped, unwilling to blame his friend. He knew now that Hawkes,
having mixed his drinks earlier in the evening, had mixed his signals
later.

"Get me a horse, Del, and round up two or three of the boys. I've got to
get after those fellows. They are the ones that held up the Limited last
week. Find out for me what hotel they put up at here. I want their rooms
searched. Send somebody round to the corrals, and let me know where they
stabled their horses. If they left any papers or saddle-bags, get them
for me."

Fifteen minutes later Collins was in the saddle ready for the chase,
and only waiting for his volunteer posse to join him. They were just
starting when a frightened Chinaman ran into the plaza with the news
that there had been shooting just back of his laundry on the edge of
town and that a man had been killed.

When the sheriff reached the spot, he lowered himself from the saddle
and limped over to the black mass huddled against the wall in the bright
moonlight. He turned the riddled body over and looked down into the face
of the dead man. I was that of the outlaw, Scott Dailey. That the
body had been thoroughly searched was evident, for all around him were
scattered his belongings. Here an old letter and a sack of tobacco, its
contents emptied on the ground; there his coat and vest, the linings
of each of them ripped out and the pockets emptied. Even the boots and
socks of the man had been removed, so thorough had been the search.
Whatever the murderers had been looking for it was not money, since
his purse, still fairly well lined with greenbacks, was found behind a
cactus bush a few yards away.

"What in time were they after?" frowned Collins. "If it wasn't his
money--and it sure wasn't--what was it? I ce'tainly would like to know
what the Wolf wanted so blamed bad. Guess I'll not follow Mr. Leroy just
now till my leg is in better shape. Maybe I had better investigate a
little bit round town first."

The body was taken back to the Gold Nugget and placed on a table,
pending the arrival of the undertaker. It chanced that Collins, looking
absently over the crowd, glimpsed a gray felt hat that looked familiar
by reason of a frayed silver band found it. Underneath the hat was a
Mexican, and him the sheriff ordered to step forward.

"Where did you get that hat, Manuel?"

"My name is Jose--Jose Archuleta," corrected the olive-hued one.

"I ain't worrying about your name, son. What I want to know is where you
found that hat."

"In the alley off the plaza, senor."

"All right. Chuck it up here."

"Muy bien, senor." And the dusty hat was passed from hand to hand till
it reached the sheriff.

Collins ripped off the silver band and tore out the sweat-pad. It was
an off chance--one in a thousand--but worth trying none the less. And a
moment later he knew it was the chance that won. For sewed to the inside
of the discolored sweat-pad was a little strip of silk. With his knife
he carefully removed the strip, and found between it and the leather a
folded fragment of paper closely covered with writing. He carried this
to the light, and made it out to be a memorandum of direction of some
sort. Slowly he spelled out the poorly written words:

From Y. N. took Unowhat. Went twenty yards strate for big rock. Eight
feet direckly west. Fifty yards in direcksion of suthern Antelope Peke.
Then eighteen to nerest cotonwood. J. H. begins hear.

Collins read the scrawl twice before an inkling of its meaning came home
to him. Then in a flash his brain was lighted. It was a memorandum of
the place where Dailey's share of the plunder was buried.

His confederates had known that he had it, and had risked capture to
make a thorough search for the paper. That they had not found it was due
only to the fact that the murdered man had lost his hat as he scurried
down the streets before them.

The doctor, having arrived, examined the wound and suggested an
anaesthetic. Collins laughed.

"I reckon not, doc. You round up that lead pill and I'll endure the
grief without knockout drops."

While the doctor was probing for the bullet lodged in his leg, the
sheriff studied the memorandum found in Dailey's hat. He found it blind,
disappointing work, for there was no clearly indicated starting-point.
Bit by bit he took it:

From Y. N. took Unowhat.

This was clear enough, so far as it went. It could only mean that from
York Neil the writer had taken the plunder to hide. But--WHERE did he
take it? From what point? A starting-point must be found somewhere, or
the memorandum was of no use. Probably only Neil could supply the needed
information, now that Dailey was dead.

Went twenty yards strate for big rock. Eight feet direckly west. Fifty
yards in direcksion of suthern Antelope Peke. Then eighteen to nerest
cotonwood.

All this was plain enough, but the last sentence was the puzzler.

J. H. begins hear.

Was J. H. a person? If so, what did he begin. If Dailey had buried his
plunder, what had J. H. left to do?

But had he buried it? Collins smiled. It was not likely he had handed it
over to anybody else to hide for him. And yet--

He clapped his hand down on his knee. "By the jumping California frog,
I've got it!" he told himself. "They hid the bulk of what they got from
the Limited all together. Went out in a bunch to hide it. Blind-folded
each other, and took turn about blinding up the trail. No one of them
can go get the loot without the rest. When they want it, every one of
these memoranda must be Johnny-on-the-spot before they can dig up the
mazuma. No wonder Wolf Leroy searched so thorough for this bit of paper.
I'll bet a stack of blue chips against Wolf's chance of heaven that
he's the sorest train-robber right this moment that ever punctured a
car-window."

Collins laughed softly, nor had the smile died out of his eyes when
Hawkes came into the room with information to the point. He had made a
round of the corrals, and discovered that the outlaws' horses had been
put up at Jay Hardman's place, a tumble-down feed-station on the edge of
town.

"Jay didn't take kindly to my questions," Hawkes explained, "but after a
little rock-me-to-sleep-mother talk I soothed him down some, and cut
the trail of Wolf Leroy and his partners. The old man give me several
specimens of langwidge unwashed and uncombed when I told him Wolf and
York was outlaws and train-robbers. Didn't believe a word of it, he
said. 'Twas just like the fool officers to jump an innocent party. I
told Jay to keep his shirt on--he could turn his wolf lose when they
framed up that he was in it. Well, sir! I plumb thought for a moment
he was going to draw on me when I said that. Say he must be the
fellow that's in on that mine, with Leroy and York Neil. He's a big,
long-haired guy."

Collins' eyes narrowed to slits, as they always did when he was thinking
intensely. Were their suspicions of the showman about to be justified?
Did Jay Hardman's interest in Leroy have its source merely in their
being birds of a feather, or was there a more direct community of
lawlessness between them? Was he a member of Wolf Leroy's murderous
gang? Three men had joined in the chase of Dailey, but the tracks had
told him that only two horses had galloped from the scene of the murder
into the night. The inference left to draw was that a local accomplice
had joined them in the chase of Scott, and had slipped back home after
the deed had been finished.

What more likely than that Hardman had been this accomplice? Hawkes said
he was a big long-haired fellow. So was the man that had held up the
engineer of the Limited. He was--"J. H. begins hear." Like a flash the
ill-written scrawl jumped to his sight. "J. H." was Jay Hardman. What
luck!

The doctor finished his work, and Collins tested his leg gingerly.
"Del, I'm going over to have a little talk with the old man. Want to go
along?"

"You bet I do, Val"--from Del Hawkes.

"You mustn't walk on that leg for a week or two yet, Mr. Collins," the
doctor explained, shaking his head.

"That so, doctor? And it nothing but a nice clean flesh-wound! Sho! I've
a deal more confidence in you than that. Ready, Del?"

"It's at your risk then, Mr. Collins."

"Sure." The sheriff smiled. "I'm living at my own risk, doctor. But I'd
a heap rather be alive than daid, and take all the risk that's coming,
too. But since you make a point of it, I'll do most of my walking on a
bronco's back."

They found Mr. Hardman just emerging from the stable with a saddle-pony
when they rode into the corral. At a word from Collins, Hawkes took the
precaution to close the corral gate.

The fellow held a wary position on the farther side of his horse, the
while he ripped out a raucous string of invectives.

"Real fluent, ain't he?" murmured Hawkes, as he began to circle round to
flank the enemy.

"Stay right there, Del Hawkes. Move, you redhaided son of a brand
blotter, and I'll pump holes in you!" A rifle leveled across the saddle
emphasized his sentiments.

"Plumb hospitable," grinned Hawkes, coming promptly to a halt.

Collins rode slowly forward, his hand on the butt of the revolver that
still lay in its scabbard. The Winchester covered every step of his
progress, but he neither hastened nor faltered, though he knew his life
hung in the balance. If his steely blue eyes had released for one moment
the wolfish ones of the villain, if he had hesitated or hurried, he
would have been shot through the head.

But the eyes of a brave man are the king of weapons. Hardman's fingers
itched at the trigger he had not the courage to pull. For such an
unflawed nerve he knew himself no match.

"Keep back," he screamed. "Damn it, another step and I'll fire!"

But he did not fire, though Collins rode up to him, dismounted, and
threw the end of the rifle carelessly from him.

"Don't be rash, Hardman. I've come here to put you under arrest for
robbing the T. P. Limited, and I'm going to do it."

The indolent, contemptuous drawl, so free of even a suggestion of the
strain the sheriff must have been under, completed his victory. The
fellow lowered his rifle with a peevish oath.

"You're barkin' up the wrong tree, Mr. Collins."

"I guess not," retorted the sheriff easily. "Del, you better relieve Mr.
Hardman of his ballast. He ain't really fit to be trusted with a weapon,
and him so excitable. That Winchester came awful near going off, friend.
You don't want to be so careless when you're playing with firearms. It's
a habit that's liable to get you into trouble."

Collins had not shaved death so closely without feeling a reaction
of boyish gaiety at his adventure. It bubbled up in his talk like
effervescing soda.

"Now we'll go into a committee of the whole, gentlemen, adjourn to
the stable, and have a little game of 'Button, button, who's got the
button?' You first, Mr. Hardman. If you'll kindly shuck your coat and
vest, we'll begin button-hunting."

They diligently searched the miscreant without hiding anything
pertaining to "J. H. begins hear."

"He's bound to have it somewhere," asseverated Collins. "It don't stand
to reason he was making his getaway without that paper. We got to be
more thorough, Del."

Hawkes, under the direction of his friend, ripped up linings and
tore away pockets from clothing. The saddle on the bronco and the
saddle-blankets were also torn to pieces in vain.

Finally Hawkes scratched his poll and looked down on the wreckage. "I
hate to admit it, Val, but the old fox has got us beat; it ain't on his
person."

"Not unless he's got it under his skin," agreed Collins, with a grin.

"Maybe he ate it. Think we better operate and find out?"

An idea hit the sheriff. He walked up to Hardman and ordered him to open
his mouth.

The jaws set like a vise.

Collins poked his revolver against the closed mouth. "Swear for us, old
bird. Get a move on you."

The mouth opened, and Collins inserted two fingers. When he withdrew
them they brought a set of false teeth. Under the plate was a tiny
rubber bag that stuck to it. Inside the bag was a paper. And on it was
written four lines in Spanish. Those lines told what he wanted to know.
They, too, were part of a direction for finding hidden treasure.

The sheriff wired at once to Bucky, in Chihuahua. Translated into plain
English, his cipher dispatch meant: "Come home at once. Trail getting
red hot."

But Bucky did not come. As it happened, that young man had other fish to
fry.


CHAPTER 9. "ADORE HAS ONLY ONE D."

After all, adventures are to the adventurous. In this prosaic twentieth
century the Land of Romance still beckons to eager eyes and gallant
hearts. The rutted money-grabber may deny till he is a nerve-racked
counting-machine, but youth, even to the end of time, will laugh to
scorn his pessimism and venture with elastic heel where danger and
mystery offer their dubious hazards.

So it was that Bucky and his little comrade found nothing of dulness
in the mission to which they had devoted themselves. In their task of
winning freedom for the American immured in the Chihuahua dungeon they
already found themselves in the heart of a web of intrigue, the stakes
of which were so high as to carry life and death with them in the
balance. But for them the sun shone brightly. It was enough that they
played the game and shared the risks together. The jocund morning was in
their hearts, and brought with it an augury of success based on nothing
so humdrum or tangible as reason.

O'Connor carried with him to the grim fortress not only his permit for
an inspection, but also a note from O'Halloran that was even more potent
in effect. For Colonel Ferdinand Gabilonda, warden of the prison, had
a shrewd suspicion that a plot was under way to overthrow the unpopular
administration of Megales, and though he was an office-holder under the
present government he had no objection to ingratiating himself with
the opposition, providing it could be done without compromising himself
openly. In other words, the warden was sitting on the fence waiting to
see which way the cat would jump. If the insurgents proved the stronger
party, he meant to throw up his hat and shout "Viva Valdez." On the
other hand, if the government party crushed them he would show himself
fussily active in behalf of Megales. Just now he was exerting all his
diplomacy to maintain a pleasant relationship with both. Since it was
entirely possible that the big Irishman O'Halloran might be the man on
horseback within a very few days, the colonel was all suave words and
honeyed smiles to his friend the ranger.

Indeed he did him the unusual honor of a personally conducted
inspection. Gabilonda was a fat little man, with a soft, purring voice
and a pompous manner. He gushed with the courteous volubility of his
nation, explaining with great gusto this and that detail of the work.
Bucky gave him outwardly a deferent ear, but his alert mind and eyes
were scanning the prisoners they saw. The ranger was trying to find in
one of these scowling, defiant faces some resemblance to the picture his
mind had made of Henderson.

But Bucky looked in vain. If the man he wanted was among these he had
changed beyond recognition. In the end he was forced to ask Gabilonda
plainly if he would not take him to see David Henderson, as he knew a
man in Arizona who was an old friend of his, and he would like to be
able to tell him that he had seen his friend.

Henderson was breaking stone when O'Connor got his first glimpse of him.
He continued to swing his hammer listlessly, without looking up, when
the door opened to let in the warden and his guests. But something in
the ranger's steady gaze drew his eyes. They were dull eyes, and sullen,
but when he saw that Bucky was an American, the fire of intelligence
flashed into them.

"May I speak to him?" asked O'Connor.

"It is against the rules, senor, but if you will be brief--" The colonel
shrugged, and turned his back to them, in order not to see. It must be
said for Gabilonda that his capacity for blinking what he did not think
it judicious to see was enormous.

"You are David Henderson, are you not?" The ranger asked, in a low
voice.

Surprise filtered into the dull eyes. "That was my name," the man
answered bitterly. "I have a number now."

"I come from Webb Mackenzie to get you out of this," the ranger said.

The man's eyes were no longer dull now, but flaming with hatred. "Curse
him, I'll take nothing from his hands. For fifteen years he has let me
rot in hell without lifting a hand for me."

"He thought you dead. It can all be explained. It was only last week
that the mystery of your disappearance was solved."

"Then why didn't he come himself? It was to save his little girl I got
myself into this place. If I had been in his shoes I would have come if
I'd had to crawl on my hands and knees."

"He doesn't know yet you are here. I wrote him simply that I knew where
you were, and then I came at once." Bucky glanced round warily at the
fat colonel gazing placidly out of the barred window. "I mean to
rescue you, and I knew if he were here his impulsiveness would ruin
everything."

"Do you mean it? For God's sake! don't lie to me. If there's no hope
for me, don't say there is." The prisoner's voice shook and his hands
trembled. He was only the husk of the man he had been, but it did
Bucky's heart good to see that the germ of life was still in him. Back
in Arizona, on the Rocking Chair Ranch, with the free winds of the
plains beating on his face, he would pick up again the old strands of
his broken life, would again learn to love the lowing of cattle and the
early morning call of the hooter to his mate.

"I mean it. As sure as I stand here I'll get you out, or, if I don't,
Webb Mackenzie will. We're calling the matter to the attention of the
United States Government, but we are not going to wait till that time to
free you. Keep up your courage, man. It is only for a little time now."

Tears leaped to the prisoner's eyes. He had been a game man in the dead
years that were past, none gamer in Texas, and he could still face his
jailers with an impassive face; but this first kindly word from his
native land in fifteen years to the man buried alive touched the fount
of his emotions. He turned away and leaned against the grating of his
cell, his head resting on his forearm. "My God! man, you don't know what
it means to me. Sometimes I think I shall go mad and rave. After all
these years But I know you'll fail--It's too good to be true," he
finished quietly.

"I'll not fail, though I may be delayed. But I can't say more. Gabilonda
is coming back. Next time I see you it will be to take you out to
freedom. Think of that always, and believe it."

Gabilonda bowed urbanely. "If the senor has seen all he cares to of this
department we will return to the office," he suggested suavely.

"Certainly, colonel. I can't appreciate too much your kindness in
allowing me to study your system so carefully."

"Any friend of my friend the Senor O'Halloran is cherished deeply in my
heart," came back the smiling colonel, with a wave of his plump, soft
hand.

"I am honored, sir, to receive such consideration at the hands of so
distinguished a soldier as Colonel Gabilonda," bowed Bucky gravely, in
his turn, with the most flowery Spanish he could muster.

There was another half-hour of the mutual exchange of compliments before
O'Connor could get away. Alphonse and Gaston were fairly outdone, for
the Arizonian, with a smile hidden deep behind the solemnity of his blue
eyes, gave as good as he got. When he was at last fairly in the safety
of his own rooms he gave way to limp laughter while describing to his
little friend that most ceremonious parting.

"He pressed me to his manly bay window, Curly, and allowed he was plumb
tickled to death to have met me. Says I, coming back equal strong, 'twas
the most glorious day of my life."

"Oh, I know YOU," answered young Hardman, with a smile.

"A friend of his friend O'Halloran--"

"Mr. O'Halloran was here while you were away. He seemed very anxious
to see you; said he would call again in an hour. I think it must be
important."

Came at that instant O'Halloran's ungentle knock, on the heels of which
his red head came through the open door.

"You're the very lad I'm wanting to see, Bucky," he announced, and
followed this declaration by locking all the doors and beckoning him to
the center of the room.

"Is that tough neck of yours aching again, Reddy?" inquired his friend
whimsically.

"It is that, me bye. There's the very divil to pay," he whispered.

"Cough it out, Mike."

"That tyrant Megales is onto our game. Somebody's leaked, or else he has
a spy in our councils--as we have in his, the ould scoundrel."

"I see. Your spy has told you that his spy has reported to him--"

"That the guns are to be brought in to-night. He has sent out a guard
to bring them in safely to him. If he gets them, our game is up, me son,
and you can bet your last nickle on that."

"If he gets them! Is there a chance for us?"

"Glory be! there is. You see, he doesn't know that we know what he has
done. For that reason he sent out only a guard of forty men. If he sent
more we would suspect what he was doing, ye see. That is the way the old
fox reasoned. But forty--they were able to slip out of the city on
last night's train in civilian's clothes and their arms in a couple of
coffins."

"Why didn't he send a couple of hundred men openly, and at the same time
arrest you all?"

"That doesn't suit his book at all. For one thing, he probably doesn't
know all of us, and he doesn't want to bag half of us and throw the rest
into immediate rebellion. It's his play not to force the issue until
after the election, Bucky. He controls all the election machinery and
will have himself declared reelected, the old scamp, notwithstanding
that he's the most unpopular man in the State. To precipitate trouble
now would be just foolishness, he argues. So he'll just capture our
arms, and after the election give me and my friends quiet hell. Nothing
public, you know--just unfortunate assassinations that he will regret
exceedingly, me bye. But I have never yit been assassinated, and, on
principle, I object to being trated so. It's very destructive to a man's
future usefulness."

"And so?" laughed the ranger.

"And so we've arranged to take a few lads up the line and have a train
hold-up. I'm the robber-in-chief. Would ye like to be second in command
of the lawless ruffians, me son?"

Bucky met his twinkling eye gaily. "Mr. O'Connor is debarred from taking
part in such an outrageous affair by international etiquette, but he
knows a gypsy lad would be right glad to join, I reckon."

"Bully for him. If you'll kindly have him here I'll come around and
collect him this evening at eight-thirty sharp."

"I hope you'll provide a pleasant entertainment for him."

"We'll do our best," grinned the revolutionist. "Music provided by
Megales' crack military band. A lively and enjoyable occasion guaranteed
to all who attend. Your friend will meet some of the smartest officers
in the State. It promises to be a most sumptuous affair."

"Then my friend accepts with pleasure."

After the conspirator had gone, Frank spoke up. "You wouldn't go away
with him and leave me here alone, would you?"

"I ce'tainly shouldn't take you with me, kid. I don't want my little
friend all shot up by greasers."

"If you're going, I want to go, too. Supposing--if anything were to
happen to you, what could I do?"

"Leave the country by the next train. Those are the orders."

"You're always talking about a square deal. Do you think that is one? I
might say that I don't want YOU shot. You don't care anything about my
feelings." The soft voice had a little break in it that Bucky loved.

He walked across to his partner, that rare, tender smile of his in his
eyes. "If I'm always talking about a square deal I reckon I have got to
give you one. Now, what would you think a square deal, Curly? Would it
be square for me to let my friend O'Halloran stand all the risk of this
and then me take the reward when Henderson has been freed by him? Would
that be your notion of the right telling?"

"I didn't say that, though I don't see why you have to mix yourself
up in his troubles. Why should you go out and kill these soldiers that
haven't injured you?"

"I'm not going to kill any of them," he smiled "Besides, that isn't the
way I look at it. This fellow Megales is a despot. He has made out
to steal the liberty of the people from them. President Diaz can't
interfere because the old rascal governor does everything with that
smooth, oily way of his under cover of law. It's up to some of the
people to put up a good strong kick for themselves. I ain't a bit sorry
to give them the loan of my foot while they are doing it."

"Then can't I go, too? I don't want to be left alone here and you away
fighting."

Bucky's eyes gleamed. He dared an experiment in an indifferent drawl.
"Whyfor don't you want to stay alone, kid? Are you afraid for yourself
or for me?"

His partner's cheeks were patched with roses. Shyly the long, thick
lashes lifted and let the big brown eyes meet his blue ones. "Maybe I'm
afraid for both of us."

"Would you care if one of their pills happened along in the scrimmage
and put me out of business? Honest, would you?"

"You haven't any right to talk that way. It's cruel," was the reply that
burst from the pretty lips, and he noticed that at his suggestion the
roses had died from soft cheeks.

"Well, I won't talk that way any more, little partner," he answered
gaily, taking the small hand in his. "For reasons good. I'm fire-proof.
The Mexican bullet hasn't been cast yet that can find Bucky O'Connor's
heart."

"But you mustn't think that, either, and be reckless," was the next
injunction. The shy laugh rang like music. "That's why I want to go
along, to see that you behave yourself properly."

"Oh, I'll behave," he laughed; for the young man found it very easy to
be happy when those sweet eyes were showing concern for him. "I've got
several good reasons why I don't aim to get bumped off just yet. Heaps
of first-rate reasons. I'll tell you what some of them are one of these
days," he dared to add.

"You had better tell me now." The gaze that fell before his steady eyes
was both shy and eager.

"No, I reckon I'll wait, Curly," he answered, turning away with a
long breath. "Well, we better go out and get some grub, tortillas and
frijoles, don't you think?"

"Just as you like." The lad's breath was coming a little fast. They had
been on the edge of some moment of intimacy that Bucky's partner both
longed for and dreaded. "But you have not told me yet whether I can go
with you."

"You can't. I'm sorry. I'd like first-rate to take you, if you want to
go, but I can't do it. I hate to disappoint you if you're set on it, but
I've got to, kid. Anything else you want I'll be glad to do."

He added this last because Frank looked so broken-hearted about it.

"Very well." Swift as a flash came the demand: "Tell me these heaps of
first-rate reasons you were mentioning just now."

Under the sun-tan he flushed. "I reckon I'll have to make another
exception, Curly. Those reasons ain't ripe yet for telling."

"Then if you are--if anything happens--I'll never know them. And you
promised you would tell me--you, who pretend to hate a liar so," she
scoffed.

"Would it do if I wrote those reasons and left them in a sealed
envelope? Then in case anything happened you could open it and satisfy
that robust curiosity of yours." He recognized that he had trapped
himself, and he was making the best bargain left him.

"You may write them, if you like. But I'm going to open the letter,
anyway. The reasons belong to me now. You promised."

"I'll make a new deal with you, then," he smiled. "I'll take awful good
care of myself to-night if you'll promise not to open the envelope for
two weeks unless--well, unless that something happens that we ain't
expecting."

"Call it a week, and it's a bargain."

"Better say when we're back across the line again. That may be inside of
three days, if everything goes well," he threw in as a bait.

"Done. I'm to open the letter when we cross the line into Texas."

Bucky shook the little hand that was offered him and wished mightily
that he had the right to celebrate with more fervent demonstrations.

That afternoon the ranger wrote with a good deal of labor the letter
he had promised. It appeared to be a difficult thing for him to deliver
himself even on paper of those good and sufficient reasons. He made
and destroyed no less than half a dozen openings before at last he
was fairly off. Meanwhile, Master Frank, busy over some alterations in
Bucky's gypsy suit, took pleasure in deriding with that sweet voice the
harassed correspondent.

"It might be a love letter from the pains you take with it. Would you
like me to come and help you with it?" the sewer railed merrily.

"I ain't used to letter writing much," apologized the scribe, wiping his
bedewed brow, which had suddenly gone a shade more flushed.

"Apparently not. I expect, from the time you give it, the result will be
a literary classic."

"Don't you disturb me, Curly, or I'll never get done," implored the
tortured ranger.

"You're doing well. You've only been an hour and a half on six lines,"
the tormentor mocked.

Womanlike, she was quite at her ease, since he was very far indeed from
being at his. Yet she had a problem of her own she was trying to decide.

Had he discovered, after all, that she was not a boy, and had
his reasons--the ones he was trying to tell in that disturbing
letter--anything to do with that discovery? Such a theory accounted
for several things she had noticed in him of late. There was an added
respect in his manner for her. He never now invaded the room recognized
as hers without a specific invitation, nor did he seem any longer to
chafe at the little personal marks of fastidiousness that had at first
appeared to annoy him. To be sure, he ordered her about, just as he had
been in the habit of doing at first. But it was conceivable that this
might be a generous blind to cover up his knowledge of her sex.

"How do you spell guessed--one s or two?" he presently asked, out of the
throes of composition.

She spelled it, and added demurely: "Adore has only one d"

Bucky laid down his pen and pretended to glare at him. "You young
rascal, what do you mean by bothering me like that? Act like that, you
young imp, and you'll never grow up to be a gentleman."

Their glances caught and held, the minds of each of them busy over that
last prediction of his. For one long instant masks were off and both
were trying to find an answer to a question in the eyes opposite. Then
voluntarily each gaze released the other in a confusion of sweet shame.
For the beating of a lash, soul had looked into naked soul, all disguise
stripped from them. She knew that he knew. Yet in that instant when his
secret was surprised from him another secret, sweeter than the morning
song of birds, sang its way into both their hearts.


CHAPTER 10. THE HOLD-UP OF THE M. C. P. FLYER

Agua Negra is twelve miles from Chihuahua as the crow flies, but if one
goes by rail one twists round thirty sinuous miles of rough mountainous
country in the descent from the pass to the capital of the State. The
ten men who slipped singly or by twos out of the city in the darkness
that evening and met at the rendezvous of the Santa Dolorosa mission did
not travel by rail to the pass, but followed a horseback trail which was
not more than half the distance.

At the mission O'Halloran and his friend found gathered half a dozen
Mexicans, one or two of them tough old campaigners, the rest young
fellows eager for the excitement of their first active service.

"Is Juan Valdez here yet?" asked O'Halloran, peering around in the
gloom.

"Not yet; nor Manuel Garcia," answered a young fellow.

Bucky was introduced to those present under the name of Alessandro
Perdoza, and presently also to the two missing members of the party who
arrived together a few moments later. Juan Valdez was the son of the
candidate who was opposing the reelection of Megales, and Manuel Garcia
was his bosom friend, and the young man to whom his sister was engaged.
They were both excellent types of the honorable aristocratic young
Mexican. They were lightly built, swarthy your men, possessed of that
perfect grace and courtesy which can be found at its best in the Spanish
races. Gay, handsome young cavaliers as they were, filled with the
pride of family, Bucky thought them almost ideal companions for such a
harebrained adventure as this. The ranger was a social democrat to the
marrow. He had breathed in with the Southwest breezes the conviction
that every man must stand on his own bottom, regardless of adventitious
circumstance, but he was not fool enough to think all men equal. It had
been his experience that some men, by grace of the strength in them,
were born to be masters and others by their weakness to be servants. He
knew that the best any civilization can offer a man is a chance. Given
that, it is up to every man to find his own niche.

But though he had no sense of deference to what is known as good blood,
Bucky had too much horse sense to resent the careless, half-indifferent
greeting which these two young sprouts of aristocracy bestowed on the
rest of the party. He understood that it was the natural product of
their education and of that of the others.

"Are we all here?" asked Garcia.

"All here," returned O'Halloran briskly. "Rodrigo will guide the party.
I ride next with Senor Garcia. Perdoza and Senor Valdez will bring up
the rear. Forward, gentlemen, and may the Holy Virgin bring a happy
termination to our adventure." He spoke in Mexican, as they all did,
though for the next two hours conversation was largely suspended, owing
to the difficulty of the precipitous trail they were following.

Coming to a bit of the road where they were able to ride two abreast,
O'Connor made comment on the smallness of their number. "O'Halloran must
have a good deal of confidence in his men. Forty to ten is rather heavy
odds, is it not, senor?"

"There are six more to join us at the pass. The wagons have gone round
by the road and the drivers will assist in the attack."

"Of course it is all in the surprise. I have seen three men hold up a
train with five hundred people on it. Once I knew a gang to stick up a
treasure train with three heavily armed guards protecting the gold.
They got them right, with the drop on them, and it was good-by to the
mazuma."

"Yes, if they have had any warning or if our plans slip a cog anywhere
we shall be repulsed to a certainty."

By the light of a moon struggling out from behind rolling clouds Bucky
read eleven-thirty on his watch when the party reached Agua Negra.
It was still thirty minutes before the Flyer was due, and O'Halloran
disposed his forces with explicit directions as to the course to be
followed by each detail. Very rapidly he sketched his orders as to the
present disposition of the wagons and the groups of attackers. When
the train slowed down to remove the obstacles they placed on the track,
Garcia and another young man were to command parties covering the train
from both sides, while Rodrigo and one of the drivers were to cover the
engineer and the fireman.

O'Halloran himself, with Bucky and young Valdez, rode rapidly in the
direction of the approaching train. At Concho the engine would take on
water for the last stiff climb of the ascent, and here he meant to board
the train unnoticed, just as it was pulling out, in order to emphasize
the surprise at the proper moment and render resistance useless. If the
troopers were all together in the car next the one with the boxes of
rifles, he calculated that they might perhaps be taken unawares so
sharply as to render bloodshed unnecessary.

Concho was two miles from the summit, and when the three men galloped
down to the little station the headlight of the approaching engine was
already visible. They tied their horses in the mesquit and lurked in
the thick brush until the engine had taken water and the signal for the
start was given Then O'Halloran and Bucky slipped across in the darkness
to the train and swung themselves to the platform of the last car. To
Valdez, very much against his will, had fallen the task of taking the
horses back to Agua Negra Since the track wound round the side of the
mountain in such a way as to cover five miles in making the summit from
Concho, the young Mexican had ample time to get back to the scene of
action before the train arrived.

The big Irishman and Bucky rested quietly in the shadows of the back
platform for some time. Then they entered the last car, passed through
it, and on to the next. In the sleeper they met the conductor, but
O'Halloran quietly paid their fares and passed forward. As they had
hoped, the whole detail of forty men were in a special car next to the
one containing the arms consigned to Michael O'Halloran, importer of
pianos.

Lieutenant Chaves, in charge of the detail sent out to see that the
rifles reached Governor Megales instead of the men who had paid for
them, was finding his assignment exceedingly uninteresting. There was at
Chihuahua a certain black-eyed dona with whom he had expected to enjoy a
pleasant evening's flirtation. It was confounded luck that it had fallen
to him to take charge of the escort for the guns. He had endured in
consequence an unpleasant day of dusty travel and many hours of boredom
through the evening. Now he was cross and sleepy, which latter might
also be said of the soldiers in general.

He was connected with a certain Arizona outfit which of late had been
making money very rapidly. If one more coup like the last could be
pulled off safely by his friend Wolf Leroy he would resign from the army
and settle down. It would then no longer be necessary to bore himself
with such details as this.

There was, of course, no necessity for alertness in his present
assignment. The opposition was scarcely mad enough to attempt taking the
guns from forty armed men. Chaves devoutly hoped they would, in order
that he might get a little glory, at least, out of the affair. But of
course such an expectation would be ridiculous. No, the journey would
continue to be humdrum to the end, he was wearily assured of that,
and consequently attempted to steal a half hour's sleep while propped
against a window with his feet in the seat opposite.

The gallant lieutenant was awakened by a cessation of the drumming of
the wheels. Opening his eyes, he saw that the train was no longer in
motion. He also saw--and his consciousness of that fact was much more
acute--the rim of a revolver about six inches from his forehead. Behind
the revolver was a man, a young Spanish gypsy, and he was offering the
officer very good advice.

"Don't move, sir. No cause for being uneasy. Just sit quiet and
everything will be serene. No, I wouldn't reach for that revolver, if I
were you."

Chaves cast a hurried eye down the car, and at the end of it beheld
the huge Irishman, O'Halloran, dominating the situation with a pair of
revolvers. Chaves' lambs were ranged on either side of the car, their
hands in the air. Back came the lieutenant's gaze to the impassive
face in front of him. Taken by and large, it did not seem an auspicious
moment for garnering glory. He decided to take the advice bestowed on
him.

"Better put your hands up and vote with your men. Then you won't be
tempted to play with your gun and commit suicide. That's right, sir.
I'll relieve you of it if you don't object."

Since the lieutenant had no objections to offer, the smiling gypsy
possessed himself of the revolver. At the same instant two more men
appeared at the end of the car. One of them was Juan Valdez and another
one of the mule-skinners. Simultaneously with their entrance rang out
a most disconcerting fusillade of small arms in the darkness without.
Megales' military band, as O'Halloran had facetiously dubbed them to
the ranger, arrived at the impression that there were about a thousand
insurgents encompassing the train. Chaves choked with rage, but the rest
of the command yielded to the situation very tranquilly, with no desire
to offer themselves as targets to this crackling explosion of Colts. Muy
bien! After all, Valdez was a better man to serve than the fox Megales.

Swiftly Valdez and the wagon driver passed down the car and gathered the
weapons from the seats of the troopers. Raising a window, they passed
them out to their friends outside. Meanwhile, the sound of an axe could
be heard battering at the door of the next car, and presently the crash
of splintering wood announced that an entrance had been forced.

"Breaking furniture, I reckon," drawled Bucky, in English, for the
moment forgetful of the part he was playing. "I hope they'll be all
right careful of them pianos and not mishandle them so they'll get out
of tune."

"So, senor, you are American," said Chaves, in English, with a sinister
smile.

O'Connor shrugged, answering in Spanish: "I am Romany. Who shall say,
whether American, or Spanish, or Bohemian? All nations call to me, but
none claim me, senor."

The lieutenant continued to smile his meaning grin. "Yet you are
American," he persisted.

"Oh, as you please. I am what you will, lieutenant."

"You speak the English like a native."

"You are complimentary."

Chaves lifted his eyebrows. "For believing that you are in costume, that
you are wearing a disguise, Mr. American?"

Bucky laughed outright, and offered a gay retort. "Believe me,
lieutenant, I am no more disguised as a gypsy than you are as a
soldier."

The Mexican officer flushed with anger at the suggestion of contempt
in the careless voice. His generalship was discredited. He had been
outwitted and made to yield without a blow. But to have it flung in his
teeth with such a debonair insolence threw him into a fury.

"If you and I ever meet on equal terms, senor, God pity you," he ground
out between his set jaws.

Bucky bowed, answering the furious anger in the man's face as much as
his words. "I shall try to be careful not to offer myself a sheath for a
knife some dark night," he scoffed.

A whistle blew, and then again. The revolver of Bucky rang out almost on
the same instant as those of O'Halloran. Under cover of the smoke they
slipped out of the car just as Rodrigo leaped down from the cab of the
engine. Slowly the train began to back down the incline in the same
direction from which it had come. The orders given the engineer were to
move back at a snail's pace until he reached Concho again. There he was
to remain for two hours. That Chaves would submit to this O'Halloran did
not for a moment suspect.

But the track would be kept obstructed till six o'clock in the morning,
and a sufficient guard would wait in the underbrush to see that the
right of way was not cleared. In the meantime the wagons would be
pushing toward Chihuahua as fast as they could be hurried, and the rest
of the riders would guard them till they separated on the outskirts of
the town and slipped quietly in. In order to forestall any telegraphic
communication between Lieutenant Chaves and his superiors in the city,
the wires had been cut. On the face of it, the guns seemed to be safe.
Only one thing had O'Halloran forgotten. Eight miles across the hills
from Concho ran the line of the Chihuahua Northern.


CHAPTER 11. "STONE WALLS DO NOT A PRISON MAKE."

The two young Spanish aristocrats rode in advance of the convoy on the
return trip, while O'Halloran and Bucky brought up the rear. The roads
were too rough to permit of rapid travel, but the teams were pushed as
fast as it could safely be done in the dark. It was necessary to get
into the city before daybreak, and also before word reached Megales of
the coup his enemies had made. O'Halloran calculated that this could be
done, but he did not want to run his margin of time too fine.

"When the governor finds we have recaptured the arms, will he not have
all your leaders arrested today and thrown into the prison?" asked the
ranger.

"He will--if he can lay hands on them. But he had better catch his hare
before he cooks it. I'm thinking that none of us will be at home to-day
when his men come with a polite invitation to go along with them."

"Then he'll spend all day strengthening his position. With this warning
he will be a fool if he can't make himself secure before night, when the
army is on his side."

"Oh, the army is on his side, is it? Now, what would you say if most
of the officers were ready to come over to us as soon as we declare
ourselves? And ye speak of strengthening his position. The beauty of his
position, me lad, from our point of view, is that he doesn't know his
weak places. He'll be the most undeceived man in the State when the test
comes--unless something goes wrong."

"When do you propose to attack the prison?"

"To-night. To-morrow is election day, and we want all the byes we can on
hand to help us out."

"Do you expect to throw the prison doors wide open--let every scoundrel
in Chihuahua loose on the public."

"We couldn't do that, since half of them are loose already," retorted
O'Halloran dryly. "And as for the rest--we expect to make a selection,
me son, to weed out a few choice ruffians and keep them behind the
bars. But if ye know anything about the prisons of this country, you're
informed, sir, that half the poor fellows behind bars don't belong there
so much as the folk that put them there. I'm Irish, as ye are yourself,
and it's me instinct to fight for the under dog. About the time of
the Doge's death, another important public event took place in the
death of John Visconti. He had a carbuncle upon his forehead, just above
the eyebrows, which he imprudently caused to be cut; and, on the
very day of the operation, October 4th, 1354, he expired so suddenly
as not to have time to receive the sacrament.

John Visconti had three nephews, Matteo, Galeazzo, and Barnabo. They
were his heirs, and took possession of his dominions in common, a
few days after his death, without any dispute among themselves.

The day for their inauguration was fixed, such was the superstition
of the times, by an astrologer; and on that day Petrarch was
commissioned to make to the assembled people an address suited to
the ceremony.

He was still in the midst of his harangue, when the astrologer
declared with a loud voice that the moment for the ceremony was
come, and that it would be dangerous to let it pass.

Petrarch, heartily as he despised the false science, immediately stopped
his discourse.

The astrologer, somewhat disconcerted, replied that there was still
a little time, and that the orator might continue to speak. Petrarch
answered that he had nothing more to say. Whilst some laughed, and others
were indignant at the interruption, the astrologer exclaimed "that
the happy moment was come;" on which an old officer carried three white
stakes, like the palisades of a town, and gave one to each of the brothers;
and the ceremony was thus concluded.

The countries which the three brothers shared amongst them comprehended
not only what was commonly called the Duchy, before the King of
Sardinia acquired a great part of it, but the territories of Parma,
Piacenza, Bologna, Lodi, Bobbio, Pontremoli, and many other places.

There was an entire dissimilarity among the brothers. Matteo hated
business, and was addicted to the grossest debaucheries.

Barnabo was a monster of tyranny and cruelty. Petrarch, nevertheless,
condescended to be godfather to one of Barnabo's sons, and presented
the child with a gilt cup. He also composed a Latin poem, on the occasion
of his godson being christened by the name of Marco, in which he passes
in review all the great men who had borne that name.

Galeazzo was very different from his brothers.

He had much kindliness of disposition. One of his greatest pleasures was
his intercourse with men of letters. He almost worshipped Petrarch, and
it was his influence that induced the poet to settle at Milan. Unlike
as they were in dispositions, the brothers, nevertheless, felt how
important it was that they should be united, in order to protect
themselves against the league which threatened them; and, at first, they
lived in the greatest harmony. Barnabo, the most warlike, was charged
with whatever concerned the military. Business of every other kind
devolved on Galeazzo.

Matteo, as the eldest, presided over all; but, conscious of his incapacity,
he took little share in the deliberations of his brothers. Nothing
important was done without consulting Petrarch; and this flattering
confidence rendered Milan as agreeable to him as any residence could be,
consistently with his love of change.

 The deaths of the Doge of Venice and of
 the Lord of Milan were soon followed
 by another, which, if it had happened
 some years earlier, would have strongly
 affected Petrarch.

This was the tragic end of Rienzo. Our poet's opinion of this
extraordinary man had been changed by his later conduct, and he now took
but a comparatively feeble interest in him.
Under the pontificate of Clement VI., the ex-Tribune, after his fall,
had been consigned to a prison at Avignon. Innocent, the succeeding
Pope, thought differently of him from his predecessor, and sent
the Cardinal Albornoz into Italy, with an order to establish him
at Rome, and to confide the government of the city to him under the
title of senator.

The Cardinal obeyed the injunction; but after a brief and inglorious
struggle with the faction of the Colonnas, Rienzo perished in a
popular sedition on the 8th of October, 1354.

War was now raging between the States of the Venetian League and
Milan, united with Genoa, when a new actor was brought upon the
scene.

The Emperor, who had been solicited by one half of Italy to enter the
kingdom, but who hesitated from dread of the Lord of Milan, was evidently
induced by the intelligence of John Visconti's death to accept
this invitation.

In October, 1354, his Imperial Majesty entered Italy, with no show of
martial preparation, being attended by only three hundred horsemen. On
the 10th of November he arrived at Mantua, where he was received
as sovereign.

There he stopped for some time, before he pursued his route to Rome.

The moment Petrarch heard of his arrival, he wrote to his Imperial
Majesty in transports of joy.

"You are no longer," he said, "king of Bohemia. I behold in you the
king of the world, the Roman emperor, the true Cæsar." The Emperor
received this letter at Mantua, and in a few days sent Sacromore
de Pomieres, one of his squires, to invite Petrarch to come and
meet him, expressing the utmost eagerness to see him.

Petrarch could not resist so flattering an invitation; he was not
to be deterred even by the unprecedented severity of the frost, and
departed from Milan on the 9th of December; but, with all the speed
that he could make, was not able to reach Mantua till the 12th.

The Emperor thanked him for having come to him in such dreadful weather,
the like of which he had scarcely ever felt, even in Germany.

"The Emperor," says Petrarch, "received me in a manner that partook
neither of imperial haughtiness nor of German etiquette. We passed sometimes
whole days together, from morning to night, in conversation, as if his
Majesty had had nothing else to do. He spoke to me about my works, and
expressed a great desire to see them, particularly my 'Treatise on
Illustrious Men.' I told him that I had not yet put my last hand
to it, and that, before I could do so, I required to have leisure
and repose.
He gave me to understand that he should be very glad to see it
appear under his own patronage, that is to say, dedicated to himself.

I said to him, with that freedom of speech which Nature has given me,
and which years have fortified, 'Great prince, for this purpose,
nothing more is necessary than, virtue on your part, and leisure on
mine.'

He asked me to explain myself. I said, 'I must have time for a work of
this nature, in which I propose to include great things in a small space.
On your part, labour to deserve that your name should appear at the head
of my book.

For this end, it is not enough that you wear a crown; your virtues
and great actions must place you among the great men whose portraits
I have delineated. Live in such a manner, that, after reading the lives
of your illustrious predecessors, you may feel assured that your own
life shall deserve to be read by posterity.'
"The Emperor showed by a smile that my liberty had not displeased
him, I seized this opportunity of presenting him with some imperial
medals, in gold and in silver, and gave him a short sketch of the
lives of those worthies whose images they bore.

He seemed to listen to me with pleasure, and, graciously accepting the
medals, declared that he never had received a more agreeable
present.

"I should never end if I were to relate to you all the conversations which
I held with this prince. He desired me one day to relate the history
of my life to him. I declined to do so at first; but he would take
no refusal, and I obeyed him.

He heard me with attention, and, if I omitted any circumstances
from forgetfulness or the fear of being wearisome, he brought them back
to my memory. He then asked me what were my projects for the future,
and my plans for the rest of my life. 'My intentions are good,' I replied
to him, 'but a bad habit, which I cannot conquer, masters my better
will, and I resemble a sea beaten by two opposite winds,' 'I can
understand that,' he said; 'but I wish to know what is the kind of
life that would most decidedly please you?'

'A secluded life,' I replied to him, without hesitation. 'If I could,
I should go and seek for such a life at its fountain-head; that is, among
the woods and mountains, as I have already done. If I could not go so
far to find it, I should seek to enjoy it in the midst of cities.'

"The Emperor differed from me totally as to the benefits of a solitary
life. I told him that I had composed a treatise on the subject.

'I know that,' said the Emperor; 'and if I ever find your book, I
shall throw it into the fire.'

'And,' I replied, 'I shall take care that it never falls into your hands.'
On this subject we had long and frequent disputes, always seasoned
with pleasantry. I must confess that the Emperor combated my system
on a solitary life with surprising energy."
Petrarch remained eight days with the King of Bohemia, at Mantua,
where he was witness to all his negotiations with the Lords of the
league of Lombardy, who came to confer with his Imperial Majesty,
in that city, or sent thither their ambassadors.

The Emperor, above all things, wished to ascertain the strength of this
confederation; how much each principality would contribute, and how
much might be the sum total of the whole contribution. The result of
this inquiry was, that the forces of the united confederates were not
sufficient to make head against the Visconti, who had thirty thousand
well-disciplined men. The Emperor, therefore, decided that it was
absolutely necessary to conclude a peace.
This prince, pacific and without ambition, had, indeed, come into
Italy with this intention; and was only anxious to obtain two crowns
without drawing a sword. He saw, therefore, with satisfaction that
there was no power in Italy to protract hostilities by strengthening
the coalition.

He found difficulties, however, in the settlement of a general peace.
The Viscontis felt their superiority; and the Genoese, proud of a victory
which they had obtained over the Venetians, insisted on hard terms. The
Emperor, more intent upon his personal interests than the good of
Italy, merely negotiated a truce between the belligerents.

He prevailed upon the confederates to disband the company of Count
Lando, which cost much and effected little. It cannot be doubted that
Petrarch had considerable influence in producing this dismissal, as he
always held those troops of mercenaries in abhorrence. The truce
being signed, his Imperial Majesty had no further occupation than to
negotiate a particular agreement with the Viscontis, who had sent the
chief men of Milan, with presents, to conclude a treaty with him. No
one appeared more fit than Petrarch to manage this negotiation, and it
was universally expected that it should be entrusted to him; but
particular reasons, which Petrarch has not thought proper to record,
opposed the desires of the Lords of Milan and the public wishes.

The negotiation, nevertheless, was in itself a very easy one. The
Emperor, on the one hand, had no wish to make war for the sake of
being crowned at Monza.

On the other hand, the Viscontis were afraid of seeing the league of their
enemies fortified by imperial power. They took advantage of the desire
which they observed in Charles to receive this crown without a
struggle. They promised not to oppose his coronation, and even to
give 50,000 florins for the expense of the ceremony; but they required
that he should not enter the city of Milan, and that the troops
in his suite should be disarmed.

To these humiliating terms Charles subscribed. The affair was completed
during the few days that Petrarch spent at Mantua. The Emperor strongly
wished that he should be present at the signature of the treaty; and,
in fact, though he was not one of the envoys from Milan, the success
of the negotiation was generally attributed to him.

A rumour to this effect reached even Avignon, where Lælius then was. He
wrote to Petrarch to compliment him on the subject.

The poet, in his answer, declines an honour that was not due to him.

After the signature of the treaty, Petrarch departed for Milan, where
he arrived on Christmas eve, 1354. He there found four letters from
Zanobi di Strata, from whom he had not had news for two years. Curious
persons had intercepted their letters to each other. Petrarch often
complains of this nuisance, which was common at the time.

The Emperor set out from Mantua after the festivities of Christmas. On
arriving at the gates of Milan, he was invited to enter by the
Viscontis; but Charles declined their invitation, saying, that he
would keep the promise which he had pledged.

The Viscontis told him politely that they asked his entrance as a
favour, and that the precaution respecting his troops by no means
extended to his personal presence, which they should always consider an
honour. The Emperor entered Milan on the 4th of January, 1355.

He was received with the sound of drums, trumpets, and other instruments,
that made such a din as to resemble thunder.

"His entry," says Villani, "had the air of a tempest rather than
of a festivity."

Meanwhile the gates of Milan were shut and strictly guarded.

Shortly after his arrival, the three brothers came to tender their homage,
declaring that they held of the Holy Empire all that they possessed, and
that they would never employ their possessions but for his service.

Next day the three brothers, wishing to give the Emperor a high idea
of their power and forces, held a grand review of their troops, horse
and foot; to which, in order to swell the number, they added
companies of the burgesses, well mounted, and magnificently dressed;
and they detained his poor Majesty at a window, by way of amusing
him, all the time they were making this display of their power.

Whilst the troops were defiling, they bade him look upon the six thousand
cavalry and ten thousand infantry, which they kept in their pay for
his service, adding that their fortresses and castles were well furnished
and garrisoned.
This spectacle was anything but amusing to the Emperor; but he put a
good countenance on the matter, and appeared cheerful and serene.
Petrarch scarcely ever quitted his side; and the Prince conversed with
him whenever he could snatch time from business, and from the rigid
ceremonials that were imposed on him.

On the 6th of January, the festival of Epiphany, Charles received at
Milan the iron crown, in the church of St.

Ambrosio, from the hands of Robert Visconti, Archbishop of Milan. They
gave the Emperor fifty thousand florins in gold, two hundred
beautiful horses, covered with cloth bordered with ermine, and six
hundred horsemen to escort him to Rome.

The Emperor, who regarded Milan only as a fine large prison, got
out of it as soon as he could.

Petrarch accompanied him as far as five miles beyond Pìacenza, but
refused to comply with the Emperor's solicitations to continue with
him as far as Rome.

The Emperor departed from Sienna the 28th of March, with the Empress
and all his suite.

On the 2nd of April he arrived at Rome. During the next two days he visited
the churches in pilgrim's attire. On Sunday, which was Easter day, he
was crowned, along with his Empress; and, on this occasion, he
confirmed all the privileges of the Roman Church, and all the
promises that he had made to the Popes Clement VI. and Innocent VI.

One of those promises was, that he should not enter Rome except
upon the day of his coronation, and that he should not sleep in the
city. He kept his word most scrupulously. After leaving the church
of St.

Peter, he went with a grand retinue to St. John's di Latrana, where he
dined, and, in the evening, under pretext of a hunting-party, he went and
slept at St.

Lorenzo, beyond the walls.

The Emperor arrived at Sienna on the 29th of April. He had there
many conferences with the Cardinal Albornoz, to whom he promised
troops for the purpose of reducing the tyrants with whom the Legate
was at war.

His Majesty then went to Pisa, where, on the 21st of May, 1355,
a sedition broke out against him, which nearly cost him his life. He left
Tuscany without delay, with his Empress and his whole suite, to return
to Germany, where he arrived early in June.

Many were the affronts he met with on his route, and he recrossed the
Alps, as Villani says, "with his dignity humbled, though with his
purse well filled."

Lælius, who had accompanied the Emperor as far as Cremona, quitted
him at that place, and went to Milan, where he delivered to Petrarch
the Prince's valedictory compliments.

Petrarch's indignation, at his dastardly flight vented itself in a
letter to his Imperial Majesty himself, so full of unmeasured rebuke,
that it is believed it was never sent.

Shortly after the departure of the Emperor, Petrarch had the
satisfaction of hearing, in his own church of St.

Ambrosio, the publication of a peace between the Venetians and
Genoese.

It was concluded at Milan by the mediation of the Visconti, entirely
to the advantage of the Genoese, to whom their victory gained in the
gulf of Sapienza had given an irresistible superiority. It cost the
Venetians two hundred thousand florins.

Whilst the treaty of peace was proceeding, Venice witnessed the sad and
strange spectacle of Marino Faliero, her venerable Doge, four-score
years old, being dragged to a public execution.

Some obscurity still hangs over the true history of this affair.

"Good heavens! It
can't be possible. You're not Webb Mackenzie's little girl, are you?"

She did not answer him in words, but from her neck she slipped a chain
and handed it to him. On the chain hung a locket.

The ranger struck a match and examined the trinket. "It's the very
missing locket. See! Here's the other one. Compare them together." He
touched the spring and it opened, but the match was burned out and he
had to light another. "Here's the mine map that has been lost all these
years. How did you get this? Have you always had it? And how long have
you known that you were Frances Mackenzie?"

His questions tumbled out one upon another in his excitement.

She laughed, answering him categorically. "I don't know, for sure. Yes,
at least a great many years. Less than a week."

"But--I don't understand--"

"And won't until you give me a chance to do some of the talking," she
interrupted dryly.

"That's right. I reckon I am getting off left foot first. It's your
powwow now," he conceded.

"So long as I can remember exactly I have always lived with the man
Hardman and his wife. But before that I can vaguely recall something
different. It has always seemed like a kind of fairyland, for I was a
very little tot then. But one of the things I seem to remember was a
sweet, kind-eyed mother and a big, laughing father. Then, too, there
were horses and lots of cows. That is about all, except that the chain
around my neck seemed to have some connection with my early life. That's
why I always kept it very carefully, and, after one of the lockets
broke, I still kept it and the funny-looking paper inside of it."

"I don't understand why Hardman didn't take the paper," he interrupted.

"I suppose he did, and when he discovered that it held only half the
secret of the mine he probably put it back in the locket. I see you have
the other part."

"It was lost at the place where the robbers waited to hold up the T. P.
Limited. Probably you lost it first and one of the robbers found it."

"Probably," she said, in a queer voice.

"What was the first clue your father had had for many years about his
little girl. He happened to be at Aravaipa the day you and I first met.
I guess he took a fancy to me, for he asked me to take this case up for
him and see if I couldn't locate you. I ran Hardman down and made him
tell me the whole story. But he lied about some of it, for he told me
you were dead."

"He is a born liar," the girl commented. "Well, to get on with my story.
Anderson, or Hardman, as he now calls himself, except when he uses his
stage name of Cavallado, went into the show business and took me with
him. When I was a little bit of a girl he used to use me for all sorts
of things, such as a target for his knife throwing and to sell medicine
to the audience. Lots of people would buy because I was such a morsel of
a creature, and I suppose he found me a drawing card. We moved all over
the country for years. I hated the life. But what could I do?"

"You poor little lamb," murmured the man. "And when did you find out who
you were?"

"I heard you talking to him the night you took him back to Epitaph, and
then I began to piece things together. You remember you went over the
whole story with him again just before we reached the town."

"And you knew it was you I was talking about?"

"I didn't know. But when you mentioned the locket and the map, I knew.
Then it seemed to me that since this man Henderson had lost so many
years of his life trying to save me I must do something for him. So I
asked you to take me with you. I had been a boy so long I didn't think
you would know the difference, and you did not. If I hadn't dressed as a
girl that time you would not know yet."

"Maybe, and maybe not," he smiled. "Point is, I do know, and it makes a
heap of difference to me."

"Yes, I know," she said hurriedly. "I'm more trouble now."

"That ain't it," he was beginning, when a thought brought him up short.
As the daughter of Webb Mackenzie this girl was no longer a penniless
outcast, but the heiress of one-half interest in the big Rocking Chair
Ranch, with its fifteen thousand head of cattle. As the first he had
a perfect right to love her and to ask her to marry him, but as the
latter--well, that was quite a different affair. He had not a cent to
bless himself with outside of his little ranch and his salary, and,
though he might not question his own motives under such circumstances,
there would be plenty who would question them for him. He was an
independent young man as one could find in a long day's ride, and his
pride rose up to padlock his lips.

She looked across at him in shy surprise, for all the eagerness had
in an instant been sponged from his face. With a hard, impassive
countenance he dropped the hand he had seized and turned away.

"You were saying--" she suggested.

"I reckon I've forgot what it was. It doesn't matter, anyhow."

She was hurt, and deeply. It was all very well for her to try her little
wiles to delay him, but in her heart she longed to hear the words he
had been about to say. It had been very sweet to know that this brown,
handsome son of Arizona loved her, very restful to know that for the
first time in her life she could trustfully let her weakness lean on
the strength of another. And, more than either, though she sometimes
smilingly pretended to deny it to herself, was the ultimate fact that
she loved him. His voice was music to her, his presence joy. He brought
with him sunshine, and peace, and happiness.

He was always so reliable, so little the victim of his moods. What could
have come over him now to change him in that swift instant? Was she to
blame? Had she unknowingly been at fault? Or was there something in her
story that had chilled him? It was characteristic of her that it was
herself she doubted and not him; that it never occurred to her that her
hero had feet of clay like other men.

She felt her heart begin to swell, and choked back a sob. It wrung him
to hear the little breath catch, but he was a man, strong-willed and
resolute. Though he dug his finger nails into his palms till the flesh
was cut he would not give way to his desire.

"You're not angry at me--Bucky?" she asked softly.

"No, I'm not angry at you." His voice was cold because he dared not
trust himself to let his tenderness creep into it.

"I haven't done anything that I ought not to? Perhaps you think it
wasn't--wasn't nice to--to come here with you."

"I don't think anything of the kind," his hard voice answered. "I think
you're a prince, if you want to know."

She smiled a little wanly, trying to coax him back into friendliness.
"Then if I'm a prince you must be a princess," she teased.

"I meant a prince of good fellows."

"Oh!" She could be stiff, too, if it came to that.

And at this inopportune moment the key turned harshly and the door swung
open.


CHAPTER 12. A CLEAN WHITE MAN'S OPTION

The light of a lantern coming down the steps blinded them for a moment.
Behind the lantern peered the yellow face of the turnkey. "Ho, there,
Americano! They want you up above," the man said. "The generals, and the
colonels, and the captains want a little talk with you before they hang
you, senor."

The two soldiers behind the fellow cackled merrily at his wit, and the
encouraged turnkey tried again.

"We shall trouble you but a little time. Only a few questions, senor,
an order, and then poco tiempo, after a short walk to the
gallows--paradise."

"What--what do you mean?" gasped the girl whitely.

"Never mind, muchacho. This is no affair of yours. Your turn will come
later. Have no fear of that," nodded the wrinkled old parchment face.

"But--but he hasn't done anything wrong."

"Ho, ho! Let him explain that to the generals and the colonels," croaked
the old fellow. "And that you may explain the sooner, senor, hurry--let
your feet fly!"

Bucky walked across to the girl he loved and took her hands in his.

"If I don't come back before three hours read the letter that I wrote
you yesterday, dear. I have left matches on that bench so that you may
have a light. Be brave, pardner. Don't lose your nerve, whatever you do.
We'll both get out of this all right yet."

He spoke in a low voice, so that the guards might not hear, and it was
in kind that she answered.

"I'm afraid, Bucky; afraid away down deep. You don't half believe
yourself what you say. I can't stand it to be here alone and not know
what's going on. They might be--be doing what that man said, and I not
know anything about it till afterward." She broke down and began to sob.
"Oh, I know I'm a dreadful little coward, but I can't be like you--and
you heard what he said."

"Sho! What he says is nothing. I'm an American citizen, and I reckon
that will carry us through all right. Uncle Sam has awful long arms, and
these greasers know it. I'm expecting to come back here again, little
pardner. But if I don't make it, I want you, just as soon as they turn
you loose, to go straight to your father's ranch."

"Come! This won't do. Look alive, senor," the turnkey ordered, and to
emphasize his words reached a hand forward to pluck away the sobbing
lad. Bucky caught his wrist and tightened on it like a vise. "Hands off,
here!" he commanded quietly.

The man gave a howl of pain and nursed his hand gingerly after it was
released.

"Oh, Bucky, make him let me go, too," the girl wailed, clinging to his
coat.

Gently he unfastened her fingers. "You know I would if I could, Curly;
but it isn't my say-so."

And with that he was gone. Ashen-faced she watched him go, and as soon
as the door had closed groped her way to the bench and sank down on it,
her face covered with her hands. He was going to his death. Her lover
was going to his death. Why had she let him go? Why had she not done
something--thought of some way to save him?

The ranger's guards led him to the military headquarters in the next
street from the prison. He observed that nearly a whole company of
Rurales formed the escort, and this led him to conclude that the
government party was very uneasy as to the situation and had taken
precautions against a possible attempt at rescue. But no such attempt
was made. The sunny streets were pretty well deserted, except for a few
lounging peons hardly interested enough to be curious. The air of peace,
of order, sat so incongruously over the plaza that Bucky's heart fell.
Surely this was the last place on earth for a revolution to make any
headway of consequence. His friends were hidden away in holes and
cellars, while Megales dominated the situation with his troops. To
expect a reversal of the situation was surely madness.

Yet even while the thought was in his mind he caught a glimpse in a
doorway of a man he recognized. It was Rodrigo, one of his allies of the
previous night's escapade, and it seemed to him that the man was trying
to tell him something with his eyes. If so, the meaning of his message
failed to carry home, for after the ranger had passed he dared not look
back again.

So far as the trial itself went, O'Connor hoped for nothing and was the
less disappointed. One glance at his judges was enough to convince him
of the futility of expectation. He was tried by a court-martial presided
over by General Carlo. Beside him sat a Colonel Onate and Lieutenant
Chaves. In none of the three did he find any room for hope. Carlo was
a hater of Americans and a butcher by temperament and choice, Chaves
a personal enemy of the prisoner, and Onate looked as grim an old
scoundrel as Jeffreys the hanging judge of James Stuart. Governor
Megales, though not technically a member of the court, was present, and
took an active part in the prosecution. He was a stout, swarthy little
man, with black, beady eyes that snapped restlessly to and fro, and from
his manner to the officers in charge of the trial it was plain that he
was a despot even in his own official family.

The court did not trouble itself with forms of law. Chaves was both
principal witness and judge, notwithstanding the protest of the
prisoner. Yet what the lieutenant had to offer in the way of testimony
was so tinctured with bitterness that it must have been plain to the
veriest novice he was no fit judge of the case.

But Bucky knew as well as the judges that his trial was a merely
perfunctory formality. The verdict was decided ere it began, and,
indeed, so eager was Megales to get the farce over with that several
times he interrupted the proceedings to urge haste.

It took them just fifteen minutes from the time the young American was
brought into the room to find him guilty of treason and to decide upon
immediate execution as the fitting punishment.

General Carlo turned to the prisoner. "Have you anything to say before I
pronounce sentence of death upon you?"

"I have," answered Bucky, looking him straight in the eyes. "I am an
American, and I demand the rights of a citizen of the United States."

"An American?" Incredulously Megales lifted his eyebrows. "You are a
Spanish gypsy, my friend."

The ranger was fairly caught in his own trap. He had donned the gypsy
masquerade because he did not want to be taken for what he was, and he
had succeeded only too well. He had played into their hands. They would,
of course, claim, in the event of trouble with the United States, that
they had supposed him to be what his costume proclaimed him, and they
would be able to make good their pretense with a very decent appearance
of candor. What an idiot of sorts he had been!

"We understand each other perfectly, governor. I know and you know
that I am an American. As a citizen of the United States I claim the
protection of that flag. I demand that you will send immediately for the
United States consul to this city."

Megales leaned forward with a thin, cruel smile on his face. "Very
well, senor. Let it be as you say. Your friend, Senor O'Halloran, is the
United States consul. I shall be very glad to send for him if you can
tell me where to find him. Having business with him to-day, I have
despatched messengers who have been unable to find him at home. But
since you know where he is, and are in need of him, perhaps you can
assist me with information of value."

Again Bucky was fairly caught. He had no reason to doubt that the
governor spoke truth in saying that O'Halloran was the United States
consul. There were in the city as permanent residents not more than
three or four citizens of the United States. With the political instinct
of the Irish, it would be very characteristic of O'Halloran to work his
"pull" to secure for himself the appointment. That he had not happened
to mention the fact to his friend could be accounted for by reason
of the fact that the duties of the office at that place were few and
unimportant.

"We are waiting, senor. If you will tell us where we may send?" hinted
Megales.

"I do not know any more than you do, if he is not at home."

The governor's eyes glittered. "Take care, senor. Better sharpen your
memory."

"It's pretty hard to remember what one never knew," retorted the
prisoner.

The Mexican tyrant brought his clinched fist slowly down on the table
in front of him. "It is necessary to remember, sir. It is necessary to
answer a few questions. If you answer them to our satisfaction you may
yet save your life."

"Indeed!" Bucky swept his fat bulk scornfully from head to foot. "If I
were what you think me, do you suppose I would betray my friends?"

"You have no option, sir. Answer my questions, or die like a dog."

"You mean that you would not think you had any option if you were in my
place, but since I'm a clean white man there's an option. By God! sir,
it doesn't take me a whole lot of time to make it, either. I'll see you
rot in hell before I'll play Judas."

The words rang like a bell through the room, not loud, but clear and
vibrant. There was a long instant's silence after the American finished
speaking, and as his eyes swept from one to another of the enemy Bucky
met with a surprise. On Colonel Onate's face was a haggard look of
fear--surely it was fear--that lifted in relief at the young man's brave
challenge. He had been dreading something, and the dread was lifted.
Onate! Onate! The ranger's memory searched the past few days to locate
the name. Had O'Halloran mentioned it? Was this man one of the officers
expected to join the opposition when it declared itself against Megales?
He had a vague recollection of the name, and he could have heard it only
through his friend.

"Was Juan Valdez a member of the party that took the rifles from
Lieutenant Chaves and his escort?"

Bucky laughed out his contempt.

"Speak, sir," broke in Chaves. "Answer the governor, you dog."

"If I speak, it will be to tell you what a cur I think you."

Chaves flushed angrily and laid a hand on his revolver. "Who are you
that play dice with death, like a fool?"

"My name, seh, is Bucky O'Connor."

At the words a certain fear, followed by a look of triumph, passed over
the face of Chaves. It was as if he had had an unpleasant shock that had
instantly proved groundless. Bucky did not at the time understand it.

"Why don't you shoot? It's about your size, you pinhead, to kill an
unarmed man."

"Tell all you know and I promise you your life." It was Megales who
spoke.

"I'll tell you nothing, except that I'm Bucky O'Connor, of the Arizona
Rangers. Chew on that a while, governor, and see how it tastes. Kill me,
and Uncle Sam is liable to ask mighty loud whyfor; not because I'm such
a mighty big toad in the puddle, but because any man that stands under
that flag has back of him the biggest, best, and gamest country on God's
green footstool." Bucky spoke in English this time, straight as he could
send it.

"In that case, I think sentence may now be pronounced, general."

"I warn you that the United States will exact vengeance for my death."

"Indeed!" Politely the governor smiled at him with a malice almost
devilish. "If so, it will be after you are dead, Senor Bucky O'Connor,
of the Arizona Rangers."

Colonel Onate leaned forward and whispered something to General Carlo,
who shook his head and frowned. Presently the black head of Chaves
joined them, and the three were in excited discussion. Arms waved like
signals, as is usual among the Latin races who talk with their hands
and expressive shrugs of the shoulders. Outvoted by two to one, Onate
appealed to the governor, who came up and listened, frowning, to both
sides of the debate. In their excitement the voices raised, and to Bucky
came snatches of phrases that told him his life hung in the balance.
Carlo and Chaves were for having him executed out of hand, at latest, by
sunset. The latter was especially vindictive. Indeed, it seemed to
the ranger that ever since he had mentioned his name this man had set
himself more malevolently to compass his death. Onate maintained, on the
other hand, that their prisoner was worth more to them alive than dead.
There was a chance that he might weaken before morning and tell secrets.
At worst they would still have his life as a card to hold in case of
need over the head of the rebels. If it should turn out that this was
not needed, he could be executed in the morning as well as to-night.

It may be conceived with what anxiety Bucky listened to the whispered
conversation and waited for the decision of the governor. He was a game
man, noted even in a country famous for its courageous citizens, but he
felt strangely weak now as he waited with that leather-crusted face of
his bereft of all expression.

"Give him till morning to weaken. If he still stays obstinate, hang
him in the dawn," decided the governor, his beady eyes fixed on the
prisoner.

Not a flicker of the eyelid betrayed the Arizonian's emotion, but for
an instant the world swam dizzily before him. Safe till morning! Before
then a hundred chances might change the current of the game in his
favor. How brightly the sunshine flooded the room! What a glorious
world it was, after all! Through the open window poured the rich,
full-throated song of a meadow lark, and the burden of its blithe song
was, "How good is this life the mere living."


CHAPTER 13. BUCKY'S FIRST-RATE REASONS

How long Frances Mackenzie gave herself up to despair she never knew,
but when at last she resolutely took herself in hand it seemed hours
later. "Bucky told me to be brave, he told me not to lose my nerve," she
repeated to herself over and over again, drawing comfort from the memory
of his warm, vibrant voice. "He said he would come back, and he hates
a liar. So, of course, he will come." With such argument she tried to
allay her wild fears.

But on top of all her reassurances would come a swift, blinding vision
of gallant Bucky being led to his death that crumpled her courage as a
hammer might an empty egg shell. What was the use of her pretending all
was well when at that very moment they might be murdering him? Then in
her agony she would pace up and down, wringing her hands, or would beat
them on the stone walls till the soft flesh was bruised and bleeding.

It was in the reaction, after one of these paroxysms of despair, that
in her groping for an anchor to make fast her courage she thought of his
letter.

"He said in three hours I was to read it if he didn't come back. It must
be more than three hours now," she said aloud to herself, and knew a
fresh dread at his prolonged absence beyond the limit he had set.

In point of fact, he had been gone less than three-quarters of an hour,
but in each one of them she had lived a lifetime of pain and died many
deaths.

By snatches she read her letter, a sentence or a fragment of a sentence
at a time as the light served. Luckily he had left a case nearly full of
matches, and one after another of them dropped, charred and burned out,
before she had finished reading. After she had read it, her first love
letter, she must needs go over it again, to learn by heart the sweet
phrases in which he had wooed her. It was a commonplace note enough, far
more neutral than the strong, virile writer who had lacked the cunning
to transmit his feeling to ink and paper. But, after all, it was from
him, and it told the divine message, however haltingly. No wonder she
burned her little finger tips from the flame of the matches creeping
nearer unheeded. No wonder she pressed it to her lips in the darkness
and dreamed her happy dream in those few moments when she was lost in
her love before cruel realities pressed home on her again.

"I told you, Little Curly Haid, that I had first-rate reasons for not
wanting to be killed by these Mexicans. So I have, the best reasons
going. But they are not ripe to tell you, and so I write them.

"I guessed your secret, little pardner, right away when I seen you in a
girl's outfit. If I hadn't been blind as a bat I would have guessed it
long since, for all the time my feelings were telling me mighty loud
that you were the lovingest little kid Bucky had ever come across.

"I'll not leave you to guess my secret the way you did me yours, dear
Curly, but right prompt I'll set down adore (with one D) and say you hit
the bull's-eye that time without expecting to. But if I was saying it I
would not use any French words sweetheart, but plain American. And the
word would be l-o-v-e, without any D's. Now you have got the straight
of it, my dear. I love you--love you--love you, from the crown of that
curly hear to the soles of your little feet. What's more, you have got
to love me, too, since I am,

"Your future husband,

"BUCKY O CONNOR.

"P. S.--And now, Curly, you know my first-rate reasons for not meaning
to get shot up by any of these Mexican fellows."

So the letter ran, and it went to her heart directly as rain to the
thirsty roots of flowers. He loved her. Whatever happened, she would
always have that comfort. They might kill him, but they could not take
away that. The words of an old Scotch song that Mrs. Mackenzie sang came
back to her:

 "The span o' life's nae large eneugh,
   Nor deep enough the sea,
 Nor braid eneugh this weary warld,
  To part my love frae me."

No, they could not part their hearts in this world or the next, and
with this sad comfort she flung herself on the rough bed and sobbed. She
would grieve still, but the wildness of her grief and despair was gone,
scattered by the knowledge that however their troubles eventuated they
were now one in heart.

She was roused after a long time by the sound of the huge key grating
in the lock. Through the opened door a figure descended, and by an
illuminating swing of the turnkey's lantern she saw that it was Bucky.
Next moment the door had closed and they were in each other's arms.
Bucky's stubborn pride, the remembrance of the riches which of a sudden
had transformed his little partner into an heiress and set a high wall
of separation between them, these were swept clean away on a great wave
of love which took Bucky off his feet and left him breathless.

"I had almost given you up," she cried joyfully.

Again he passed his hand across her face. "You've been crying, little
pardner. Were you crying on account of me?"

"On account of myself, because I was afraid I had lost you. Oh, Bucky,
isn't it too good to be true?"

The ranger smiled, remembering that he had about fourteen hours to live,
if the Megales faction triumphed. "Good! I should think it is. Bully!
I've been famished to see Curly Haid again."

"And to know that everything is going to come out all right and that we
love each other."

"That's right good hearing and most ce'tainly true on my side of it. But
how do you happen to know it so sure?" he laughed gayly.

"Why, your letter, Bucky. It was the dearest letter. I love it."

"But you weren't to read it for three hours," he pretended to reprove,
holding her at arm's length to laugh at her.

"Wasn't it three hours? It seemed ever so much longer."

"You little rogue, you didn't play fair." And to punish her he drew
her soft, supple body to him in a close embrace, and for the first time
kissed the sweet mouth that yielded itself to him.

"Tell me all about what happened to you," she bade him playfully, after
speech was again in order.

"Sure." He caught her hand to lead her to the bench and she winced
involuntarily.

"I burned it," she explained, adding, with a ripple of shy laughter:
"When I was reading your letter. It doesn't really hurt, though."

But he had to see for himself and make much over the little blister that
the flame of a match revealed to him. For they were both very much in
love, and, in consequence, bubbling over with the foolishness that is
the greatest inherited wisdom of the ages.

But though her lover had acquiesced so promptly to her demand for a
full account of his adventures since leaving her, that young man had
no intention of offering an unexpurged edition of them. It was his hope
that O'Halloran would storm the prison during the night and effect a
rescue. If so, good; if not, there was no need of her knowing that for
them the new day would usher in fresh sorrow. So he gave her an account
of his trial and its details, told her how he had been convicted, and
how Colonel Onate had fought warily to get the sentence of execution
postponed in order to give their friends a chance to rescue them.

"When Megales remanded me to prison I wanted to let out an Arizona yell,
Curly. It sure seemed too good to be true."

"But he may want the sentence carried out some time, if he changes his
mind. Maybe in a week or two he may take a notion that--" She stopped,
plainly sobered by the fear that the good news of his return might not
be final.

"We won't cross that bridge till we come to it. You don't suppose our
friends are going to sit down and fold their hands, do you? Not if I've
got Mike O'Halloran and young Valdez sized up right. Fur is going to
begin to fly pretty soon in this man's country. But it's up to us to
help all we can, and I reckon we'll begin by taking a preliminary survey
of this wickiup."

Wickiup was distinctly good, since the word is used to apply to a frail
Indian hut, and this cell was nothing less than a tomb built in the
solid rock by blowing out a chamber with dynamite and covering the front
with a solid sheet of iron, into which a door fitted. It did not take a
very long investigation to prove to Bucky that escape was impossible by
any exit except the door, which meant the same thing as impossible
at all under present conditions. Yet he did not yield to this opinion
without going over every inch of the walls many times to make sure that
no secret panel opened into a tunnel from the room.

"I reckon they want to keep us, Curly. Mr. Megales has sure got us real
safe this time. I'd be plumb discouraged about breaking jail out of this
cage. It's ce'tainly us to stay hitched a while."

About dark tortillas and frijoles were brought down to them by the
facetious turnkey, who was accompanied as usual by two guards.

"Why don't my little birdies sing?" he asked, with a wink at the
soldiers. "One of them will not do any singing after daybreak to-morrow.
Ho, ho, my larks! Tune up, tune up!"

"What do you mean about one not singing after daybreak?" asked the girl,
with eyes dilating.

"What! Hasn't he told you? Senor the ranger is to be hanged at the dawn
unless he finds his tongue for Governor Megales. Ho, ho! Our birdie must
speak even if he doesn't sing." And with that as a parting shot the man
clanged the door to after him and locked it.

"You never told me, Bucky. You have been trying to deceive me," she
groaned.

He shrugged his shoulders. "What was the use, girlie? I knew it would
worry you, and do no good. Better let you sleep in peace, I thought."

"While you kept watch alone and waited through the long night. Oh,
Bucky!" She crept close to him and put her arms around his neck,
holding him tight, as if in the hope that she could keep him against the
untoward fate that was reaching for him. "Oh, Bucky, if I could only die
for you!"

"Don't give up, little friend. I don't. Somehow I'll slip out, and then
you'll have to live for me and not die for me."

"What is it that the governor wants you to say that you won't?"

"Oh, he wants me to sell our friends. I told him to go climb a giant
cactus."

"Of course you couldn't do that," she sighed regretfully.

He laughed. "Well, hardly, and call myself a white man."

"But--" She blanched at the alternative. "Oh, Bucky, we must do
something. We must--we must."

"It ain't so bad as it looks, honey. You want to remember that Mike
O'Halloran is on deck. What's the matter with him knocking out a
home run and bringing us both in. I put a heap of confidence in that
red-haided Irishman," he answered cheerfully.

"You say that just to--to give me courage. You don't really think he can
do anything," she said wanly.

"That's just what I think, Curly. Some men have a way of getting things
done. When you look at O'Halloran you feel this, the same as you do when
you look at Val Collins. Oh, he'll get us out all right. I've been in
several tighter holes than this one." His mention of Collins suggested a
diversion, and he took up a less distressing theme lightly. "Wonder what
Val is doing at this precise moment. I'll bet he's beginning to make
things warm for Wolf Leroy's bunch of miscreants. We'll have the robbers
of the Limited behind the bars within two weeks now, or I miss my
guess."

He had succeeded in diverting her attention better than he had dared to
hope. Her big eyes fixed on his much as if he had raised for her some
forgotten spectre.

"That's another thing I must tell you. I didn't think to before. But I
want you to know all about me now. Don't think me bad, Bucky. I'm only a
girl. I couldn't help myself," she pleaded.

"What is it you have done that is so awful?" he smiled, and went to
gather her into his arms.

She stayed him with a gesture of her hand. "No, not yet. Mebbe after you
know you won't want to. I was one of the robbers of the Limited."

"You--what!" he exclaimed, for once struck dumb with sheer amazement.

"Yes, Bucky. I expect you'll hate me now. What is it you called me--a
miscreant? Well, that's what I am."

His arms slipped round her as she began to sob, and he gentled her till
she could again speak. "Tell me all about it, little Curly." he said.

"I didn't go into it because I wanted to. My master made me. I don't
know much about the others, except that I heard the names they called
each other."

"Would you know them again if you saw them? But of course you would."

"Yes. But that's it, Bucky. I hated them all, and I was in mortal fear
all the time. Still--I can't betray them. They thought I went in freely
with them--all but Hardman. It wouldn't be right for me to tell what I
know. I've got to make you see that, dear."

"You'll not need to argue that with me, honey. I see it. You must keep
quiet. Don't tell anybody else what you've told me."

"And will they put me in the penitentiary when the rest go there?"

"Not while Bucky O'Connor is alive and kicking," he told her
confidently.

But the form in which he had expressed his feeling was unfortunate.
It brought them back to the menace of their situation. Neither of them
could tell how long he would be alive and kicking. She flung herself
into his arms and wept till she could weep no more.


CHAPTER 14. LE ROI EST MORT; VIVE LE ROI

When the news reached O'Halloran that Megales had scored on the
opposition by arresting Bucky O'Connor, the Irishman swore fluently at
himself for his oversight in forgetting the Northern Chihuahua. So far
as the success of the insurgents went, the loss of the ranger was a
matter of no importance, since O'Halloran knew well that nothing in the
way of useful information could be cajoled or threatened out of him.
But, personally, it was a blow to the filibuster, because he knew that
the governor would not hesitate to execute his friend if his fancy or
his fears ran that way, and the big, red-headed Celt would not have let
Bucky go to death for a dozen teapot revolutions if he could help it.

"And do you think you're fit to run even a donation party, you great,
blundering gumph?" Mike asked himself, in disgust. "You a conspirator!
You a leader of a revolution! By the ghost of Brian Boru, you had better
run along back to the kindergarten class."

But he was not the man to let grass grow under his feet while he
hesitated how to remedy his mistake. Immediately he got in touch with
Valdez and a few of his party, and decided on a bold counterstroke that,
if successful, would oppose a checkmate to the governor's check and
would also make unnecessary the unloosing of the State prisoners on the
devoted heads of the people.

"But mind, gentlemen," said Juan Valdez plainly, "the governor must not
be injured personally. I shall not consent to any violence, no matter
what the issue. Furthermore, I should like to be given charge of the
palace, in order to see that his wants are properly provided for.
We cannot afford to have our movement discredited at the outset by
unnecessary bloodshed or by any wanton outrages."

O'Halloran smothered a smile. "Quite right, senor. Success at all
hazards, but, if possible, success with peace. And, faith, subject
to the approval of the rest of those present, I do hereby appoint you
keeper of the governor's person and his palace, as well as all that do
dwell therein, including his man servants, his maid servants, and his
daughter. We hold you personally responsible for their safe keeping. See
that none of them cherish the enemy or give aid and comfort to them."
The Irishman finished, with a broad smile that seemed to say: "Begad,
there's a clear field. Go in and win, me bye."

Nothing could be done in broad daylight, while the troops of the
government party patrolled the streets and were prepared to pounce on
the first suspects that poked their noses out of the holes where they
were hidden. Nevertheless, their spies were busy all day, reporting
to the opposition leaders everything that happened of interest. In the
course of the day General Valdez, the father of Juan, was arrested
on suspicion of complicity and thrown into prison, as were a score
of others thought to be in touch with the Valdez faction. All day the
troops of the governor were fussily busy, but none of the real leaders
of the insurgents was taken. For General Valdez, though he had been
selected on account of his integrity and great popularity to succeed
Megales, was unaware of the plot on foot to retire the dictator from
power.

It was just after nightfall that a farmer drove into Chihuahua with
a wagonload of alfalfa. He was halted once or twice by guards on the
streets, but, after a very cursory inspection, was allowed to pass. His
route took him past the back of the governor's palace, an impressive
stone affair surrounded by beautiful grounds. Here he stopped, as if to
fasten a tug. Out of the hay tumbled fifteen men armed with rifles and
revolvers, all of them being careful to leave the wagon on the side
farthest from the palace.

"Now, me lads, we're all heroes by our talk. It's up to us to make
good. I can promise one thing: by this time to-morrow we'll all be live
patriots or dead traitors. Which shall it be?"

O'Halloran's concluding question was a merely rhetorical one, for
without waiting for an answer he started at the double toward the
palace, taking advantage of the dense shrubbery that offered cover up to
the last twenty yards. This last was covered with a rush so rapid that
the guard was surprised into a surrender without a protest.

Double guard was on duty on account of the strained situation, but the
officer in charge, having been won over to the Valdez side, had taken
care to pick them with much pains. As a consequence, the insurgents met
friends in place of enemies, and within three minutes controlled fully
the palace. Every entrance was at once closed and guarded, so that no
news of the reversal could reach the military barracks.

So silently had the palace been taken that, except the guards and one
or two servants held as prisoners, not even those living within it were
aware of anything unusual.

"Senor Valdez, you are appointed to notify the senorita that she need
not be alarmed at what has occurred. Senor Garcia will act as captain
of the day, and allow nobody to leave the building under any pretext
whatever. I shall personally put the tyrant under arrest. Rodrigo and
Jose will accompany me."

O'Halloran left his subordinates at the door when he entered the
apartments of the governor. The outer room was empty, and the Irishman
passed through it to the inner one, where Megales was accustomed to take
his after-dinner siesta.

To-night, however, that gentleman was in no mood for peaceful reflection
followed by slumber. He was on the edge of a volcano, and he knew it.
The question was whether he could hold the lid on without an eruption.
General Valdez he dared not openly kill, on account of his fame and his
popularity, but that pestilent Irishman O'Halloran could be assassinated
and so could several of his allies--if they only gave him time. That was
the rub. The general dissatisfaction at his rule had been no secret, of
course, but the activity of the faction opposing him, the boldness and
daring with which it had risked all to overthrow him, had come as so
complete a surprise that he had been unprepared to meet it. Everywhere
to-night his guards covered the city, ready to crush rebellion as soon
as it showed its head. Carlo was in personal charge of the troops, and
would remain so until after the election to-morrow, at which he would be
declared formally reelected. If he could keep his hands on the reins
for twenty-four hours more the worst would be past. He would give a good
deal to know what that mad Irishman, O'Halloran, was doing just now.
If he could once get hold of him, the opposition would collapse like a
house of cards.

At that precise moment in walked the mad Irishman pat to the Mexican's
thought of him.

"Buenos noches, excellency. I understand you have been looking for me.
I am, senor, yours to command." The big Irishman brought his heels
together and gave a mocking military salute.

The governor's first thought was that he was a victim of treachery, his
second that he was a dead man, his third that he would die as a Spanish
gentleman ought. He was pale to the eyes, but he lost no whit of his
dignity.

"You have, I suppose, taken the palace," he said quietly.

"As a loan, excellency, merely as a loan. After to-morrow it will
be returned you in the event you still need it," replied O'Halloran
blandly.

"You expect to murder me, of course?"

The big Celt looked shocked. "Not at all! The bulletins may perhaps have
to report you accidentally killed or a victim of suicide. Personally I
hope not."

"I understand; but before this lamentable accident happens I beg leave
to assure myself that the palace really is in your hands, senor. A mere
formality, of course." The governor smiled his thin-lipped smile and
touched a bell beside him.

Twice Megales pressed the electric bell, but no orderly appeared in
answer to it. He bowed to the inevitable.

"I grant you victor, Senor O'Halloran. Would it render your victory
less embarrassing if I were to give you material immediately for that
bulletin on suicide?" He asked the question quite without emotion, as
courteously as if he were proposing a stroll through the gardens.

O'Halloran had never liked the man. The Irish in him had always boiled
at his tyranny. But he had never disliked him so little as at this
moment. The fellow had pluck, and that was one certain passport to the
revolutionist's favor.

"On the contrary, it would distress me exceedingly. Let us reserve that
bulletin as a regrettable possibility in the event that less drastic
measures fail."

"Which means, I infer, that you have need of me before I pass by the
Socratic method," he suggested, still with that pale smile set in
granite "I shall depend on you to let me know at what precise hour you
would like to order an epitaph written for me. Say the word at your
convenience, and within five minutes your bulletin concerning the late
governor will have the merit of truth."

"Begad, excellency, I like your spirit. If it's my say-so, you will live
to be a hundred. Come the cards are against you. Some other day they may
fall more pat for you. But the jig's up now."

"I am very much of your opinion, sir," agreed Megales.

"Then why not make terms?"

"Such as--"

"Your life and your friends' lives against a graceful capitulation."

"Our lives as prisoners or as free men?"

"The utmost freedom compatible with the circumstances. Your friends may
either leave or remain and accept the new order of things. I'm afraid it
will be necessary for you and General Carlo to leave the state for your
own safety. You have both many enemies."

"With our personal possessions?"

"Of course. Such property as you cannot well take may be left in the
hands of an agent and disposed of later."

Megales eyed him narrowly. "Is it your opinion, on honor, that the
general and I would reach the boundaries of the State without being
assassinated?"

"I pledge you my honor and that of Juan Valdez that you will be safely
escorted out of the country if you will consent to a disguise. It is
only fair to him to say that he stands strong for your life."

"Then, sir, I accept your terms if you can make it plain to me that you
are strong enough to take the city against General Carlo."

From his pocket O'Halloran drew a typewritten list and handed it to the
governor, who glanced it over with interest.

"These army officers are all with you?"

"As soon as the word is given."

"You will pardon me if I ask for proof?"

"Certainly. Choose the name of any one of them you like and send for
him. You are at liberty to ask him whether he is pledged to us."

The governor drew a pencil-mark through a name. O'Halloran clapped his
hands and Rodrigo came into the room.

"Rodrigo, the governor desires you to carry a message to Colonel Onate.
He is writing it now. You will give Colonel Onate my compliments and ask
him to make as much haste as is convenient."

Megales signed and sealed the note he was writing and handed it to
O'Halloran, who in turn passed it to Rodrigo.

"Colonel Onate should be here in fifteen minutes at the farthest. May I
in the meantime offer you a glass of wine, Dictator O'Halloran?" At the
Irishman's smile, the Mexican governor hastened to add, misunderstanding
him purposely: "Perhaps I assume too much in taking the part of host
here. May I ask whether you will be governor in person or by deputy,
senor?"

"You do me too much honor, excellency. Neither in person nor by deputy,
I fear. And, as for the glass of wine--with all my heart. Good liquor is
always in order, whether for a funeral or a marriage."

"Or an abdication, you might add. I drink to a successful reign, Senor
Dictator: Le roi est mort; vive le roi!"

The Irishman filled a second glass. "And I drink to Governor Megales, a
brave man. May the cards fall better for him next time he plays."

The governor bowed ironically. "A brave man certainly, and you might
add: 'Who loses his stake without striking one honest blow for it.'"

"We play with stacked cards, excellency. Who can forestall the treachery
of trusted associates?"

"Sir, your apology for me is very generous, no less so than the terms
you offer," returned Megales sardonically.

O'Halloran laughed. "Well, if you don't like my explanations I shall
have to let you make your own. And, by the way, may I venture on a
delicate personal matter, your excellency?"

"I can deny you nothing to-night, senor," answered Megales, mocking at
himself.

"Young Valdez is in love with your daughter. I am sure that she is fond
of him, but she is very loyal to you and flouts the lad. I was thinking,
sir, that--"

The Spaniard's eye flashed, but his answer came suavely as he
interrupted: "Don't you think you had better leave Senor Valdez and me
to arrange our own family affairs? We could not think of troubling you
to attend to them."

"He is a good lad and a brave."

Megales bowed. "Your recommendation goes a long way with me, senor, and,
in truth, I have known him only a small matter of twenty years longer
than you."

"Never a more loyal youngster in the land."

"You think so? A matter of definitions, one may suppose. Loyal to
the authorized government of his country, or to the rebels who would
illegally overthrow it?"

"Egad, you have me there, excellency. 'Tis a question of point of view,
I'm thinking. But you'll never tell me the lad pretended one thing and
did another. I'll never believe you like that milksop Chaves better."

"Must I choose either a fool or a knave?"

"I doubt it will be no choice of yours. Juan Valdez is an ill man to
deny what he sets his heart on. If the lady is willing--"

"I shall give her to the knave and wash my hands of her. Since treason
thrives she may at last come back to the palace as its mistress. Quien
sabe?"

"Less likely things have happened. What news, Rodrigo?" This last to the
messenger, who at that moment appeared at the door.

"Colonel Onate attends, senor."

"Show him in."

Onate was plainly puzzled at the summons to attend the governor, and
mixed with his perplexity was a very evident anxiety. He glanced quickly
at O'Halloran as he entered, as if asking for guidance, and then as
questioningly at Megales. Had the Irishman played Judas and betrayed
them all? Or was the coup already played with success?

"Colonel Onate, I have sent for you at the request of Governor Megales
to set his mind at rest on a disturbing point. His health is failing
and he considers the advisability of retiring from the active cares
of state. I have assured him that you, among others, would, under such
circumstances, be in a friendly relation to the next administration. Am
I correct in so assuring him?"

Megales pierced him with his beady eyes. "In other words, Colonel Onate,
are you one of the traitors involved in this rebellion?"

"I prefer the word patriot, senor," returned Onate, flushing.

"Indeed I have no doubt you do. I am answered," he exclaimed scornfully.
"And what is the price of patriotism these days, colonel?"

"Sir!" The colonel laid his hand on his sword.

"I was merely curious to know what position you would hold under the new
administration."

O'Halloran choked a laugh, for by chance the governor had hit the nail
on the head. Onate was to be Secretary of State under Valdez, and this
was the bait that had been dangled temptingly under his nose to induce a
desertion of Megales.

"If you mean to reflect upon my honor I can assure you that my
conscience is clear," answered Onate blackly.

"Indeed, colonel, I do not doubt it. I have always admired your
conscience and its adaptability." The governor turned to O'Halloran. "I
am satisfied, Senior Dictator. If you will permit me--"

He walked to his desk, unlocked a drawer, and drew forth a parchment,
which he tossed across to the Irishman. "It is my commission as
governor. Allow me to place it in your hands and put myself at the
service of the new administration."

"If you will kindly write notes, I will send a messenger to General
Carlo and another to Colonel Gabilonda requesting their attendance. I
think affairs may be quickly arranged."

"You are irresistible, senor. I hasten to obey."

Megales sat down and wrote two notes, which he turned over to
O'Halloran. The latter read them, saw them officially sealed, and
dispatched them to their destinations.

When Gabilonda was announced, General Carlo followed almost at his
heels. The latter glanced in surprise at O'Halloran.

"Where did you catch him, excellency?" he asked.

"I did not catch him. He has caught me, and, incidentally, you,
general," answered the sardonic Megales.

"In short, general," laughed the big Irishman, "the game is up."

"But the army--You haven't surrendered without a fight?"

"That is precisely what I have done. Cast your eye over that paper,
general, and then tell me of what use the army would be to us. Half the
officers are with the enemy, among them the patriotic Colonel Onate,
whom you see present. A resistance would be futile, and would only
result in useless bloodshed."

"I don't believe it," returned Carlo bluntly.

"Seeing is believing, general," returned O'Halloran, and he gave a
little nod to Onate.

The colonel left the room, and two or three minutes later a bell began
to toll.

"What does that mean?" asked Carlo.

"The call to arms, general. It means that the old regime is at an end in
Chihuahua. VIVA VALDEZ."

"Not without a struggle," cried the general, rushing out of the room.

O'Halloran laughed. "I'm afraid he will not be able to give the
countersign to Garcia. In the meantime, excellency, pending his return,
I would suggest that you notify Colonel Gabilonda to turn over the
prison to us without resistance."

"You hear your new dictator, colonel," said Megales.

"Pardon me, your excellency, but a written order--"

"Would relieve you of responsibility. So it would. I write once more."

He was interrupted as he wrote by a great shout from the plaza. "VIVA
VALDEZ!" came clearly across the night air, and presently another that
stole the color from the cheek of Megales.

"Death to the tyrant! Death to Megales!" repeated the governor, after
the shouts reached them.

"I fear, Senor Dictator, that your pledge to see me across the frontier
will not avail against that mad-dog mob." He smiled, waving an airy hand
toward the window.

The Irishman set his bulldog jaw. "I'll get you out safely or, begad!
I'll go down fighting with you."

"I think we are likely to have interesting times, my dear dictator. Be
sure I shall watch your doings with interest so long as your friends
allow me to watch anything in this present world." The governor turned
to his desk and continued the letter with a firm hand. "I think this
should relieve you of responsibility, colonel."

By this time General Carlo had reentered the room, with a crestfallen
face.

O'Halloran had been thinking rapidly. "Governor, I think the safest
place for you and General Carlo, for a day or two, will be in the
prison. I intend to put my friend O'Connor in charge of its defense,
with a trustworthy command. There is no need of word reaching the mob as
to where you are hidden. I confess the quarters will be narrows but--"

"No narrower than those we shall occupy very soon if we do not accept
your suggestion," smiled Megales. "Buertos! Anything to escape the
pressing attentions of your friends outside. I ask only one favor, the
loan of a revolver, in order that we may disappoint the mad dogs if they
overpower the guard of Senor O'Connor."

Hastily O'Halloran rapped out orders, gathered together a little force
of five men, and prepared to start. Both Carlo and Megales he furnished
with revolvers, that they might put an end to their lives in case the
worst happened. But before they had started Juan Valdez and Carmencita
Megales came running toward them.

"Where are you going? It is too late. The palace is surrounded!" cried
the young man. "Look!" He swept an excited arm toward the window. "There
are thousands and thousands of frenzied people calling for the lives of
the governor and General Carlo."

Carlo shook like a leaf, but Megales only smiled at O'Halloran his
wintry smile. "That is the trouble in keeping a mad dog, senor. One
never knows when it may get out of leash and bite perhaps even the hand
that feeds it."

Carmencita flung herself, sobbing, into the arms of her father and
filled the palace with her screams. Megales handed her over promptly to
her lover.

"To my private office," he ordered briskly. "Come, general, there is
still a chance."

O'Halloran failed to see it, but he joined the little group that hurried
to the private office. Megales dragged his desk from the corner where
it set and touched a spring that opened a panel in the wall. Carlo,
blanched with fear at the threats and curses that filled the night,
sprang toward the passageway that appeared.

Megales plucked him back. "One moment, general. Ladies first.
Carmencita, enter."

Carlo followed her, after him the governor, and lastly Gabilonda,
tearing himself from a whispered conversation with O'Halloran. The panel
swung closed again, and Valdez and O'Halloran lifted back the desk
just as Garcia came running in to say that the mob would not be denied.
Immediately O'Halloran threw open a French window and stepped out to the
little railed porch upon which it opened. He had the chance of his life
to make a speech, and that is the one thing that no Irishman can resist.
He flung out from his revolver three shots in rapid succession to draw
the attention of the mob to him. In this he succeeded beyond his hopes.
The word ran like wildfire that the mad Irishman, O'Halloran, was about
to deliver a message to them, and from all sides of the building they
poured to hear it. He spoke in Mexican, rapidly, his great bull voice
reaching to the utmost confines of the crowd.

"Fellow lovers of liberty, the hour has struck that we have worked and
prayed for. The glorious redemption of our State has been accomplished
by your patriotic hands. An hour ago the tyrants, Megales and Carlo,
slipped out of the palace, mounted swift horses, and are galloping
toward the frontier."

A roar of rage, such as a tiger disappointed of its kill might give,
rose into the night. Such a terrible cry no man made of flesh and blood
could hear directed at him and not tremble.

"But the pursuit is already on. Swift riders are in chase, with orders
not to spare their horses so only they capture the fleeing despots. We
expect confidently that before morning the tyrants will be in our hands.
In the meantime, let us show ourselves worthy of the liberty we have
won. Let us neither sack nor pillage, but show our great president in
the City of Mexico that not ruffians but an outraged people have driven
out the oppressors."

The huge Celt was swimming into his periods beautifully, but it was very
apparent to him that the mob must have a vent for its stored excitement.
An inspiration seized him.

"But one sacred duty calls to us from heaven, my fellow citizens.
Already I see in your glorious faces that you behold the duty. Then
forward, patriots! To the plaza, and let us tear down, let us destroy by
fire, let us annihilate the statue of the dastard Megales which defaces
our fair city. Citizens, to your patriotic duty!"

Another wild yell rang skyward, and at once the fringes of the crowd
began to vanish plazaward, its centre began to heave, its flanks to
stir. Three minutes later the grounds of the palace were again dark and
empty. The Irishman's oratory had won the day.


CHAPTER 15. IN THE SECRET CHAMBER

The escaping party groped its way along the passage in the wall, down a
rough, narrow flight of stone steps to a second tunnel, and along this
underground way for several hundred yards. Since he was the only one
familiar with the path they were traversing, the governor took the lead
and guided the others. At a distance of perhaps an eighth of a mile from
the palace the tunnel forked. Without hesitation, Megales kept to the
right. A stone's throw beyond this point of divergence there began to
be apparent a perceptible descent which terminated in a stone wall that
blocked completely the way.

Megales reached up and put his weight on a rope suspended from the roof.
Slowly the solid masonry swung on a pivot, leaving room on either side
for a person to squeeze through. The governor found it a tight fit, as
did also Gabilonda.

"I was more slender last time I passed through there. It has been
several years since then," said the governor, giving his daughter a hand
to assist her through.

They found themselves in a small chamber fitted up as a living room in
a simple way. There were three plain chairs, a bed, a table, and a
dresser, as well as a cooking stove.

"This must be close to the prison. We have been coming in that direction
all the time. It is strange that it could be so near and I not know of
it," said the warden, looking around curiously.

Megales smiled. "I am the only person alive that knew of the existence
of this room or of the secret passage until half an hour ago. I had it
built a few years since by Yaquis when I was warden of the prison.
The other end, the one opening from the palace, I had finished after I
became governor."

"But surely the men who built it know of its existence."

Again Megales smiled. "I thought you knew me better, Carlo. The Yaquis
who built this were condemned raiders. I postponed their execution a
few months while they were working on this. It was a convenience both to
them and to me."

"And is also a convenience to me," smiled Carlo, who was beginning to
recover from his terror.

"But I don't quite understand yet how we are to get out of here except
by going back the way we came," said Gabilonda.

"Which for some of us might prove a dangerously unhealthy journey. True,
colonel, and therefore one to be avoided." Megales stepped to the wall,
spanned with his fingers a space from the floor above a joint in the
masonry, and pressed against the concrete. Inch by inch the wall fell
back and opened into a lower corridor of the prison, the very one indeed
which led to the cell in which Bucky and his love were imprisoned.
Cautiously the Spaniard's glance traveled down the passage to see it was
empty before he opened the panel door more than enough to look through.
Then he beckoned to Gabilonda. "Behold, doubting Thomas!"

The warden gasped. "And I never knew it, never had a suspicion of it."

"But this only brings us from one prison to another," objected the
general. "We might be penned in here as well as at the castle."

"Even that contingency has been provided for. You noticed, perhaps,
where the tunnel forked. The left branch runs down to the river-wash,
and by ten minutes' digging with the tools lying there one can force an
exit."

"Your excellency is certainly a wonder, and all this done without
arousing the least suspicion of anybody," admired the warden.

"The wise man, my dear colonel, prepares for emergencies; the fool
trusts to his luck," replied the governor dryly.

"Are we to stay here for the present, colonel?" broke in the governor's
daughter. "And can you furnish accommodations for the rest of us if we
stay all night, as I expect we must?"

"My dear senorita, I have accommodations and to spare. But the trouble
is that your presence would become known. I should be the happiest'
man alive to put my all at the accommodation of Chihuahua's fairest
daughter. But if it should get out that you are here--" Gabilonda
stopped to shrug his fat shoulders at the prospect.

"We shall have to stay here, or, at least, in the lower tier of cells.
I'm sorry, Carmencita, but there is no other course compatible with
safety," decided Megales promptly.

The warden's face cleared. "That is really not a point for me to decide,
governor. This young American, O'Connor, is now in charge of the prison.
I must release him at once, and shall then bring him here to confer with
you as to means of safety."

Bucky's eyes opened wide when Gabilonda and Megales came alone and
without a lantern to his cell. In the darkness it was impossible to
recognize them, but once within the closed cell the warden produced a
dark lantern from under his coat.

"Circumstances have arisen that make the utmost vigilance necessary,"
explained the warden. "I may begin my explanations by congratulating you
and your young friend. Let me offer a thousand felicitations. Neither of
you are any longer prisoners."

If he expected either of them to fall on his neck and weep tears of
gratitude at his pompous announcement, the colonel was disappointed.
From the darkness where the ranger's little partner sat on the bed came
a deep sigh of relief, but O'Connor did not wink an eyelash.

"I may conclude, then, that Mike O'Halloran has been getting in his
work?" was his cool reply.

"Exactly, senor. He is the man on horseback and I travel afoot," smiled
Megales.

Bucky looked him over coolly from head to foot. "Still I can't quite
understand why your ex-excellency does me the honor of a personal
visit."

"Because, senor, in the course of human events Providence has seen fit
to reverse our positions. I am now your prisoner and you my jailer,"
explained Megales, and urbanely added a whimsical question. "Shall you
have me hanged at dawn?"

"It would be a pleasure, and, I reckon, a duty too. But I can't promise
till I've seen Mike. Do some more explaining, colonel. I want to know
all about the round-up O'Halloran is boss of. Did he make a right good
gather?"

The subtleties of American humor baffled the little Mexican, but he
appreciated the main drift of the ranger's query, and narrated with much
gesticulation the story of the coup that O'Halloran had pulled off in
capturing the government leaders.

"It was an exceedingly neat piece of strategy," its victim admitted. "I
would give a good deal to have the privilege of hanging your red-headed
friend, but since that is denied me, I must be grateful he does not take
a fancy to hang me."

"In case he doesn't, your excellency," was Bucky's addendum.

"I understand he has decided to deport me," retorted Megales lightly.
"It is perhaps better politics, on the whole, better even than a knife
in the back."

"Unless rumor is a lying jade, you should be a good judge of that,
governor," said the American, eyeing him sternly.

Megales shrugged. "One of the penalties of fame is that one gets credit
for much he does not deserve. There was your immortal General Lincoln,
a wit so famous in your country that every good story is fathered upon
him, I understand. So with your humble servant. Let a man accomplish
his vendetta upon the body of an enemy, and behold! the world cries: 'A
victim of Megales.'"

"Still, if you deserve your reputation as much as our immortal General
Lincoln deserves his, the world may be pardoned for an occasional
error." O'Connor turned to the warden. "What does he mean by saying that
he is my prisoner? Have you a message for me from O'Halloran, colonel?"

"It is his desire, senor, that, pending the present uncertain state of
public opinion, you accept the command of the prison and hold safe all
persons detained here, including his excellency and General Carlo. He
desired me to assure you that as soon as is possible he will arrive to
confer with you in person."

"Good enough, and are you a prisoner, too, colonel?"

"I did not so understand Senor O'Halloran."

"If you're not you have to earn your grub and lodgings. I'll appoint
you my deputy, colonel. And, first off, my orders are to lock up his
excellency and General Carlo in this cell till morning."

"The cell, Senor O'Connor, is damp and badly ventilated," protested
Gabilonda.

"I know that a heap better than you do, colonel," said Bucky dryly. "But
if it was good enough for me and my pardner, here, I reckon it's good
enough for them. Anyhow, we'll let them try it, won't we, Frank."

"If you think best, Bucky."

"You bet I do."

"And what about the governor's daughter?" asked Gabilonda.

"You don't say! Is she a guest of this tavern?"

The colonel explained how they had reached the prison and the
circumstances that had led to their hurried flight, while the ranger
whistled the air of a cowboy song, his mind busy with this new phase of
the case.

"She's one of these here Spanish blue-blooded senoritas used to guitar
serenades under her window. Now, what would you do with her in a jail,
Bucky?" he asked himself, in humorous dismay; but even as he reflected
on it his roving eye fell on his friend. "The very thing. I'll take
Curly Haid in to her and let them fall in love with each other. You're
liable to be some busy, Bucky, and shy on leisure to entertain a lady,
let alone two."

And so he arranged it. Leaving the former governor and General Carlo in
the cell just vacated by them, Frances and he accompanied Gabilonda to
the secret room behind the corridor wall.

All three parties to the introduction that followed acknowledged
secretly to a surprise. Miss Carmencita had expected the friend of big,
rough, homely O'Halloran to resemble him in kind, at least. Instead, she
looked on a bronzed young Apollo of the saddle with something of that
same lithe grace she knew and loved in Juan Valdez. And the shy boy
beside him--why, the darling was sweet enough to kiss. The big, brown,
helpless eyes, the blushing, soft cheeks, the crop of thick, light curls
were details of an extraordinarily taking picture. Really, if these
two were fair specimens, Americans were not so bad, after all. Which
conclusion Juan Valdez's fondness for that race may have helped in part
to form.

But if the young Spanish girl found a little current of pleasure in her
surprise, Bucky and his friend were aware of the same sensation. All
the charm of her race seemed summed up in Carmencita Megales. She was
of blue blood, every feature and motion told that. The fine, easy set
of her head, the fire in the dark, heavy-lashed eyes, the sweep of dusky
chin and cheek and throat certified the same story. She had, too, that
coquettish hint of uncertainty, that charm of mystery so fatal in
its lure to questing man. Even physically the contradiction of sex
attracted. Slender and lissom as a fawn, she was yet a creature of
exquisitely rounded curves. Were her eyes brown or black or--in the
sunlight--touched with a gleam of copper? There was always uncertainty.
But much more was there fire, a quality that seemed to flash out from
her inner self. She was a child of whims, a victim of her moods. Yet in
her, too, was a passionate loyalty that made fickleness impossible. She
knew how to love and how to hate, and, despite her impulses, was capable
of surrender complete and irrevocable.

All of this Bucky did not read in that first moment of meeting, but the
shrewd judgment behind the level blue eyes came to an appraisal roughly
just. Before she had spoken three sentences he knew she had all her
sex's reputed capacity for injustice as well as its characteristic
flashes of generosity.

"Are you one of the men who have rebelled against my father and
attempted to murder him?" she flashed.

"I'm the man he condemned to be hanged tomorrow morning at dawn for
helping Juan Valdez take the guns," retorted Bucky, with a laugh.

"You are his enemy, and, therefore, mine."

"I'm a friend of Michael O'Halloran, who stood between him and the mob
that wanted to kill him."

"Who first plotted against him and seduced his officers to betray him,"
she quickly replied.

"I reckon, ma'am, we better agree to disagree on politics," said Bucky
good-naturedly. "We're sure liable to see things different from each
other. Castile and Arizona don't look at things with the same eyes."

She looked at him just then with very beautiful and scornful ones, at
any rate. "I should hope not."

"You see, we're living in the twentieth century up in the sunburned
State," said Bucky, with smiling aplomb.

"Indeed! And we poor Chihuahuans?"

"When I see the ladies I think you're ce'tainly in the golden age, but
when I break into your politics, I'm some reminded of that Richard Third
fellow in the Shakespeare play."

"Referring, I presume, to my father?" she demanded haughtily.

"In a general way, but eliminating the most objectionable points of the
king fellow."

"You're very kind." She interrupted her scorn to ask him where he meant
her to sleep.

He glanced over the room. "This might do right here, if we had that bed
aired."

"Do you expect to put me in irons?"

"Not right away. Colonel, I'll ask you to go to the office and notify
me as soon as Senor O'Halloran arrives." He waited till the colonel had
gone before adding: "I'm going to leave this boy with you, senorita, for
a while. He'll explain some things to you that I can't. In about an
hour I'll be back, perhaps sooner. So long, Curly. Tell the lady your
secret." And with that Bucky was out of the room.

"Your secret, child! What does he mean?"

The flame of color that swept into the cheeks of Frances, the appeal
in the shamed eyes, held Carmencita's surprised gaze. Then coolly it
traveled over the girl and came back to her burning face.

"So that's it, is it?"

But the scorn in her voice was too much for Frances. She had been judged
and condemned in that cool stare, and all the woman in her protested at
its injustice.

"No, no, no!" she cried, running forward and catching at the other's
hand. "I'm not that. You don't understand."

Coldly Carmencita disengaged her hand and wiped it with her kerchief. "I
understand enough. Please do not touch me."

"May I not tell you my story?"

"I'll not trouble you. It does not interest me."

"But you will listen?" implored the other.

"I must ask to be excused."

"Then you are a heartless, cruel woman," flamed Frances. "I'm good--as
good as you are." The color patched her cheek and ebbed again. "I
wouldn't treat a dog as you do me. Oh, cruel, cruel!"

The surprising extravagance of her protest, the despair that rang in the
fresh young voice, caught the interest of the Mexican girl. Surely such
a heart-broken cry did not consist with guilt. But the facts--when a
young and pretty girl masquerades through the country in the garb of a
boy with a handsome young man, not much room for doubt is left.

Frances was quick to see that the issue was reopened. "Oh, senorita, it
isn't as you think. Do I look like--" She broke off to cover with her
hands a face in which the pink and white warred with alternate success.
"I ought not to have come. I ought never to have come. I see that now.
But I didn't think he would know. You see, I had always passed as a boy
when I wanted to."

"A remarkably pretty one, child," said Miss Carmencita, a smile dimpling
her cheeks. "But how do you mean that you had passed as a boy?"

Frances explained, giving a rapid sketch of her life with the Hardmans
during which she had appeared every night on the stage as a boy without
the deception being suspected. She had cultivated the tricks and ways
of boys, had tried to dress to carry out the impression, and had always
succeeded until she had made the mistake of putting on a gypsy girl's
dress a couple of days before.

Carmencita heard her out, but not as a judge. Very early in the story
her doubts fled and she succumbed to the mothering instinct in her. She
took the American girl in her arms and laughed and cried with her; for
her imagination seized on the romance of the story and delighted in its
fresh unconventionality. Since she had been born Carmencita's life
had been ordered for her with precision by the laws of caste. Her
environment wrapped her in so that she must follow a set and beaten
path. It was, to be sure, a flower-strewn one, but often she impotently
rebelled against its very orderliness. And here in her arms was a victim
of that adventurous romance she had always longed so passionately to
know. Was it wonder she found it in her heart to both love and envy the
subject of it?

"And this young cavalier--the Senor Bucky, is it you call him?--surely
you love him, my dear."

"Oh, senorita!" The blushing face was buried on her new friend's
shoulder. "You don't know how good he is."

"Then tell me," smiled the other. "And call me Carmencita."

"He is so brave, and patient, and good. I know there was never a man
like him."

Miss Carmencita thought of one and demurred silently. "I'm sure this
paragon of lovers is at least part of what you say. Does he love you?
But I am sure he couldn't help it."

"Sometimes I think he does, but once--" Frances broke off to ask, in a
pink flame: "How does a lover act?"

Miss Carmencita's laughter rippled up. "Gracious me, have you never had
one before."

"Never."

"Well, he should make verses to you and pretty speeches. He should sing
serenades about undying love under your window. Bonbons should bombard
you, roses make your rooms a bower. He should be ardent as Romeo,
devoted as a knight of old. These be the signs of a true love," she
laughed.

Frances' face fell. If these were the tokens of true love, her ranger
was none. For not one of the symptoms could fairly be said to fit him.
Perhaps, after all, she had given him what he did not want.

"Must he do all that? Must he make verses?" she asked blankly, not being
able to associate Bucky with poetasting.

"He must," teased her tormentor, running a saucy eye over her boyish
garb. "And why not with so fair a Rosalind for a subject?" She broke off
to quote in her pretty, uncertain English, acquired at a convent in the
United States, where she had attended school:

 "From the east to western Ind,
  No jewel is like Rosalind.
  Her worth being mounted on the wind,
  Through all the world bears Rosalind.

  All the pictures, fairest lin'd,
  Are but black to Rosalind.
  Let no face be kept in mind
  But the fair of Rosalind."

"So your Shakespeare has it, does he not?" she asked, reverting again to
the Spanish language, in which they had been talking. But swift on the
heels of her raillery came repentance. She caught the dispirited girl to
her embrace laughingly. "No, no, child! Nonsense ripples from my tongue.
These follies are but for a carpet lover. You shall tell me more of your
Senor Bucky and I shall make no sport of it."

When Bucky returned at the expiration of the time he had set himself, he
found them with their arms twined about each other's waists, whispering
the confidences that every girl on the threshold of womanhood has to
tell her dearest friend.

"I reckon you like my pardner better than you do me," smiled Bucky to
Miss Carmencita.

"A great deal better, sir, but then I know him better."

Bucky's eyes rested for a moment almost tenderly on Frances. "I reckon
he is better worth knowing," he said.

"Indeed! And you so brave, and patient, and good?" she mocked.

"Oh! Am I all that?" asked Bucky easily.

"So I have been given to understand."

Out of the corner of his eye O'Connor caught the embarrassed,
reproachful look that Frances gave her audacious friend, and he found it
easy to fit quotation marks round the admirable qualities that had just
been ascribed to him. He guessed himself blushing a deux with his little
friend, and also divined Miss Carmencita's roguish merriment at their
confusion.

"I AM all those things you mentioned and a heap more you forgot to say,"
claimed the ranger boldly, to relieve the situation. "Only I didn't know
for sure that folks had found it out. My mind's a heap easier to know
I'm being appreciated proper at last."

Under her long, dark lashes Miss Carmencita looked at him in gentle
derision. "I'm of opinion, sir, that you get all the appreciation that
is good for you."

Bucky carried the war into the enemy's country. "Which same, I expect,
might be said of Chihuahua's most beautiful belle. And, talking of
Senor Valdez reminds me that I owe a duty to his father, who is confined
here. I'll be saying good night ladies."

"It's high time," agreed Miss Megales. "Talking of Senor Valdez,
indeed!"

"Good night, Curly said."

"Good night, Bucky."

To which, in mocking travesty, added, in English, Miss Carmencita, who
seemed to have an acute attack of Shakespeare:

     "Good night, good night; parting is such sweet sorrow
      That I shall say good night till It be morrow."


CHAPTER 16. JUAN VALDEZ SCORES

The first thing Bucky did after leaving the two young women was to go
down in person with one of the guards to the cell of David Henderson.
The occupant of the cell was asleep, but he woke up when the two men
entered.

"Who is it?" he demanded.

"Webb Mackenzie's man come to release you," answered Bucky.

The prisoner fell to trembling like an aspen. "God, man, do you mean
it?" he begged. "You wouldn't deceive an old man who has lived fifteen
years in hell?"

"It's true, friend, every word of it. You'll live to ride the range
again and count your cattle on the free hillside. Come with me up to the
office and we'll talk more of it."

"But may I? Will they let me?" trembled Henderson, fearful lest his cup
of joy be dashed from him. "I'm not dreaming, am I? I'll not wake the
way I often do and find that it is all a dream, will I?" He caught at
the lapel of O'Connor's coat and searched his face.

"No, your dreams are true at last, Dave Henderson. Come, old friend,
take a drink of this to steady you. It's all coming out right now."

Tears streamed down the face of the man rescued from a living grave. He
dashed them away impatiently with a shaking hand. "I used to be as game
as other men, young man, and now you see what a weakling I am. Don't
judge me too hard. Happiness is a harder thing to stand than pain or
grief. They've tried to break my spirit many a time and they couldn't,
but you've done it now with a word."

"You'll be all right as soon as you are able to realize it. I don't
wonder the shock unnerves you. Have you anything you want to take out of
here with you before you leave forever?"

Pathetically the prisoner looked round on his few belongings. Some of
them had become endeared to him by years of use and association, but
they had served their time. "No, I want to forget it all. I came in with
nothing. I'll take out nothing. I want to blot it all out like a hideous
nightmare."

Bucky ordered Colonel Gabilonda to bring up from his cell General Valdez
and the other arrested suspects. They reached the office at the same
time as Mike O'Halloran, who greeted them with the good news that the
day was won. The Megales faction had melted into mist, and all over the
city a happy people was shouting for Valdez.

"I congratulate you, general. We have just telegraphed the news over the
State that Megales has resigned and fled. There can be no doubt that you
will be elected governor to-morrow and that the people's party will win
the day with an unprecedented vote. Glory be, Chihuahua is at last free
from the heel of tyranny. Viva Valdez! Viva Chihuahua libra!"

Bucky at once introduced to General Valdez the American prisoner who had
suffered so long and unjustly. He recited the story of the abduction of
the child, of Henderson's pursuit, of the killing of the trooper, and of
the circumstantial evidence that implicated the Texan and upon which he
was convicted. He then drew from his pocket a signed and attested copy
of the confession of the knife thrower and handed it to the general.

Valdez looked it over, asked an incisive question or two of Bucky, heard
from Henderson his story, and, after a few moments' discussion of the
matter with O'Halloran, promised a free pardon as his first official act
after being elected to the governorship, in case he should be chosen.

The vote next day amply justified the hopes of O'Halloran and his
friends. The whole ticket, sent out by telegraph and messengers
throughout the State, was triumphantly elected by large majorities.
Only in one or two out-of-the-way places, where the news of the fall
of Megales did not arrive in time to affect the voting, did the old
government party make any showing worthy of consideration.

It was after Valdez's election had been made certain by the returns that
O'Halloran and Juan Valdez posted to the prison and visited father
and daughter. They separated in the lower corridor, one to visit the
defeated governor, the other Miss Carmencita. The problem before Juan
Valdez was to induce that young woman to remain in Chihuahua instead
of accompanying her father in his flight. He was a good fighter, and he
meant to win, if it were a possibility. She had tacitly admitted that
she loved him, but he knew that she felt that loyalty demanded she stay
by her father in his flight.

When O'Halloran was admitted to the cell where the governor and the
general were staying he laughed aloud.

"Faith, gentlemen, is this the best accommodation Governor Valdez can
furnish his guests? We must petition him to improve the sanitation of
his hotel."

"We are being told, one may suppose, that General Valdez is the newly
elected governor?"

"Right, your excellency, elected by a large majority to succeed the late
Governor Megales."

"Late!" The former governor lifted his eyebrows. "Am I also being told
that necessity demands the posting of the suicide bulletin, after all?"

"Not at all. Sure, I gave you me word, excellency. And that is one of
the reasons why I am here. We have arranged to run a special down the
line to-night, in order to avoid the risk of the news leaking out that
you are still here. Can you make your arrangements to take that train,
or will it hurry your packing too much?"

Megales laughed. "I have nothing to take with me except my daughter. The
rest of my possessions may be forwarded later."

"Oh, your daughter! Well, that's pat, too. What about the lad, Valdez?"

"Are you his representative, senor?"

"Oh, he can talk for himself." O'Halloran grinned. "He's doing it right
now, by the same token. Shall we interrupt a tete-a-tete and go pay our
compliments to Miss Carmencita? You will want to find out whether she
goes with you or stays here."

"Assuredly. Anything to escape this cave."

Miss Carmencita was at that moment reiterating her everlasting
determination to go wherever her father went. "If you think, sir,
that your faithlessness to him is a recommendation of your promised
faithfulness to me, I can only wish you more light on the feelings of a
daughter," she was informing Valdez, when her father slipped through the
panel door and stood before her.

"Brava, senorita!" he applauded, with subtle irony, clapping his hands.
"Brava, brava!"

That young woman swam blushingly toward him and let her face disappear
in an embrace.

"You see, one can't have everything, Senor Valdez," continued Megales
lightly. "For me, I cannot have both Chihuahua and my life; you, it
seems, cannot have both your successful revolution and my daughter."

"Your excellency, she loves me. Of that I am assured. It rests with
you to say whether her life will be spoiled or not. You know what I can
offer her in addition to a heart full of devotion. It is enough. Shall
she be sacrificed to her loyalty to you?" the young man demanded, with
all the ardor of his warm-blooded race.

"It is no sacrifice to love and obey my father," came a low murmur from
the former governor's shoulder.

"Since the world began it has been the law of life that the young should
leave their parents for a home of their own," Juan protested.

"So the Scripture says," agreed Megales sardonically. "It further
counsels to love one's enemies, but, I think, omits mention of the
enemies of one's father."

"Sir, I am not your enemy. Political exigencies have thrown us into
different camps, but we are not so small as to let such incidentals come
between us as a vital objection in such a matter."

"You argue like a lawyer," smiled the governor. "You forget that I am
neither judge nor jury. Tyrant I may have been to a fickle people
that needed a firm hand to rule them, but tyrant I am not to my only
daughter."

"Then you consent, your excellency?" cried Valdez joyously.

"I neither consent nor refuse. You must go to a more final authority
than mine for an answer, young man."

"But you are willing she should follow where her heart leads?"

"But certainly."

"Then she is mine," cried Valdez.

"I am not," replied the girl indignantly over her shoulder.

Megales turned her till her unconsenting eyes met his. "Do you want to
marry this young man, Carmencita?"

"I never told him anything of the sort," she flamed.

"I didn't quite ask what you had told him. The question is whether you
love him."

"But no; I love you," she blushed.

"I hope so," smiled her father. "But do you love him? An honest answer,
if you please."

"Could I love a rebel?"

"No Yankee answers, muchacha. Do you love Juan Valdez?"

It was Valdez that broke triumphantly the moment's silence that
followed. "She does. She does. I claim the consent of silence."

But victory spoke too prematurely in his voice. Cried the proud Spanish
girl passionately: "I hate him!"

Megales understood the quality of her hate, and beckoned to his future
son-in-law. "I have some arrangements to make for our journey to-night.
Would it distress you, senor, if I were to leave you for a while?"

He slipped out and left them alone.

"Well?" asked O'Halloran, who had remained in the corridor.

"I think, Senor Dictator, I shall have to make the trip with only
General Carlo for a companion," answered the Spaniard.

The Irishman swung his hat. "Hip, hip, hurrah! You're a gentleman I
could find it in me heart to both love and hate, governor."

"And you're a gentleman," returned the governor, with a bow, "I could
find it in my heart to hang high as Haman without love or hate."

Michael linked his arm in that of his excellency.

"Sure, you're a broth of a lad, Senor Megales," he said irreverently,
in good, broad Irish brogue. "Here, me bye, where are you hurrying?"
he added, catching at the sleeve of Frances Mackenzie, who was slipping
quietly past.

"Please, Mr. O'Halloran, I've been up to the office after water. I'm
taking it to Senorita Carmencita."

"She doesn't want water just now. You go back to the office, son,
and stay there thirty minutes. Then you take her that water," ordered
O'Halloran.

"But she wanted it as soon as I could get it, sir."

"Forget it, kid, just as she has. Water! Why, she's drinking nectar of
the gods. Just you do as I tell ye."

Frances was puzzled, but she obeyed, even though she could not
understand his meaning. She understood better when she slid back the
panel at the expiration of the allotted time and caught a glimpse of
Carmencita Megales in the arms of Juan Valdez.


CHAPTER 17. HIDDEN VALLEY

Across the desert into the hills, where the sun was setting in a great
splash of crimson in the saddle between two distant peaks, a bunch of
cows trailed heavily. Their tongues hung out and they panted for water,
stretching their necks piteously to low now and again. For the heat of
an Arizona summer was on the baked land and in the air that palpitated
above it.

But the end of the journey was at hand and the cowpuncher in charge of
the drive relaxed in the saddle after the easy fashion of the vaquero
when he is under no tension. He did not any longer cast swift, anxious
glances behind him to make sure no pursuit was in sight. For he had
reached safety. He knew the 'Open sesame' to that rock wall which rose
sheer in front of him. Straight for it he and his companion took their
gather, swinging the cattle adroitly round a great slab which concealed
a gateway to the secret canon. Half a mile up this defile lay what was
called Hidden Valley, an inaccessible retreat known only to those who
frequented it for nefarious purposes.

It was as the man in charge circled round to head the lead cows in that
a faint voice carried to him. He stopped, listening. It came again, a
dry, parched call for help that had no hope in it. He wheeled his pony
as on a half dollar, and two minutes later caught sight of an exhausted
figure leaning against a cottonwood. He needed no second guess to
surmise that she was lost and had been wandering over the sandy desert
through the hot day. With a shout, he loped toward her, and had his
water bottle at her lips before she had recovered from her glad surprise
at sight of him.

"You'll feel better now," he soothed. "How long you been lost, ma'am?"

"Since ten this morning. I came with my aunt to gather poppies, and
somehow I got separated from her and the rig. These hills look so alike.
I must have got turned round and mistaken one for another."

"You have to be awful careful here. Some one ought to have told you," he
said indignantly.

"Oh, they told me, but of course I knew best," she replied, with quick
scorn of her own self-sufficiency.

"Well, it's all right now," the cowpuncher told her cheerfully. He would
not for a thousand dollars have told her how near it had come to being
all wrong, how her life had probably depended upon that faint wafted
call of hers.

He put her on his horse and led it forward to the spot where the
cattle waited at the gateway. Not until they came full upon them did he
remember that it was dangerous for strange young women to see him with
those cattle and at the gateway to the Hidden canon.

"They are my uncle's cattle. I could tell the brand anywhere. Are you
one of his riders? Are we close to the Rocking Chair Ranch?" she cried.

He flung a quick glance at her. "Not very close. Are you from the
Rocking Chair?"

"Yes. I'm Mr. Mackenzie's niece."

"Major Mackenzie's daughter?" demanded the man quickly.

"Yes." She said it with a touch of annoyance, for he looked at her as a
man does who has heard of her before. She knew that the story had been
bruited far and wide of how she had passed through the hands of the
train robbers carrying thirty thousand dollars on her person. She had no
doubt that it was in this connection her rescuer had heard of her.

He drew off to one side and called his companion to him.

"Hardman, you ride up to the ranch and tell Leroy I've just found Miss
Mackenzie wandering around on the desert, lost. Ask him whether I'm to
bring her up. She's played out and can't travel far, tell him."

The showman rode on his errand and the other returned to Helen.

"You better light, ma'am. We'll have to wait here a few minutes," he
explained.

He helped her dismount. She did not understand why it was necessary to
wait, but that was his business and not hers. Her roving eyes fell upon
the cattle again.

"They ARE my uncle's, aren't they?"

"They were," he corrected. "Cattle change hands a good deal in this
country," he added dryly.

"Then you're not one of his riders?" Her stark eyes passed over him
swiftly.

"No, ma'am."

"Are we far from the Rocking Chair?"

"A right smart distance. You've been traveling, you see, for eight or
nine hours."

It occurred to her that there was something elusive, something not quite
frank, about the replies of this young man. Her glance raked him again
and swept up the details of his person. One of them that impressed
itself upon her mind was the absence of a finger on his right hand.
Another was that he was a walking arsenal. This startled her, though
she was not yet afraid. She relapsed into silence, to which he seemed
willing to consent. Once and again her glance swept him. He looked a
tough, weather-beaten Westerner, certainly not a man whom a woman need
be afraid to meet alone on the plains, but the oftener she looked the
more certain she became that he was not a casual puncher busy at the
legitimate work of his craft.

"Do you--live near here?" she asked presently.

"I live under my hat, ma'am," he told her.

"Sometimes near here, sometimes not so near."

This told her exactly nothing.

"How far did you say it was to the Rocking Chair?"

"I didn't say."

At the sound of a horses footfall she turned, and she saw that whereas
they had been two, now they were three. The newcomer was a slender,
graceful man, dark and lithe, with quick, piercing eyes, set deep in the
most reckless, sardonic face she had ever seen.

The man bowed, with a sweep of his hat almost derisive. "Miss Mackenzie,
I believe."

She met him with level eyes that confessed no fear.

"Who are you, sir?"

"They call me Wolf Leroy."

Her heart sank. "You and he are the men that held up the Limited.''

"If we are, you are the young lady that beat us out of thirty thousand
dollars. We'll collect now," he told her, with a silky smile and a
glitter of white, even teeth.

"What do you mean? Do you think I carry money about with me?"

"I didn't say that. We'll put it up to your father."

"My father?"

"He'll have to raise thirty thousand dollars to redeem his daughter." He
let his bold eyes show their admiration. "And she's worth every cent of
it."

"Do you mean--" She read the flash of triumph in his ribald eyes and
broke off. There was no need to ask him what he meant.

"That's what I mean exactly, ma'am. You're welcome to the hospitality of
Hidden Valley. What's ours is yours. You're welcome to stay as long
as you like, but I reckon YOU'RE NOT WELCOME TO GO WHENEVER YOU WANT
TO--not till we get that thirty thousand."

"You talk as if he were a millionaire," she told him scornfully.

"The major's got friends that are. If it's a showdown he'll dig the
dough up. I ain't a bit worried about that. His brother, Webb, will come
through."

"Why should he?" She stood as straight and unbending as a young pine,
courage regnant in the very poise of the fine head. "You daren't harm a
hair of my head, and he knows it. For your life, you daren't."

His eyes glittered. Wolf Leroy was never a safe man to fling a challenge
at. "Don't you be too sure of that, my dear. There ain't one thing on
this green earth I daren't do if I set my mind to it. And your friends
know it."

The other man broke in, easy and unmoved. "Hold yore hawses, cap. We
got no call to be threatening this young lady. We keep her for a ransom
because that's business. But she's as safe here as she would be at the
Rocking Chair. She's got York Neil's word for that."

The Wolf snarled. "The word of a miscreant. That'll comfort her a heap.
And York Neil's word don't always go up here."

The cowpuncher's steady eyes met him. "It'll go this time."

The girl gave her champion a quiet little nod and a low "Thank you." It
was not much, but enough. For on the frontier "white men" do not war on
women. Her instinct gave just the right manner of treating his help. It
assumed that since he was what he was he could do no less. Moreover, it
had the unexpected effect of spurring the Wolf's vanity, or something
better than his vanity. She could see the battle in his face, and the
passing of its evil, sinister expression.

"Beg your pardon, Miss Mackenzie. York's right. I'll add my word to his
about your safety. I'm a wolf, they'll tell you. But when I give my word
I keep it."

They turned and followed through the gateway the cattle which Hardman
and another rider were driving up the canon. Presently the walls fell
back, the gulch opened to a saucer-shaped valley in which nestled a
little ranch.

Leroy indicated it with a wave of his hand. "Welcome to Hidden Valley,
Miss Mackenzie," he said cynically.

"Afraid I'm likely to wear my welcome out if you keep me here until my
father raises thirty thousand dollars," she said lightly.

"Don't you worry any about that. We need the refining influences of
ladies' society here. I can see York's a heap improved already. Just to
teach us manners you're worth your board and keep." Then hardily, with a
sweeping gesture toward the weary cattle: "Besides, your uncle has sent
up a contribution to help keep you while you visit with us."

York laughed. "He sent it, but he didn't know he was sending it."

Leroy surrendered his room to Miss Mackenzie and put at her service
the old Mexican woman who cooked for him. She was a silent, taciturn
creature, as wrinkled as leather parchment and about as handsome, but
Alice found safety in the very knowledge of the presence of another
woman in the valley. She was among robbers and cutthroats, but old
Juanita lent at least a touch of domesticity to a situation that would
otherwise have been impossible. The girl was very uneasy in her mind.
A cold dread filled her heart, a fear that was a good deal less
than panic-terror, however. For she trusted the man Neil even as she
distrusted his captain. Miscreant he had let himself be called, and
doubtless was, but she knew no harm could befall her from his companions
while he was alive to prevent it. A reassurance of this came to her
that evening in the fragment of a conversation she overheard. They were
passing her window which she had raised on account of the heat when the
low voices of two men came to her.

"I tell you I'm not going, Leroy. Send Hardman," one said.

"Are you running this outfit, or am I, Neil?"

"You are. But I gave her my word. That's all there's to it."

Alice was aware that they had stopped and were facing each other
tensely.

"Go slow, York. I gave her my word, too. Do you think I'm allowing to
break it while you're away?"

"No, I don't. Look here, Phil. I'm not looking for trouble. You're
major-domo of this outfit What you say goes--except about this girl. I'm
a white man, if I'm a scoundrel."

"And I'm not?"

"I tell you I'm not sayin' that," the other answered doggedly.

"You're hinting it awful loud. I stand for it this time, York, but never
again. You butt in once more and you better reach for your hardware
simultaneous. Stick a pin in that."

They had moved on again, and she did not hear Neil's answer.
Nevertheless, she was comforted to know she had one friend among these
desperate outlaws, and that comfort gave her at least an hour or two of
broken, nappy sleep.

In the morning when she had dressed she found her room door unlocked,
and she stepped outside into the sunshine. York Neil was sitting on the
porch at work on a broken spur strap. Looking up, he nodded a casual
good morning. But she knew why he was there, and gratitude welled up in
her heart. Not a young woman who gave way to every impulse, she yielded
to one now, and shook hands with him. Their eyes met for a moment and he
knew she was thanking him.

An eye derisive witnessed the handshake. "An alliance against the teeth
of the wolf, I'll bet. Good mo'ning, Miss Mackenzie," drawled Leroy.

"Good morning," she answered quietly, her hands behind her.

"Sleep well?"

"Would you expect me to?"

"Why not, with York here doing the virgin-knight act outside your door?"

Her puzzled eyes discovered that Neil's face was one blush of
embarrassment.

"He slept here on the po'ch," explained Leroy, amused. "It's a great
fad, this outdoor sleeping. The doctors recommend it strong for sick
people. You wouldn't think to look at him York was sick. He looks plumb
husky. But looks are right deceptive. It's a fact, Miss Mackenzie, that
he was so sick last night I wasn't dead sure he'd live till mo'ning."

The eyes of the men met like rapiers. Neil said nothing, and Leroy
dropped him from his mind as if he were a trifle and devoted his
attention to Alice.

"Breakfast is ready, Miss Mackenzie. This way, please."

The outlaw led her to the dining room, where the young woman met a
fresh surprise. The table was white with immaculate linen and shone with
silver. She sat down to breakfast food with cream, followed by quail on
toast, bacon and eggs, and really good coffee. Moreover, she discovered
that this terror of the border knew how to handle his knife and fork,
was not deficient in the little niceties of table decorum. He talked,
and talked well, ignoring, like a perfect host, the relation that
existed between them. They sat opposite each other and ate alone, waited
upon by the Mexican woman. Alice wondered if he kept solitary state when
she was not there or ate with the other men.

It was evening before Hardman returned from the mission upon which he
had been sent in place of the obstinate Neil. He reported at once to
Leroy, who came smilingly to the place where she was sitting on the
porch to tell her his news.

"Webb Mackenzie's going to raise that thirty thousand, all right. He's
promised to raise it inside of three days," he told her triumphantly.

"And shall I have to stay here three whole days?"

He looked with half-shut, smoldering eyes at her slender exquisiteness,
compact of a strange charm that was both well-bred and gypsyish. There
was a scarce-veiled passion in his gaze that troubled her. More than
once that day she had caught it.

"Three days ain't so long. I could stand three months of you and wish
for more," he told her.

Lightly she turned the subject, but not without a chill of fear. Three
days was a long time. Much might happen if this wolf slipped the leash
of his civilization.

It was next day that an incident occurred which was to affect the course
of events more than she could guess at the time. A bunch of wild
hill steers had been driven down by Hardman, Reilly, and Neil in the
afternoon and were inclosed in the corral with the cows from the Rocking
Chair Ranch. Just before sunset Leroy, who had been away all day,
returned and sauntered over from the stable to join Alice. It struck the
girl from his flushed appearance that he had been drinking. In his eye
she found a wild devil of lawlessness that set her heart pounding. If
Neil and he clashed now there would be murder done. Of that she felt
sure.

That she set herself to humor the Wolf's whims was no more for her own
safety than for that of the man who had been her friend. She curbed her
fears, clamped down her startled maiden modesty, parried his advances
with light words and gay smiles. Once Neil passed, and his eyes asked
a question. She shook her head, unnoticed by Leroy. She would fight her
own battle as long as she could. It was to divert him that she proposed
they go down to the corral and look at the wild cattle the men had
driven down. She told him she had heard a great deal about them, but had
never seen any. If he would go with her she would like to look at them.

The outlaw was instantly at her service, and they sauntered across. In
her hand the girl carried a closed umbrella she had been using to keep
off the sun.

They stood at the gate of the corral looking at the long-legged, shaggy
creatures, as wild and as active almost as hill deer. On horseback one
could pass to and fro among them without danger, but in a closed corral
a man on foot would have taken a chance. Nobody knew this better than
Leroy. But the liquor was still in his head, and even when sober he was
reckless beyond other men.

"They need water," he said, and with that opened the gate and started
for the windmill.

He sauntered carelessly across, with never a glance at the dangerous
animals among which he was venturing. A great bull pawed the ground
lowered its head, and made a rush at the unconscious man. Alice called
to him to look out, then whipped open the gate and ran after him. Leroy
turned, and, in a flash, saw that which for an instant filled him with a
deadly paralysis. Between him and the bull, directly in the path of its
rush, stood this slender girl, defenseless.

Even as his revolver flashed out from the scabbard the outlaw knew he
was too late to save her, for she stood in such a position that he could
not hit a vital spot. Suddenly her umbrella opened in the face of the
animal. Frightened, it set its feet wide and slithered to a halt so
close to her that its chorus pierced the silk of the umbrella. With one
hand Leroy swept the girl behind him; with the other he pumped three
bullets into the forehead of the bull. Without a groan it keeled over,
dead before it reached the ground.

Alice leaned against the iron support of the windmill. She was so white
that the man expected her to sink down. One glance showed him other
cattle pawing the ground angrily.

"Come!" he ordered, and, putting an arm round her waist, he ran with her
to the gate. Yet a moment, and they were through in safety.

She leaned against him helpless for an instant before she had strength
to disengage herself. "Thank you. I'm all right now."

"I thought you were going to faint," he explained.

She nodded. "I nearly did."

His face was colorless. "You saved my life."

"Then we're quits, for you saved mine," she answered, with a shaken
attempt at a smile.

He shook his head. "That's not the same at all. I had to do that, and
there was no risk to it. But you chose to save me, to risk your life for
mine."

She saw that he was greatly moved, and that his emotion had swept away
the effects of the liquid as a fresh breeze does a fog.

"I didn't know I was risking my life. I saw you didn't see."

"I didn't think there was a woman alive had the pluck to do it--and for
me, your enemy. That what you count me, isn't it--an enemy?"

"I don't know. I can't quite think of you as friend, can I?"

"And yet I would have protected you from any danger at any cost."

"Except the danger of yourself," she said, in low voice, meeting him eye
to eye.

He accepted her correction with a groan, an wheeled away, leaning his
arms on the corral fence and looking away to that saddle between the
peak which still glowed with sunset light.

"I haven't met a woman of your kind before in ten years," he said
presently. "I've lived on you looks, your motions, the inflections
of your voice. I suppose I've been starved for that sort of thing and
didn't know it till you came. It's been like a glimpse of heaven to me."
He laughed bitterly: and went on: "Of course, I had to take to drinking
and let you see the devil I am. When I'm sober you would be as safe with
me as with York. But the excitement of meeting you--I have to ride my
emotions to death so as to drain them to the uttermost. Drink stimulates
the imagination, and I drank."

"I'm sorry."

Her voice said more than the words. He looked at her curiously. "You're
only a girl. What do you know about men of my sort? You have been
wrappered and sheltered all your life. And yet you understand me better
than any of the people I meet. All my life I have fought with myself.
I might have been a gentleman and I'm only a wolf. My appetites and
passions, stronger than myself dragged me down. It was Kismet, the
destiny ordained for me from my birth."

"Isn't there always hope for a man who knows his weaknesses and fights
against them?" she asked timidly.

"No, there is not," came the harsh answer. "Besides, I don't fight. I
yield to mine. Enough of that. It is you we have to consider, not me.
You have saved my life, and I have got to pay the debt."

"I didn't think who you were," her honesty compelled her to say.

"That doesn't matter. You did it. I'm going to take you back to your
father and straight as I can."

Her eyes lit. "Without a ransom?"

"Yes."

"You pay your debts like a gentleman, sir."

"I'm not coyote all through."

She could only ignore the hunger that stared out of his eyes for her.
"What about your friends? Will they let me go?"

"They'll do as I say. What kicking they do will be done mostly in
private, and when they're away from me."

"I don't want to make trouble for you."

"You won't make trouble for me. If there's any trouble it will be for
them," he said grimly.

Neither of them made any motion toward the house. The girl felt a
strange impulse of tenderness toward this man who had traveled so fast
the road to destruction. She had seen before that deep hunger of the
eyes, for she was of the type of woman that holds a strong attraction
for men. It told her that he had looked in the face of his happiness
too late--too late by the many years of a misspent life that had decreed
inexorably the character he could no longer change.

"I am sorry," she said again. "I didn't see that in you at first. I
misjudged you. One can't label men just good or bad, as the novelists
used to. You have taught me that--you and Mr. Neil."

His low, sardonic laughter rippled out. "I'm bad enough. Don't make any
mistake about that, Miss Mackenzie. York's different. He's just a good
man gone wrong. But I'm plain miscreant."

"Oh, no," she protested.

"As bad as they make them, but not wolf clear through," he said again.
"Something's happened to me to-day. It won't change me. I've gone too
far for that. But some morning when you read in the papers that Wolf
Leroy died with his boots on and everybody in sight registers his
opinion of the deceased you'll remember one thing. He wasn't a wolf to
you--not at the last."

"I'll not forget," she said, and the quick tears were in her eyes.

York Neil came toward them from the house. It was plain from his manner
he had a joke up his sleeve.

"You're wanted, Phil," he announced.

"Wanted where?"

"You got a visitor in there," Neil said, with a grin and a jerk of
his thumb toward the house. "Came blundering into the draw sorter
accidental-like, but some curious. So I asked him if he wouldn't light
and stay a while. He thought it over, and figured he would."

"Who is it?" asked Leroy.

"You go and see. I ain't giving away what your Christmas presents are. I
aim to let Santa surprise you a few."

Miss Mackenzie followed the outlaw chief into the house, and over his
shoulder glimpsed two men. One of them was the Irishman, Cork Reilly,
and he sat with a Winchester across his knees. The other had his back
toward them, but he turned as they entered, and nodded casually to
the outlaw. Helen's heart jumped to her throat when she saw it was Val
Collins.

The two men looked at each other steadily in a long silence. Wolf Leroy
was the first to speak.

"You damn fool!" The swarthy face creased to an evil smile of derision.

"I ce'tainly do seem to butt in considerable, Mr. Leroy," admitted
Collins, with an answering smile.

Leroy's square jaw set like a vise. "It won't happen again, Mr.
Sheriff."

"I'd hate to gamble on that heavy," returned Collins easily. Then
he caught sight of the girl's white face, and rose to his feet with
outstretched hand.

"Sit down," snapped out Reilly.

"Oh, that's all right I'm shaking hands with the lady. Did you think I
was inviting you to drill a hole in me, Mr. Reilly?"


CHAPTER 18. A DINNER FOR THREE

"I thought we bumped you off down at Epitaph," Leroy said.

"Along with Scott? Well, no. You see, I'm a regular cat to kill, Mr.
Leroy, and I couldn't conscientiously join the angels with so lame a
story as a game laig to explain my coming," said Collins cheerfully.

"In that case--"

"Yes, I understand. You'd be willing to accommodate with a hole in the
haid instead of one in the laig. But I'll not trouble you."

"What are you doing here? Didn't I warn you to attend to your own
business and leave me alone?"

"Seems to me you did load me up with some good advice, but I plumb
forgot to follow it."

The Wolf cursed under his breath. "You came here at your own risk,
then?"

"Well, I did and I didn't," corrected the sheriff easily. "I've got a
five-thousand policy in the Southeastern Life Insurance Company, so I
reckon it's some risk to them. And, by the way, it's a company I can
recommend."

"Does it insure against suicide?" asked Leroy, his masked, smiling face
veiling thinly a ruthless purpose.

"And against hanging. Let me strongly urge you to take out a policy at
once," came the prompt retort.

"You think it necessary?"

"Quite. When you and York Neil and Hardman made an end of Scott you
threw ropes round your own necks. Any locoed tenderfoot would know
that."

The sheriff's unflinching look met the outlaw's black frown serene and
clear-eyed.

"And would he know that you had committed suicide when you ran this
place down and came here?" asked Leroy, with silken cruelty.

"Well, he ought to know it. The fact is, Mr. Leroy, that it hadn't
penetrated my think-tank that this was your hacienda when I came
mavericking in."

"Just out riding for your health?"

"Not exactly. I was looking for Miss Mackenzie. I cut her trail about
six miles from the Rocking Chair and followed it where she wandered
around. The trail led directly away from the ranch toward the mountains.
That didn't make me any easy in my mind. So I just jogged along and
elected myself an investigating committee. I arrived some late, but here
I am, right side up--and so hearty welcome that my friend Cork won't
hear of my leaving at all. He don't do a thing but entertain me--never
lets his attention wander. Oh, I'm the welcome guest, all right. No
doubt about that."

Wolf Leroy turned to Alice. "I think you had better go to your room," he
said gently.

"Oh, no, no; let me stay," she implored. "You would never--you would
never--" The words died on her white lips, but the horror in her eyes
finished the question.

He met her gaze fully, and answered her doggedly. "You're not in this,
Miss Mackenzie. It's between him and me. I shan't allow even you to
interfere."

"But--oh, it is horrible! for two minutes."

He shook his head.

"You must! Please."

"What use?"

Let me see you alone

Her troubled gaze shifted to the strong, brown, sun-baked face of the
man who had put himself in this deadly peril to save her. His keen,
blue-gray eyes, very searching and steady, met hers with a courage
she thought splendid, and her heart cried out passionately against the
sacrifice.

"You shall not do it. Oh, please let me talk it over with you."

"No."

"Have you forgotten already?--and you said you would always remember."
She almost whispered it.

She had stung his consent at last. "Very well," he said, and opened the
door to let her pass into the inner room.

But she noticed that his eyes were hard as jade.

"Don't you see that he came here to save me?" she cried, when they were
alone. "Don't you see it was for me? He didn't come to spy out your
place of hiding."

"I see that he has found it. If I let him go, he will bring back a posse
to take us."

"You could ride across the line into Mexico."

"I could, but I won't."

"But why?"

"Because, Miss Mackenzie, the money we took from the express car of the
Limited is hidden here, and I don't know where it is; because the sun
won't ever rise on a day when Val Collins will drive me out of Arizona."

"I don't know what you mean about the money, but you must let him go.
You spoke of a service I had done you. This is my pay."

"To turn him loose to hunt us down?"

"He'll not trouble you if you let him go."

A sardonic smile touched his face. "A lot you know of him. He thinks it
his duty to rid the earth of vermin like us. He'd never let up till he
got us or we got him. Well, we've got him now, good and plenty. He took
his chances, didn't he? It isn't as if he didn't know what he was up
against. He'll tell you himself it's a square deal. He's game, and he
won't squeal because we win and he has to pay forfeit."

The girl wrung her hands despairingly.

"It's his life or mine--and not only mine, but my men's," continued the
outlaw. "Would you turn a wolf loose from your sheep pen to lead the
pack to the kill?"

"But if he were to promise--"

"We're not talking about the ordinary man--he'd promise anything and lie
to-morrow. But Sheriff Collins won't do it. If you think you can twist a
promise out of him not to take advantage of what he has found out you're
guessing wrong. When you think he's a quitter, just look at that cork
hand of his, and remember how come he to get it. He'll take his medicine
proper, but he'll never crawl."

"There must be some way," she cried desperately,

"Since you make a point of it, I'll give him his chance."

"You'll let him go?" The joy in her voice was tremulously plain.

He laughed, leaning carelessly against the mantelshelf. But his narrowed
eyes watched her vigilantly. "I didn't say I would let him go. What I
said was that I'd give him a chance."

"How?"

"They say he's a dead shot. I'm a few with a gun myself. We'll ride
down to the plains together, and find a good lonely spot suitable for
a graveyard. Then one of us will ride away, and the other will stay, or
perhaps both of us will stay."

She shuddered. "No--no--no. I won't have it."

"Afraid something might happen to me, ma'am?" he asked, with a queer
laugh,

"I won't have it."

"Afraid, perhaps, he might be the one left for the coyotes and the
buzzards?"

She was white to the lips, but at his next word the blood came flaming
back to her cheeks.

"Why don't you tell the truth? Why don't you; say you love him, and be
done with it? Say it and I'll take him back to Tucson with you safe as
if he were a baby."

She covered her face with her hands, but with two steps he had reached
her and captured he hands.

"The truth," he demanded, and his eyes compelled.

"It is to save his life?"

He laughed harshly. "Here's melodrama for you! Yes--to save your lover's
life."

She lifted her eyes to his bravely. "What you say is true. I love him."

Leroy bowed ironically. "I congratulate Mr. Collins, who is now quite
safe, so far as I am concerned. Meanwhile, lest he be jealous of your
absence, shall we return now?"

Some word of sympathy for the reckless scamp trembled on her lips, but
her instinct told her would hold it insult added to injury, and she left
her pity unvoiced.

"If you please."

But as he heeled away she laid a timid hand on his arm. He turned and
looked grimly down at the working face, at the sweet, soft, pitiful
eyes brimming with tears. She was pure woman now, all the caste pride
dissolved in yearning pity.

"Oh, you lamb--you precious lamb," he groaned, and clicked his teeth
shut on the poignant pain of his loss.

"I think you're splendid," she told him. "Oh, I know what you've
done--that you are not good. I know you've wasted your life and lived
with your hand against every man's. But I can't help all that. I look
for the good in you, and I find it. Even in your sins you are not petty.
You know how to rise to an opportunity."

This man of contradictions, forever the creature of his impulses, gave
the lie to her last words by signally failing to rise to this one. He
snatched her to him, and looked down hungry-eyed at her sweet beauty, as
fresh and fragrant as the wild rose in the copse.

"Please," she cried, straining from him with shy, frightened eyes.

For answer he kissed her fiercely on the cheeks, and eyes, and mouth.

"The rest are his, but these are mine," he laughed mirthlessly.

Then, flinging her from him, he led the way into the next room. Flushed
and disheveled, she followed. He had outraged her maiden instincts and
trampled down her traditions of caste, but she had no time to think of
this now.

"If you're through explaining the mechanism of that Winchester to
Sheriff Collins we'll reluctantly dispense with your presence, Mr.
Reilly. We have arranged a temporary treaty of peace," the chief outlaw
said.

Reilly, a huge lout of a fellow with a lowering countenance, ventured
to expostulate. "Ye want to be careful of him. He's quicker'n chain
lightning."

His chief exploded with low-voiced fury. "When I ask your advice, give
it, you fat-brained son of a brand blotter. Until then padlock that
mouth of yours. Vamos."

Reilly vanished, his face a picture of impotent malice, and Leroy
continued:

"We're going to the Rocking Chair in the morning, Mr. Collins--at
least, you and Miss Mackenzie are going there. I'm going part way. We've
arranged a little deal all by our lones, subject to your approval. You
get away without that hole in your head. Miss Mackenzie goes with you,
and I get in return the papers you took off Scott and Webster."

"You mean I am to give up the hunt?" asked Collins.

"Not at all. I'll be glad to death to see you blundering in again when
Miss Mackenzie isn't here to beg you off. The point is that in exchange
for your freedom and Miss Mackenzie's I get those papers you left in a
safety-deposit vault in Epitaph. It'll save me the trouble of sticking
up the First National and winging a few indiscreet citizens of that
burgh. Savvy?"

"That's all you ask?" demanded the surprised sheriff.

"All I ask is to get those papers in my hand and a four-hour start
before you begin the hunt. Is it a deal?"

"It's a deal, but I give it to you straight that I'll be after you as
soon as the four hours are up," returned Collins promptly. "I don't know
what magic Miss Mackenzie used. Still, I must compliment her on getting
us out mighty easy."

But though the sheriff looked smilingly at Alice, that young woman,
usually mistress of herself in all emergencies, did not lift her eyes
to meet his. Indeed, he thought her strangely embarrassed. She was as
flushed and tongue-tied as a country girl in unaccustomed company. She
seemed another woman than the self-possessed young beauty he had met a
month before on the Limited, but he found her shy abashment charming.

"I guess you thought you had come to the end of the passage, Mr.
Collins," suggested the outlaw, with listless curiosity.

"I didn't know whether to order the flowers or not, but 'way down in my
heart I was backing my luck," Collins told him.

"Of course it's understood that you are on parole until we separate,"
said Leroy curtly.

"Of course."

"Then we'll have supper at once, for we'll have to be on the road
early." He clapped his hands together, and the Mexican woman appeared.
Her master flung out a command or two in her own language.

"--poco tiempo,--" she answered, and disappeared.

In a surprisingly short time the meal was ready, set out on a table
white with Irish linen and winking with cut glass and silver.

"Mr. Leroy does not believe at all in doing when in Rome as the Romans
do," Alice explained to Collins, in answer to his start of amazement.
"He's a regular Aladdin. I shouldn't be a bit surprised to see electric
lights come on next."

"One has to attempt sometimes to blot out the forsaken desert," said
Leroy. "Try this cut of slow elk, Miss Mackenzie. I think you'll like
it."

"Slow elk! What is that?" asked the girl, to make talk.

"Mr. Collins will tell you," smiled Leroy.

She turned to the sheriff, who first apologized, with a smile, to his
host. "Slow elk, Miss Mackenzie, is veal that has been rustled. I expect
Mr. Leroy has pressed a stray calf into our Service."

"I see," she flashed. "Pressed veal."

The outlaw smiled at her ready wit, and took on himself the burden of
further explanation. "And this particular slow elk comes from a ranch on
the Aravaipa owned by Mr. Collins. York shot it up in the hills a day or
two ago."

"Shouldn't have been straying so far from its range," suggested Collins,
with a laugh. "But it's good veal, even if I say it that shouldn't."

"Thank you," burlesqued the bandit gravely, with such an ironic touch of
convention that Alice smiled.

After dinner Leroy produced cigars, and with the permission of Miss
Mackenzie the two men smoked while the conversation ran on a topic as
impersonal as literature. A criticism of novels and plays written to
illustrate the frontier was the line into which the discussion fell, and
the girl from the city, listening with a vivid interest, was pleased to
find that these two real men talked with point and a sense of dexterous
turns. She felt a sort of proud proprietorship in their power, and
wished that some of the tailors' models she had met in society, who held
so good a conceit of themselves, might come under the spell of their
strong, tolerant virility. Whatever the difference between them, it
might be truly said of both that they had lived at first hand and come
in touch closely with all the elemental realities. One of them was
a romantic villain and the other an unromantic hero, but her pulsing
emotions morally condemned one no more than the other.

This was the sheer delight of her esthetic sense of fitness, that strong
men engaged in a finish fight could rise to so perfect a courtesy that
an outsider could not have guessed the antagonism that ran between them,
enduring as life.

Leroy gave the signal for breaking up by looking at his watch. "Afraid I
must say 'Lights out.' It's past eleven. We'll have to be up and on
our way with the hooters. Sleep well, Miss Mackenzie. You don't need to
worry about waking. I'll have you called in good time. Buenos noches."

He held the door for her as she passed out; and, in passing, her eyes
rose to meet his.

"--Buenos noches, senor;--I'm sure I shall sleep well to-night," she
said.

It had been the day of Alice Mackenzie' life. Emotions and sensations,
surging through her, had trodden on each other's heels. Woman-like, she
welcomed the darkness to analyze and classify the turbid chaos of her
mind. She had been swept into sympathy with an outlaw, to give him no
worse name. She had felt herself nearer to him than to some honest men
she could name who had offered her their love.

Surely, that had been bad enough, but worse was to follow. This
discerning scamp had torn aside her veils of maiden reserve and exposed
the secret fancy of her heart, unknown before even to herself. She had
confessed love for this big-hearted sheriff and frontiersman. Here
she could plead an ulterior motive. To save his life any deception was
permissible. Yes, but where lay the truth? With that insistent demand of
the outlaw had rushed over her a sudden wave of joy. What could it mean
unless it meant what she would not admit that it could mean? Why, the
man was impossible. He was not of her class. She had scarce seen him a
half-dozen times. Her first meeting with him had been only a month ago.
One month ago--

A remembrance flashed through her that brought her from the bed in a
barefoot search for matches. When the candle was relit he slipped a
chamoisskin pouch from her neck and from it took a sealed envelope. It
was the note in which the sheriff on the night of the train robbery had
written his prediction of how the matter would come out. She was to open
the envelope in a month, and the month was up to-night.

As she tore open the flap it came to her with one of her little flashing
smiles that she could never have guessed under what circumstances she
would read it. By the dim flame of a guttering candle, in a cotton
nightgown borrowed from a Mexican menial, a prisoner of the very man who
had robbed her and the recipient of a practical confession of love
from him not three hours earlier! Surely here was a situation to beggar
romance. But before she had finished reading the reality was still more
unbelievable.

I have just met for the first time the woman I am going to marry if God
is good to one. I am writing this because I want her to know it as soon
as I decently can. Of course, I am not worthy of her, but then I don't
know any man that is.

So the fact goes--I'm bound to marry her if there's nobody else in the
way. This isn't conceit. It is a deep-seated certainty I can't get away
from, and don't want to. When she reads this, she will think it a piece
of foolish presumption. My hope is she will not always think so. Her
Lover,

VAL COLLINS.

Her swift-pulsing heart was behaving very queerly. It seemed to hang
delightfully still, and then jump forward with odd little beats of
joy. She caught a glimpse of her happy face, and blew out the light for
shame, groping her way back to bed with the letter carefully guarded
against crumpling by her hand.

Foolish presumption indeed. Why, he had only seen her once, and he said
he would marry her with never a by-your-leave! Wasn't that what he had
said? She had to strike another match to learn the lines that had not
stuck word for word in her mind, and after that another match to get a
picture of the scrawl to visualize in the dark.

How dared he take her for granted? But what a masterly way of wooing for
the right man! What idiotic folly if he had been the wrong one! Was he,
then, the right one? She questioned herself closely, but came to no more
definite answer than this--that her heart went glad with a sweet joy to
know he wanted to marry her.

She resolved to put him from her mind, and in this resolve she fell at
last into smiling sleep.


CHAPTER 19. A VILLON OF THE DESERT

When Alice Mackenzie looked back in after years upon the incidents
connected with that ride to the Rocking Chair, it was always with a kind
of glorified pride in her villain-hero. He had his moments, had this
twentieth-century Villon, when he represented not unworthily the
divinity in man; and this day held more than one of them. Since he was
what he was, it also held as many of his black moods.

The start was delayed, owing to a cause Leroy had not foreseen. When
York went, sleepy-eyed, to the corral to saddle the ponies, he found the
bars into the pasture let clown, and the whole remunda kicking up its
heels in a paddock large as a goodsized city. The result was that it
took two hours to run up the bunch of ponies and another half-hour to
cut out, rope, and saddle the three that were wanted. Throughout the
process Reilly sat on the fence and scowled.

Leroy, making an end of slapping on and cinching the last saddle,
wheeled suddenly on the Irishman. "What's the matter, Reilly?"

"Was I saying anything was the matter?"

"You've been looking it right hard. Ain't you man enough to say it
instead of playing dirty little three-for-a-cent tricks--like letting
down the corral-bars?"

Reilly flung a look at Neil that plainly demanded support, and then
descended with truculent defiance from the fence.

"Who says I let down the bars? You bet I am man enough to say what I
think; and if ye think I ain't got the nerve--"

His master encouraged him with ironic derision. "That's right, Reilly.
Who's afraid? Cough it up and show York you're game."

"By thunder, I AM game. I've got a kick coming, sorr."

"Yes?" Leroy rolled and lit a cigarette, his black eyes fixed intently
on the malcontent. "Well, register it on the jump. I've got to be off."

"That's the point." The curly-headed Neil had lounged up to his
comrade's support. "Why have you got to be off? We don't savvy your
game, cap."

"Perhaps you would like to be major-domo of this outfit, Neil?" scoffed
his chief, eying him scornfully.

"No, sir. I ain't aimin' for no such thing. But we don't like the
way things are shaping. What does all this here funny business mean,
anyhow?" His thumb jerked toward Collins, already mounted and waiting
for Leroy to join him. "Two days ago this world wasn't big enough to
hold him and you. Well, I git the drop on him, and then you begin to
cotton up to him right away. Big dinner last night--champagne corks
popping, I hear. What I want to know is what it means. And here's this
Miss Mackenzie. She's good for a big ransom, but I don't see it ambling
our way. It looks darned funny."

"That's the ticket, York," derided Leroy. "Come again. Turn your wolf
loose."

"Oh! I ain't afraid to say what I think."

"I see you're not. You should try stump-speaking, my friend. There's a
field fox you there."

"I'm asking you a question, Mr. Leroy."

"That's whatever," chipped in Reilly.

"Put a name to it."

"Well, I want to know what's the game, and where we come in."

"Think you're getting the double-cross?" asked Leroy pleasantly, his
vigilant eyes covering them like a weapon.

"Now you're shouting. That's what I'd like right well to know. There he
sits"--with another thumbjerk at Collins--"and I'm a Chink if he ain't
carryin' them same two guns I took offen him, one on the train and one
here the other day. I ain't sayin' it ain't all right, cap. But what I
do say is--how about it?"

Leroy did some thinking out loud. "Of course I might tell you boys to go
to the devil. That's my right, because you chose me to run this outfit
without any advice from the rest of you. But you're such infants, I
reckon I had better explain. You're always worrying those fat brains of
yours with suspicions. After we stuck up the Limited you couldn't trust
me to take care of the swag. Reilly here had to cook up a fool scheme
for us all to hide it blindfold together. I told you straight what would
happen, and it did. When Scott crossed the divide we were in a Jim Dandy
of a hole. We had to have that paper of his to find the boodle. Then
Hardman gets caught, and coughs up his little recipe for helping to find
hidden treasure. Who gets them both? Mr. Sheriff Collins, of course.
Then he comes visiting us. Not being a fool, he leaves the documents
behind in a safety-deposit vault. Unless I can fix up a deal with him,
Mr. Reilly's wise play buncoes us and himself out of thirty thousand
dollars."

"Why don't you let him send for the papers first?"

"Because he won't do it. Threaten nothing! Collins ain't that kind of a
hairpin. He'd tell us to shoot and be damned."

"So you've got it fixed with him?" demanded Neil.

"You've a head like a sheep, York," admired Leroy. "YOU don't need any
brick-wall hints to hit you. As your think-tank has guessed, I have come
to an understanding with Collins."

"But the gyurl--I allow the old major would come down with a right smart
ransom."

"Wrong guess, York. I allow he would come down with a right smart posse
and wipe us off the face of the earth. Collins tells me the major has
sent for a couple of Apache trailers from the reservation. That means
it's up to us to hike for Sonora. The only point is whether we take that
buried money with us or leave it here. If I make a deal with Collins,
we get it. If I don't, it's somebody else's gold-mine. Anything more the
committee of investigation would like to know?" concluded Leroy, as his
cold eyes raked them scornfully and came to rest on Reilly.

"Not for mine," said Neil, with an apologetic laugh. "I'm satisfied. I
just wanted to know. And I guess Cork corroborates."

Reilly growled something under his breath, and turned to hulk away.

"One moment. You'll listen to me, now. You have taken the liberty to
assume I was going to sell you out. I'll not stand that from any man
alive. To-morrow night I'll get back from Tucson. We'll dig up the loot
and divide it. And right then we quit company. You go your way and I
go mine." And with that as a parting shot, Leroy turned on his heel and
went direct to his horse.

Alice Mackenzie might have searched the West with a fine-tooth comb and
not found elsewhere two such riders for an escort as fenced her that
day. Physically they were a pair of superb animals, each perfect after
his fashion. If the fair-haired giant, with his lean, broad shoulders
and rippling flow of muscles, bulked more strikingly in a display of
sheer strength, the sinewy, tigerish grace of the dark Apollo left
nothing to be desired to the eye. Both of them had been brought up in
the saddle, and each was fit to the minute for any emergency likely to
appear.

But on this pleasant morning no test of their power seemed likely to
arise, and she could study them at her ease without hindrance. She had
never seen Leroy look more the vagabond enthroned. For dress, he wore
the common equipment of Cattleland--jingling spurs, fringed chaps,
leather cuffs, gray shirt, with kerchief knotted loosely at the neck,
and revolver ready to his hand. But he carried them with an air, an
inimitable grace, that marked him for a prince among his fellows.
Something of the kind she hinted to him in jesting paradoxical fashion,
making an attempt to win from his sardonic gloom one of his quick,
flashing smiles.

He countered by telling her what he had heard York say to Reilly of her.
"She's a princess, Cork," York had said. "Makes my Epitaph gyurl look
like a chromo beside her. Somehow, when she looks at a fellow, he feels
like a whitewashed nigger."

All of them laughed at that, but both Leroy and the sheriff tried to
banter her by insisting that they knew exactly what York meant.

"You can be very splendid when you want to give a man that whitewashed
feeling; he isn't right sure whether he's on the map or not," reproached
the train-robber.

She laughed in the slow, indolent way she had, taking the straw hat from
her dark head to catch better the faint breath of wind that was soughing
across the plains.

"I didn't know I was so terrible. I don't think you ever had any awe of
anybody, Mr. Leroy." Her soft cheek flushed in unexpected memory of that
moment when he had brushed aside all her maiden reserves and ravished
mad kisses from her. "And Mr. Collins is big enough to take care of
himself," she added hastily, to banish the unwelcome recollection.

Collins, with his eyes on the light-shot waves that crowned her vivid
face, wondered whether he was or not. If she had been a woman to desire
in the queenly, half-insolent indifference of manner with which she had
first met him, how much more of charm lay in this piquant gaiety, in the
warm sweetness of her softer and more pliant mood! It seemed to him she
had the gift of comradeship to perfection.

They unsaddled and ate lunch in the shade of the live-oaks at El Dorado
Springs, which used to be a much-frequented watering-hole in the days
when Camp Grant thrived and mule-skinners freighted supplies in to feed
Uncle Sam's pets. Two hours later they stopped again at the edge of the
Santa Cruz wash, two miles from the Rocking Chair Ranch.

It was while they were resaddling that Collins caught sight of a cloud
of dust a mile or two away. He unslung his field-glasses, and looked
long at the approaching dust-swirl. Presently he handed the binoculars
to Leroy.

"Five of them; and that round-bellied Papago pony in front belongs to
Sheriff Forbes, or I'm away wrong."

Leroy lowered the glasses, after a long, unflurried inspection. "Looks
that way to me. Expect I'd better be burning the wind."

In a few sentences he and Collins arranged a meeting for next day up in
the hills. He trailed his spurs through the dust toward Alice Mackenzie,
and offered her his brown hand and wistful smile irresistible. "Good-by.
This is where you get quit of me for good."

"Oh, I hope not," she told him impulsively. "We must always be friends."

He laughed ruefully. "Your father wouldn't indorse those unwise
sentiments, I reckon--and I'd hate to bet your husband would," he added
audaciously, with a glance at Collins. "But I love to hear you say
it, even though we never could be. You're a right game, stanch little
pardner. I'll back that opinion with the lid off."

"You should be a good judge of those qualities. I'm only sorry you don't
always use them in a good cause."

He swung himself to his saddle. "Good-by."

"Good-by--till we meet again."

"And that will be never. So-long, sheriff. Tell Forbes I've got a
particular engagement in the hills, but I'll be right glad to meet him
when he comes."

He rode up the draw and disappeared over the brow of the hillock. She
caught another glimpse of him a minute later on the summit of the hill
beyond. He waved a hand at her, half-turning in his saddle as he rode.

Presently she lost him, but faintly the wind swept back to her a
haunting snatch of uncouth song:

     "Oh, bury me out on the lone prairee,
     In my narrow grave just six by three,"

Were the words drifted to her by the wind. She thought it pathetically
likely he might get the wish of his song.

To Sheriff Forbes, dropping into the draw a few minutes later with his
posse, Collins was a well of misinformation literally true. Yes, he
had followed Miss Mackenzie's trail into the hills and found her at a
mountain ranch-house. She had been there a couple of days, and was about
to set out for the Rocking Chair with the owner of the place, when he
arrived and volunteered to see her as far as her uncle's ranch.

"I reckon there ain't any use asking you if you seen anything of Wolf
Leroy's outfit," said Forbes, a weather-beaten Westerner with a shrewd,
wrinkled face.

"No, I reckon there's no use asking me that," returned Collins, with a
laugh that deceptively seemed to include the older man in the joke.

"We're after them for rustling a bunch of Circle 33 cows. Well, I'll
be moving. Glad you found the lady, Val. She don't look none played out
from her little trek across the desert. Funny, ain't it, how she could
have wandered that far and her afoot?"

The Arizona sun was setting in its accustomed blaze of splendor, when
Val Collins and Alice Mackenzie put their horses again toward the ranch
and the rainbow-hued west. In his contented eyes were reflected the
sunshine and a serenity born of life in the wide, open spaces. They rode
in silence for long, the gentle evening breeze blowing in soughs.

"Did you ever meet a man of such promises gone wrong so utterly? He
might have been anything--and it has come to this, that he is hunted
like a wild beast. I never saw anything so pitiful. I would give
anything to save him."

He had no need to ask to whom she was referring. "Can't be done. Good
qualities bulge out all over him, but they don't count for anything.
'Unstable as water.' That's what's the matter with him. He is the slave
of his own whims. Hence he is only the splendid wreck of a man, full
of all kinds of rich outcropping pay-ore that pinch out when you try to
work them. They don't raise men gamer, but that only makes him a more
dangerous foe to society. Same with his loyalty and his brilliancy. He's
got a haid on him that works like they say old J. E. B. Stuart's did. He
would run into a hundred traps, but somehow he always worked his men out
of them. That's Leroy, too. If he had been an ordinary criminal he
would have been rounded up years ago. It's his audacity, his iron nerve,
his good horse-sense judgment that saves his skin. But he's certainly up
against it at last."

"You think Sheriff Forbes will capture him?"

He laughed. "I think it more likely he'll capture Forbes. But we know
now where he hangs out, and who he is. He has always been a mystery till
now. The mystery is solved, and unless he strikes out for Sonora, Leroy
is as good as a dead man."

"A dead man?"

"Does he strike you as a man likely to be taken alive? I look to see a
dramatic exit to the sound of cracking Winchesters."

"Yes, that would be like him," she confessed with shudder. "I think he
was made to lead a forlorn hope. Pity it won't be one worthy of the best
in him."

"I guess he does have more moments set to music than most of us, and
I'll bet, too, he has hidden way in him a list of 'Thou shalt nots.' I
read a book once by a man named Stevenson that was sure virgin gold. He
showed how every man, no matter how low he falls, has somewhere in him
a light that burns, some rag of honor for which he is still fighting I'd
hate to have to judge Leroy. Some men, I reckon, have to buck against so
much in themselves that even failure is a kind of success for them."

"Yet you will go out to hunt him down?" she' said, marveling at the
broad sympathy of the man.

"Sure I will. My official duty is to look out for society. If something
in the machine breaks loose and goes to ripping things to pieces, the
engineer has to stop the damage, even if he has to smash the rod that's
causing the trouble."

The ponies dropped down again into the bed of the wash, and plowed
across through the heavy sand. After they had reached the solid road,
Collins resumed conversation at a new point.

"It's a month and a day since I first met you Miss Mackenzie," he said,
apparently apropos of nothing.

She felt her blood begin to choke. "Indeed!"

"I gave you a letter to read when I was on the train."

"A letter!" she exclaimed, in well-affected surprise.

"Did you think it was a book of poems? No, ma'am, it was a letter. You
were to read it in a month. Time was up last night. I reckon you read
it."

"Could I read a letter I left at Tucson, when it was a hundred miles
away?" she smiled with sweet patronage.

"Not if you left it at Tucson," he assented, with an answering smile.

"Maybe I DID lose it." She frowned, trying to remember.

"Then I'll have to tell you what was in it."

"Any time will do. I dare say it wasn't important."

"Then we'll say THIS time."

"Don't be stupid, Mr. Collins. I want to talk about our desert Villon."

"I said in that letter--"

She put her pony to a canter, and they galloped side by side in silence
for half a mile. After she had slowed down to a walk, he continued
placidly, as if oblivious of an interruption:

"I said in that letter that I had just met the young lady I was
expecting to marry."

"Dear me, how interesting! Was she in the smoker?"

"No, she was in Section 3 of the Pullman."

"I wish I had happened to go into the other Pullman, but, of course, I
couldn't know the young lady you were interested in was riding there."

"She wasn't."

"But you've just told me--"

"That I said in the letter you took so much trouble to lose that
I expected to marry the young woman passing under the name of Miss
Wainwright."

"Sir!"

"That I expected--"

"Really, I am not deaf, Mr. Collins."

"--expected to marry her, just as soon as she was willing."

"Oh, she is to be given a voice in the matter, is she?"

"Ce'tainly, ma'am."

"And when?"

"Well, I had been thinking now was a right good time."

"It can't be too soon for me," she flashed back, sweeping him with
proud, indignant eyes.

How did he lose his life, unhappy one?

--O bury him deep in the grave, she said, For what is done is done.

This is the pain of love that I have caught, And what is done is
done; A thousand remedies avail me naught, And what is done is done.

For love I gave the honour of my name, And Good and Evil are to me
as one; Let all the world chastise me with its blame, For what is
done is done.

The dust of Taban we could find no more, But yet nor rest nor respite
hath he won; His breath, his soul, floats round thee as before,
And--what is done is done.

TABAN.

XL.

O Lovely One, when to the ravished sight Thou wilt unveil that
radiant face of thine, Each atom of the worlds, catching thy light,
Reflecting thee, bright as a sun shall shine.

Walk not, my flower, within the garden close, Lest thou should give
the bulbul new distress; For at thy glance each blossom turns a
rose To lure him with her cruel loveliness.

Victorious One, thou hast unsheathed thy sword, The scimitar of thy
beauty gleams again, So over all thy lovers thou art Lord, Holding
dominion in the hearts of men.

Art thou serene and calm and unafraid When thou considerest thy
tyranny?

Think of the reckoning that shall be made Between thy heart and mine at
Judgment Day.

WALI.

XLI.

O ask not frigid Piety to dwell In the same house with Youth and warm
Desire; It were as idle as if one should tell Water to be a comrade
of the Fire.It's an all-right business town, too--the
best in the territory," he continued patriotically. "She ain't so great
as Douglas on ore or as Phoenix on lungers, but when it comes, to the
git-up-and-git hustle, she's there rounding up the trade from early morn
till dine."

He was still expatiating in a monologue with grave enthusiasm on the
town of his choice, when they came to the pasture fence of the ranch.

"Some folks don't like it--call it adobe-town, and say it's full of
greasers. Everybody to his taste, I say. Little old Tucson is good
enough for me."

She gave a queer little laugh as he talked. She had put a taboo on his
love story herself, but she resented the perfectly unmoved good humor
with which he seemed to be accepting her verdict. She made up her mind
to punish him, but he gave her no chance. As he helped her to dismount,
he said:

"I'll take the horses round to the stable, Miss Mackenzie. Probably I
won't see you again before I leave, but I'm hoping to meet you again in
Tucson one of these days. Good-by."

She nodded a curt good-by and passed into the house. She was vexed and
indignant, but had too strong a sense of humor not to enjoy a joke even
when it was against herself.

"I forgot to ask him whether he loves me or Tucson more, and as one of
the subjects seems to be closed I'll probably never find out," she told
herself, but with a queer little tug of pain in her laughter.

Next moment she was in the arms of her father.


CHAPTER 20. BACK TO GOD'S COUNTRY

To minimize the risk, Megales and Carlo left the prison by the secret
passage, following the fork to the river bank and digging at the
piled-up sand till they had forced an exit. O'Halloran met them here
with horses, and the three men followed the riverwash beyond the limits
of the town and cut across by a trail to a siding on the Central Mexican
Pacific tracks. The Irishman was careful to take no chances, and kept
his party in the mesquit till the headlight of an approaching train was
visible.

It drew up at the siding, and the three men boarded one of the two cars
which composed it. The coach next the engine was occupied by a dozen
trusted soldiers, who had formerly belonged to the bodyguard of Megales.
The last car was a private one, and in it the three found Henderson,
Bucky O'Connor, and his little friend, the latter still garbed as a boy.

Frances was exceedingly eager to don again the clothes proper to her
sex, and she had promised herself that, once habited as she desired,
nothing could induce her ever to masquerade again. Until she met and
fell in love with the ranger she had thought nothing of it, since it
had been merely a matter of professional business to which she had been
forced. Indeed, she had sometimes enjoyed the humor of the deception.
It had lent a spice o enjoyment to a life not crowded with it. But after
she met Bucky there had grown up in her a new sensitiveness. She wanted
to be womanly, to forget her turbid past and the shifts to which she
had sometimes been put. She had been a child; she was now a woman. She
wanted to be one of whom he need be in no way ashamed.

When their train began to pull out of the depot at Chihuahua she drew a
deep sigh of relief.

"It's good to get away from here back to the States. I'm tired of plots
and counterplots. For the rest of my life I want to be just a woman,"
she said to Bucky.

The young man smiled. "I reckon I must quit trying to make you a
gentleman. Fact is, I don't want you to be one any more."

She slanted a look at him to see what that might mean and another up the
car to make sure that Henderson was out of hearing.

"It was rather hopeless, wasn't it?" she smiled. "We'll do pretty well
if we succeed in making me a lady in course of time. I've a lot to
learn, you know."

"Well, you got lots of time to learn it," he replied cheerfully. "And
I've got a notion tucked away in the back of my haid that you haven't
got such a heap to study up. Mrs. Mackenzie will put you next to the
etiquette wrinkles where you are shy."

A shadow fell on the piquant, eager face beside him. "Do you think she
will love me?"

"I don't think. I know. She can't help it."

"Because she is my mother? Oh, I hope that is true."

"No, not only because she is your mother."

She decided to ask for no more reasons. Henderson, pleased at the wide
stretch of plain as only one who had missed the open air for many years
could be, was on the observation platform in the rear of the car, one
glance at his empty seat showed her. There was no safety for her shyness
in the presence of that proverbial three which makes a crowd, and she
began to feel her heart again in panic as once before. She took at once
the opening she had given.

"I do need a mother so much, after growing up like Topsy all these
years. And mine is the dearest woman in the world. I fell in love with
her before, and I did not know who she was when I was at he ranch."

"I'll agree to the second dearest in the world, but I reckon you shoot
too high when you say the plumb dearest."

"She is. We'll quarrel if you don't agree," trying desperately to divert
him from the topic she knew he meant to pursue. For in the past two
days he had been so busy helping O'Halloran that he had not even had a
glimpse of her. As a consequence of which each felt half-dubious of the
other's love, and Frances felt wholly shy about expressing her own or
even listening to his.

"Well, we're due for a quarrel, I reckon. But we'll postpone it till we
got more time to give it." He drew a watch from his pocket and glanced at
it "In less than fifteen minutes Mike and our two friends who are making
their getaway will come in that door Henderson just went out of. That
means we won't get a chance to be alone together, for about two days.
I've got something to say to you, Curly Haid, that won't keep that long
with out running my temperature clear up. So I'm allowing to say it
right now immediate. No, you don't need to turn them brown appealers on
me. It won't do a mite of good. It's Bucky to the bat and he's bound to
make a hit or strike out."

"I think I hear Mr. Henderson coming," murmured Frances, for lack of
something more effective to say.

"Not him. He's hogtied to the scenery long enough to do my business.
Now, it won't take me long if I get off right foot first. You read my
letter, you said?"

"Which letter?" She was examining attentively the fringe of the sash she
wore.

"Why, honey, that love-letter I wrote you. If there was more than one it
must have been wrote in my sleep, for I ce'tainly disremember it."

He could just hear her confused answer: "Oh, yes, I read that. I told
you that before."

"What did you think? Tell me again."

"I thought you misspelled feelings."

"You don't say. Now, ain't that too bad? But, girl o' mine, I expect
you were able to make it out, even if I did get the letters to milling
around wrong. I meant them feelings all right. Outside of the spelling,
did you have any objections to them,

"How can I remember what you wrote in that letter several days ago?"

"I'll bet you know it by heart, honey, and, if you don't, you'll find it
in your inside vest pocket, tucked away right close to your heart."

"It isn't," she denied, with a blush.

"Sho! Pinned to your shirt then, little pardner. I ain't particular
which. Point is, if you need to refresh that ailin' memory of yours, the
document is--right handy. But you don't need to. It just says one little
sentence over and over again. All you have got to do is to say one
little word, and you don't have to say it but once."

"I don't understand you," her lips voiced.

"You understand me all right. What my letter said was 'I love you,' and
what you have got to say is: 'Yes'."

"But that doesn't mean anything."

"I'll make out the meaning when you say it."

"Do I have to say it?"

"You have to if you feel it."

Slowly the big brown eyes came up to meet his bravely. "Yes, Bucky."

He caught her hands and looked down into her pure, sweet soul.

"I'm in luck," he breathed deeply. "In golden luck to have you look at
me twice. Are you sure?"

"Sure. I loved you that first day I met you. I've loved you every day
since," she confessed simply.

Full on the lips he kissed her.

"Then we'll be married as soon as we reach the Rocking Chair."

"But you once said you didn't want to be my husband," she taunted
sweetly. "Don't you remember? In the days when we were gipsies."

"I've changed my mind. I want to, and I'm in a hurry."

She shook her head. "No, dear. We shall have to wait. It wouldn't be
fair to my mother to lose me just as soon as she finds me. It is her
right to get acquainted with me just as if I belonged to her alone. You
understand what I mean, Bucky. She must not feel as if she never had
found me, as if she never had been first with me. We can love each other
more simply if she doesn't know about you. We'll have it for a secret
for a month or two."

She put her little hand on his arm appealingly to win his consent. His
eyes rested on it curiously, Then he took it in his big brown one and
turned it palm up. Its delicacy and perfect finish moved him, for it
seemed to him that in the contrast between the two hands he saw in
miniature the difference of sex. His showed strength and competency and
the roughness that comes of the struggle of life. But hers was strangely
tender and confiding, compact of the qualities that go to make up the
strength of the weak. Surely he deserved the worst if he was not good to
her, a shield and buckler against the storms that must beat against them
in the great adventure they were soon to begin together.

Reverently he raised the little hand and kissed its palm.

"Sure, sweetheart I had forgotten about your mother's claim. We can
wait, I reckon," he added with a smile. "You must always set me straight
when I lose the trail of what's right, Curly Haid. You are to be a
guiding-star to me."

"And you to me. Oh, Bucky, isn't it good?"

He kissed her again hurriedly, for the train was jarring to a halt.
Before he could answer in words, O'Halloran burst into the coach, at the
head of his little company.

"All serene, Bucky. This is the last scene, and the show went without a
hitch in the performance anywhere."

Bucky smiled at Frances as he answered his enthusiastic friend:

"That's right. Not a hitch anywhere."

"And say, Bucky, who do you think is in the other coach dressed as one
of the guards?"

"Colonel Roosevelt," the ranger guessed promptly.

"Our friend Chaves. He's escaping because he thinks we'll have him
assassinated in revenge," the big Irishman returned gleefully. "You
should have seen his color, me bye, when he caught sight of me. I asked
him if he'd been reduced to the ranks, and he begged me not to tell you
he was here. Go in and devil him."

Bucky glanced at his lover. "No, I'm so plumb contented I haven't the
heart."