Produced by Nick Hodson of London, England


The Flag of Distress, by Captain Mayne Reid.

________________________________________________________________________
This long and at times very amusing story starts off with the sighting
of a barque under full sail in mid-Pacific, and wearing the Chilian flag
upside down.  For a vessel to wear its ensign inverted is a known sign
of distress, so that the British naval vessel that sights her has to try
to board her, to render assistance.  But the barque is a good sailer,
and does not reduce her sail or heave-to.  She appears to have only two
men on board, rather strangely dressed in reddish fur clothing.

How this strange state of affairs arose takes the whole book to tell.
The captain of the barque and his passenger have been tied so securely
that they cannot move; the crew are no longer on board; the two men in
reddish fur turn out to be orang-outangs.

Reid was an excellent writer, credited with being the first to write in
the Wild-West genre.  This book, with its background of the sea, is out
of his usual line, but it is nevertheless a quite brilliant book.  You
will enjoy the part of the story that takes place on the sea-front of
San Francisco of 1849.

It makes an excellent audiobook, if you can cope with the numerous words
of unusual spelling, to represent the speech of illiterate seamen, and
the Spanish words.  The latter are also to be found in Reid's Wild-West
novels.  For some reason Reid often uses a few French phrases, but that
was not unusual at the time he wrote.

________________________________________________________________________
THE FLAG OF DISTRESS, BY CAPTAIN MAYNE REID.


CHAPTER ONE.

A CHASE.

In mid-ocean--the Pacific.  Two ships within sight of one another, less
than a league apart.  Both sailing before the wind, running dead down it
with full canvas spread--not side by side, but one in the wake of the
other.

Is it a chase?  To all appearance, yes; a probability strengthened by
the relative size and character of the vessels.  One is a barque,
polacca-masted, her masts raking back with the acute shark's-fin set
supposed to be characteristic of piratical craft.  The other is a ship,
square-rigged and full sized; a row of real, not painted, ports, with a
gun grinning out of each, proclaiming her a man-of-war.

She is one--a frigate, as any seaman would say, after giving her a
glance.  And any landsman might name her nationality.  The flag at her
peak is one known all over the world: it is the ensign of England.

If it be a chase, she is the pursuer.  Her colours might be accepted as
surety of this, without regard to the relative position of the vessels;
which show the frigate astern, the polacca leading.

The latter also carries a flag--of nationality not so easily determined.
Still it is the ensign of a naval power, though one of little note.
The five-pointed white star, solitary in a blue field, proclaims it the
standard of Chili.

Why should an English frigate be chasing a Chilian barque?  There is no
war between Great Britain and this, the most prosperous of the South
American republics; instead, peace-treaties, with relations of the most
amicable kind.  Were the polacca showing colours blood-red, or black,
with death's-head and cross-bones, the chase would be intelligible.  But
the bit of bunting at her masthead has nothing on its field either of
menace or defiance.  On the contrary, it appeals to pity, and asks for
aid; for it is an ensign reversed--in short, a _signal of distress_.

And yet the craft so signalling is on the scud before a stiff breeze,
with all sail set, stays taut, not a rope out of place!

Strange this.  So is it considered by every one aboard the man-of-war,
from the captain commanding to the latest joined "lubber of a
landsman"--a thought that has been in their minds ever since the chase
commenced.

For it _is_ a chase: that is, the frigate has sighted a sail, and stood
towards it.  This without changing course; as, when first espied, the
stranger, like herself, was running before the wind.  If slowly, the
pursuer has, nevertheless, been gradually forging nearer the pursued;
till at length the telescope tells the latter to be a barque--at the
same time revealing her ensign reversed.

Nothing strange in this, of itself; unfortunately, a sight too common at
sea.  But that a vessel displaying signals of distress should be
carrying all sail, and running away, or attempting to do so, from
another making to relieve her--above all, from a ship bearing the
British flag--this _is_ strange.  And just thus has the polacca been
behaving--still is; sailing on down the wind, without slacking
haulyards, or lessening her spread of canvas by a single inch!

Certainly the thing seems odd.  More than that--mysterious.

To this conclusion have they come on board the warship.  And, naturally
enough; for there is that which has imbued their thoughts with a tinge
of superstition.

In addition to what they see, they have something _heard_.  Within the
week they have spoken two vessels, both of which reported this same
barque, or one answering her description: "_Polacca-masted, all sail
set, ensign reversed_."

A British brig, which the frigate's boat had boarded, said: That such a
craft had run across her bows, so close they could have thrown a rope to
her; that at first no one was observed on board; but on her being
hailed, two men made appearance, both springing up to the main-shrouds;
thence answering the hail in a language altogether unintelligible, and
with hoarse croaking voices that resembled the barking of muzzled
mastiffs!

It was late twilight, almost night, when this occurred; but the brig's
people could make out the figures of the men, as these clung on to the
ratlines.  And what seemed as surprising as their odd speech was, that
both appeared to be clothed in skin-dresses, covering their bodies from
head to foot!

Seeing the signal of distress, the brig's commander would have sent a
boat aboard; but the barque gave no chance for this--keeping on without
slacking sail, or showing any other sign of a wish to communicate!

Standing by itself, the tale of the brig's crew might have been taken
for a sailor's yarn; and as they admitted it to be "almost night," the
obscurity would account for the skin-clothing.  But coupled with the
report of another vessel, which the frigate had afterwards spoken--a
whaler--it seemed to receive full corroboration.  The words sent through
the whaler's trumpet were:--

"_Barque sighted, latitude 10 degrees 22 minutes South, longitude 95
degrees West.  Polacca-masted.  All sail set.  Ensign reversed.
Chilian.  Men seen on board covered with red hair, supposed
skin-dresses.  Tried to come up, but could not.  Barque a fast sailer--
went away down wind_."

Already in receipt of such intelligence, it is no wonder that the
frigate's crew feel something more than mere curiosity about a vessel
corresponding to the one of which these queer accounts have been given.
For they are now near enough the barque to see that she answers the
description: "Polacca-masted--all sail set--ensign reversed--Chilian."

And her behaviour is as reported: sailing away from those who would
respond to her appealing signal, to all appearance endeavouring to shun
them!

Only now has the chase in reality commenced.  Hitherto the frigate was
but keeping her own course.  But the signal of distress, just sighted
through the telescope, has drawn her on; and with canvas crowded, she
steers straight for the polacca.

The latter is unquestionably a fast sailer; but although too swift for
the brig and whaler, she is no match for the man-of-war.  Still she
makes quick way, and the chase is likely to be a long one.

As it continues, and the distance does not appear very much, or very
rapidly, diminishing, the frigate's people begin to doubt whether she
will ever be overtaken.  On the fore-deck the tars stand in groups,
mingled with marines, their eyes bent upon the retreating craft, making
their comments in muttered tones, many of the men with brows o'ercast.
For a fancy has sprung up around the forecastle, that the chased barque
is no barque at all, but a _phantom_!  This is gradually growing into a
belief; firmer as they draw nearer, and with naked eye note her
correspondence with the reports of the spoken vessels.

They have not yet seen the skin-clad men--if men they be.  More like,
imagine some, they will prove _spectres_!

While on the quarterdeck there is no such superstitious thought, a
feeling almost as intense agitates the minds of those there assembled.
The captain, surrounded by his officers, stands glass in hand gazing at
the sail ahead.  The frigate, though a fine sailer, is not one of the
very fastest, else she might long ago have lapped upon the polacca.
Still has she been gradually gaining, and is now less than a league
astern.

But the breeze has been also declining, which is against her; and for
the last half-hour she has barely preserved her distance from the
barque.

To compensate for this, she runs out studding-sails on all her yards,
even to the royals; and again makes an effort to bring the chase to a
termination.  But again to suffer disappointment.

"To no purpose, now," says her commander, seeing his last sail set.
Then adding, as he casts a glance at the sky, sternwards, "The wind's
going down.  In ten minutes more we'll be becalmed."

Those around need not be told this.  The youngest reefer there, looking
at sky and sea, can forecast a calm.

In five minutes after, the frigate's sails go flapping against the
masts, and her flag hangs half-folded.

In five more, the canvas only shows motion by an occasional clout; while
the bunting droops dead downward.

Within the ten, as her captain predicted, the huge warship lies
motionless on the sea--its surface around her smooth as a swan-pond.


CHAPTER TWO.

A CALL FOR BOARDERS.

The frigate is becalmed--what of the barque?  Has she been similarly
stayed in her course?

The question is asked by all on board the warship, each seeking the
answer for himself.  For all are earnestly gazing at the strange vessel
regardless of their own condition.

Forward, the superstitious thought has become intensified into something
like fear.  A calm coming on so suddenly, just when they had hopes of
overhauling the chase!  What could that mean?  Old sailors shake their
heads, refusing to make answer; while young ones, less cautious of
speech, boldly pronounce the polacca to be a spectre!

The legends of the _Phantom Ship_ and _Flying Dutchman_ are in their
thoughts, and on their lips, as they stand straining their eyes after
the still receding vessel; for beyond doubt she is yet moving on with
waves rippling around her!

"As I told ye, mates," remarks an old tar, "we'd never catch up with
that craft--not if we stood after her till doomsday.  And doomsday it
might be for us, if we did."

"I hope she'll hold her course, and leave us a good spell behind,"
rejoins a second.  "It was a foolish thing followin' her; for my part,
I'll be glad if we never do catch up with her."

"You need have no fear about it," says the first speaker.  "Just look!
She's making way yet!  I believe she can sail as well without a wind as
with one."

Scarce are the words spoken, when, as if to contradict them, the sails
of the chased vessel commence clouting against the masts; while her flag
falls folded, and is no longer distinguishable either as signal of
distress, or any other.  The breeze that failed the frigate is also now
dead around the barque, which, in like manner, has been caught in the
calm.

"What do you make her out, Mr Black?" asks the frigate's captain of his
first, as the two stand looking through their levelled glasses.

"Not anything, sir," replies the lieutenant; "except that she should be
Chilian from her colours.  I can't see a soul aboard of her.  Ah,
yonder!  Something shows over the taffrail!  Looks like a man's head!
It's down again--ducked suddenly."

A short silence succeeds, the commanding officer, busied with his
binocular, endeavouring to catch sight of the thing seen by his
subordinate.  It does not appear again.

"Odd!" says the captain, resuming speech; "a ship running up signals of
distress, at the same time refusing to be relieved!  Very odd, isn't it,
gentlemen?" he asks, addressing himself to the group of officers now
gathered around; who all signify assent to his interrogatory.

"There must be something amiss," he continues.  "Can any of you think
what it is?"

To this there is a negative response.  They are as much puzzled as
himself--mystified by the strange barque, and more by her strange
behaviour.

There are two, however, who have thoughts different from the rest--the
third lieutenant, and one of the midshipmen.  Less thoughts than
imaginings; and these so vague, that neither communicates them to the
captain, nor to one another.  And whatever their fancies, they do not
appear pleasant ones; since on the faces of both is an expression of
something like anxiety.  Slight and little observable, it is not noticed
by their comrades standing around.  But it seems to deepen, while they
continue to gaze at the becalmed barque, as though due to something
there observed.  Still they remain silent, keeping the dark thought, if
such it be, to themselves.

"Well, gentlemen," says the commanding officer to his assembled
subordinates, "I must say this _is_ singular.  In all my experience at
sea, I don't remember anything like it.  What trick the Chilian barque--
if she be Chilian--is up to, I can't guess; not for the life of me.  It
cannot be a case of piracy.  The craft has no guns; and if she had, she
appears without men to handle them.  It's a riddle all round; to get the
reading of which, we'll have to send a boat to her."

"I don't think we'll get a very willing crew, sir," says the first
lieutenant jestingly.  "Forward, they're quite superstitious about the
character of the stranger.  Some of them fancy her the _Flying
Dutchman_.  When the boatswain pipes for boarders, they'll feel as if
his whistle were a signal for them to walk the plank."

The remark causes the captain to smile, as also the other officers;
though two of the latter abstain from such cheerful demonstration--the
third lieutenant and midshipman, already mentioned, on both of whose
brows the cloud still sits, seeming darker than ever.

"It's a very remarkable thing," observes the commander, musingly, "how
that sort of feeling still affects the forecastle!  For your genuine
British tar, who'll board an enemy's ship, crawling across the muzzle of
a shotted gun, and has no fear of death in human shape, will act like a
scared child when it threatens him in the guise of his Satanic majesty!
I have no doubt, as you say, Mr Black, that our lads forward are a bit
shy about boarding yonder vessel.  Let me show you how to send their
shyness adrift.  I'll do that with a single word!"

The captain steps forward, his subordinates following him.  When within
speaking distance of the fore-deck, he stops, and makes sign he has
something to say.  The tars are all attention.

"Men!" he exclaims, "you see that barque we've been chasing; and at her
masthead a flag reversed--which you know to be a signal of distress?
That is a call never to be disregarded by an English ship, much less an
English man-of-war.  Lieutenant! order a boat lowered, and the boatswain
to pipe for boarders.  Those of you who wish to go, muster on the
main-deck."

A loud "hurrah!" responds to the appeal; and, while its echoes are still
resounding through the ship, the whole crew comes crowding towards the
main-deck.  Scores of volunteers present themselves, enough to man every
boat in the frigate.

"So, gentlemen!" says the captain, turning to his officers with a proud
expression on his countenance, "there's the British sailor for you.
I've said he fears not man.  And, when humanity makes call, as you see,
neither is he frightened at ghost or devil!"

A second cheer succeeds the speech, mingled with good-humoured remarks,
though not much laughter.  The sailors simply acknowledge the compliment
their commanding officer has paid them, at the same time feeling that
the moment is too solemn for merriment; for their instinct of humanity
is yet under control of the weird feeling.

As the captain turns aft to the quarter, many of them fall away toward
the fore-deck, till the group of volunteers becomes greatly diminished.
Still there are enough to man the largest boat in the frigate, or fight
any crew the chased craft may carry, though these should prove to be
pirates of the most desperate kind.


CHAPTER THREE.

FORECASTLE FEARS.

"What boat is it to be, sir?"

This question is asked by the first lieutenant, who has followed the
captain to the quarter.

"The cutter," replies his superior; "there seems no need, Mr Black, to
send anything larger, at least till we get word of what's wanted.
Possibly it's a case of sickness--scurvy or something.  Though that
would be odd too, seeing how the barque keeps her canvas spread.  Very
queer altogether!"

"Is the doctor to go?"

"He needn't, till we've heard what it is.  He'd only have to come back
for his drugs and instruments.  You may instruct him to be getting them
ready.  Meanwhile, let the boat be off, and quick.  When they bring back
their report we'll see what's to be done.  The cutter's crew will be
quite sufficient.  As to any hostility from those on board the stranger,
that's absurd.  We could blow her out of the water with a single
broadside."

"Who's to command the boat, sir?"

The captain reflects, with a look cast inquiringly around.  His eye
falls upon the third lieutenant, who stands near, seemingly courting the
glance.

It is short and decisive.  The captain knows his third officer to be a
thorough seaman; though young, capable of any duty, however delicate or
dangerous.  Without further hesitation he assigns him to the command of
the cutter.

The young officer enters upon the service with alacrity--as if moved by
something more than the mere obedience due to discipline.  He hastens to
the ship's side to superintend the lowering of the boat.  Nor does he
stand at rest, but is seen to help and hurry it, with a look of restless
impatience in his eye, and the shadow still observable on his brow.

While thus occupied, he is accosted by another officer, one yet younger
than himself--the midshipman already mentioned.

"Can I go with you?" the latter asks, as if addressing an equal.

"Certainly, my dear fellow," responds the lieutenant, in like familiar
tone.  "I shall be only too pleased to have you.  But you must get the
captain's consent."

The young reefer glides aft, sees the frigate's commander upon the
quarterdeck, and saluting, says:

"Captain, may I go with the cutter?"

"Well, yes," responds the chief; "I have no objection."  Then, after
taking a survey of the youngster, he adds, "Why do you wish it?"

The youth blushes, without replying.  There is a cast upon his
countenance that strikes the questioner, somewhat puzzling him.  But
there is no time either for further inquiry or reflection.  The cutter
has been lowered, and rests upon the water.  Her crew is crowding into
her; and she will soon be moving off from the ship.

"You can go, lad," assents the captain.  "Report yourself to the third
lieutenant, and tell him I have given you leave.  You're young, and,
like all youngsters, ambitious of gaining glory.  Well; in this affair
you won't have much chance.  I take it.  It's simply boarding a ship in
distress, where you're more likely to be a spectator to scenes of
suffering.  However, that will be a lesson for you; therefore you can
go."

Thus authorised, the mid hurries away from the quarterdeck, drops down
into the boat, and takes seat alongside the lieutenant, already there.

"Shove off!" commands the latter; and with a push of boat-hook, and
plashing of oars, the cutter parts from the ship's side, cleaving the
water like a knife.

The two vessels still lie becalmed, in the same relative position to one
another, having changed from it scarce a cable's length.  And stem to
stern, just as the last breath of the breeze, blowing gently against
their sails, forsook them.

On both, the canvas is still spread, though not bellied.  It hangs limp
and loose, giving an occasional flap, so feeble as to show that this
proceeds not from any stir in the air, but the mere balancing motion of
the vessels.  For there is now not enough breeze blowing to flout the
long feathers in the tail of the Tropic bird, seen soaring aloft.

Both are motionless; their forms reflected in the water, as if each had
its counterpart underneath, keel to keel.

Between them, the sea is smooth as a mirror--that tranquil calm which
has given to the Pacific its distinctive appellation.  It is now only
disturbed, where furrowed by the keel of the cutter, with her stroke of
ten oars, five on each side.  Parting from the frigate's beam, she is
steering straight for the becalmed barque.

On board the man-of-war all stand watching her--their eyes at intervals
directed towards the strange vessel.  From the frigate's forward-deck,
the men have an unobstructed view, especially those clustering around
the head.  Still there is nearly a league between, and with the naked
eye this hinders minute observation.  They can but see the white-spread
sails, and the black hull underneath them.  With a glass the flag, now
fallen, is just distinguishable from the mast along which it clings
closely.  They can perceive that its colour is crimson above, with blue
and white underneath--the reversed order of the Chilian ensign.  Its
single star is no longer visible, nor aught of that heraldry, which
spoke so appealingly.  But if what they see fails to furnish them with
details, these are amply supplied by their excited imaginations.  Some
of them can make out men aboard the barque--scores, hundreds!  After
all, she may be a pirate, and the upside-down ensign a decoy.  On a
tack, she might be a swifter sailer than she has shown herself before
wind; and, knowing this, has been but "playing possum" with the frigate.
If so, God help the cutter's crew?

Besides these conjectures of the common kind, there are those on the
frigate's fore-deck who, in very truth, fancy the polacca to be a
spectre.  As they continue gazing, now at the boat, now at the barque,
they expect every moment to see the one sink beneath the sea; and the
other sail off, or melt into invisible air!  On the quarter, speculation
is equally rife, though running in a different channel.  There the
captain still stands surrounded by his officers, each with glass to his
eye, levelled upon the strange craft.  But they can perceive nought to
give them a clue to her character; only the loose flapping sails, and
the furled flag of distress.

They continue gazing till the cutter is close to the barque's beam.  For
then do they observe any head above the bulwarks, or face peering
through the shrouds!

The fancy of the forecastle seems to have crept aft among the officers.
They, too, begin to feel something of superstitious fear--an awe of the
uncanny!


CHAPTER FOUR.

THE CUTTER'S CREW.

Manned by ten stout tars, and as many oars propelling her, the cutter
continues her course with celerity.  The lieutenant, seated in the
stern-sheets, with the midshipman by his side, directs the movements of
the boat; while the glances of both are kept constantly upon the barque.
In their eyes is an earnest expression--quite different from that of
ordinary interrogation.

The men may not observe it; if they do, it is without comprehension of
its meaning.  They can but think of it as resembling their own, and
proceeding from a like cause.  For although with backs turned towards
the barque, they cast occasional glances over their shoulders, in which
curiosity is less observable than apprehension.

Despite their natural courage, strengthened by the late appeal to their
humanity, the awe is strong upon them.  Insidiously returning as they
took their seats in the boat, it increases as they draw farther from the
frigate and nearer to the barque.  Less than half-an-hour has elapsed,
and they are now within a cable's length of the strange vessel.

"Hold!" commands the lieutenant.

The oar-stroke is instantly suspended, and the blades held aloft.  The
boat gradually loses way, and at length rests stationary on the tranquil
water.

All eyes are bent upon the barque; glances go searchingly along her
bulwarks, from poop to prow.

No preparations to receive them!  No one appears on deck--not a head
raised over the rail!

"Barque ahoy!" hails the lieutenant.

"Barque ahoy!" is heard in fainter tone; but not in answer.  Only the
echo of the officer's voice, coming back from the hollow timbers of the
becalmed vessel!  There is again silence, more profound then ever.  For
the sailors in the boat have ceased talking; their awe, now intense,
holding them speechless and as if spellbound!

"Barque ahoy!" again shouted the lieutenant, louder than before, but
with like result.  As before, he is only answered by echo.  There is
either nobody on board, or no one who thinks it worth while to make
rejoinder.

The first supposition seems absurd, looking at the sails; the second
equally so, regarding the flag at the main-royal masthead, and taking
into account its character.

A third hail from the officer, this time vociferated in loudest voice,
with the interrogatory added:

"Any one aboard there?"

To the question no reply, any more than to the hail.

Silence continues--stillness profound, awe-inspiring.  They in the boat
begin to doubt the evidence of their senses.  Is there a barque before
their eyes?  Or is it all an illusion?  How can a vessel be under sail--
full sail--without sailors?  And if any, why do they not show at her
side?  Why have they not answered the hail thrice given; the last time
loud enough to be heard within the depths of her hold?  It should have
awakened her crew, even though all were asleep in the forecastle!

"Give way again!" cries the lieutenant.  "Bring up on the starboard
side, coxswain!  Under the forechains."

The oars are dipped, and the cutter moves on.  But scarce is she in
motion, when once more the officer commands "Hold!"

With his voice mingle others, coming from the barque.  Her people seem
at length to have become aroused from their sleep, or stupor.  A noise
is heard upon her deck, as of a scuffle, accompanied by cries of strange
intonation.

Presently two heads, apparently human, show above the bulwarks; two
faces flesh-coloured, and thinly covered with hair!  Then two bodies
appear, also human-like, save that they are hairy all over--the hair of
a foxy red!  They swarm up the shrouds; and clutching the ratlines shake
them, with quick violent jerks; at the same time uttering what appears
angry speech in an unknown tongue, and harsh voice, as if chiding off
the intruders.  They go but a short way up the shrouds, just as far as
they could spring from the deck, and only stay there for an instant;
then dropping down again, disappear as abruptly and unceremoniously as
they had presented themselves!

The lieutenant's command to "Hold!" was a word thrown away.  Without it
the men would have discontinued their stroke.  They have done so: and
sit with bated breath, eyes strained, ears listening, and lips mute, as
if all had been suddenly and simultaneously struck dumb.  Silence
throughout the boat--silence aboard the barque--silence everywhere: the
only sound heard being the "drip-drop" of the water as it falls from the
feathered oar-blades.

For a time the cutter's crew remains mute, not one essaying to speak a
word.  They are silent, less from surprise than sheer stark terror.
Fear is depicted on their faces and observable in their attitudes, as no
wonder it should.  What they have just seen is sufficient to terrify the
stoutest hearts--even those of tried tars, as all of them are.  A ship
manned by hairy men--a crew of veritable Orsons!  Certainly enough to
startle the most phlegmatic mariner, and make him tremble as he tugs at
his oar.  But they have ceased tugging at their oars, and hold them,
blades suspended.  Almost the same is their breath.  One alone, at
length, musters sufficient courage to mutter:

"Gracious goodness, shipmates! what can it all mean?"

He receives no answer, though his question brings the silence to an end.
It is now further broken by the voice of the lieutenant, as also that
of the midshipman.  They do not speak simultaneously, but one after the
other.  The superstitious fear pervading the minds of the men does not
extend to them.  They too have their fears, but of a different kind, and
from a different cause.  As yet neither has communicated to the other
what he himself has been thinking; the thoughts of both being hitherto
vague, though every moment becoming more defined.  And the appearance of
the red men upon the ratlines--strange to the sailors--seems to have
made things more intelligible to them.  Judging by the expression upon
their faces, they comprehend what is puzzling their companions.  And
with a sense of anxiety more than fear--more of doubt than dismay.

The lieutenant speaks first, shouting in command:

"Give way!  Quick!  Pull in!  Head on for the forechains!"

He acts in an excited manner, appearing nervously impatient.  And, as if
mechanically, the midshipman repeats the order, imitating the mien of
his superior.  The men execute it, but slowly, and with seeming
reluctance.  They know their officers to be daring fellows, both.  But
now they deem them rash, even to recklessness.  For they cannot
comprehend the motives urging them to action.  Still they obey; and the
prow of the boat strikes the barque abeam.

"Grapple on!" commands the senior officer soon as touching.

A boat-hook takes grip in the chains; and the cutter, swinging round,
lies at rest alongside.

The lieutenant has already risen to his feet, as also the mid.  Ordering
only the coxswain to follow, they spring to the chains, lay hold, and
lift themselves aloft.

Obedient to orders, the men remain in the boat, still keeping seat on
the thwarts, in wonder at the bold bearing of their officers--at the
same time admiring it.


CHAPTER FIVE.

A FEAST UNFINISHED.

Having gained the bulwarks, the two officers, balancing themselves on
the rail, look down over the decks of the polacca.  Their glances sweep
these forward, aft, and amidships--ranging from stem to stern, and back
again.

Nothing seen there to explain the strangeness of affairs; nothing heard.
No sailor on the fore-deck, nor officer on the quarter!  Only the two
queer creatures that had shown themselves on the shrouds.  These are
still visible, one of them standing by the mainmast, the other crouching
near the caboose.  Both again give out their jabbering speech,
accompanying it with gestures of menace.

Disregarding this, the lieutenant leaps down upon the deck, and makes
towards them; the mid and coxswain keeping close after.

At their approach, the hirsute monsters retreat; not scared-like, but
with a show of defiance, as if disposed to contest possession of the
place.  They give back, however, bit by bit, till at length, ceasing to
dispute, they shuffle off over the quarter, and on to the poop.

Neither of the two officers pays any attention to their demonstrations;
and the movement aft is not made for them.  Both lieutenant and
midshipman seem excited by other thoughts--some strong impulse urging
them on.  Alone is the coxswain mystified by the hairy men, and not a
little alarmed; but, without speaking, he follows his superiors.

All continue on toward the quarterdeck, making for the cabin-door.
Having boarded the barque by the forechains, they must pass the caboose
going aft.  Its sliding panel is open, and when opposite, the three come
to a stand.  They are brought to it by a faint cry, issuing out of the
cook's quarters.

Looking in, they behold a spectacle sufficiently singular to detain
them.  It is more than singular--it is startling.  On the bench, in
front of the galley-fire--which shows as if long-extinguished--sits a
man, bolt upright, his back against the bulkhead.  Is it a man, or but
the semblance of one?  Certainly it is a human figure; or, speaking more
precisely, a human skeleton with the skin still on; this black as the
coal-cinders in the grate in front of it!

It is a man--a negro.  And living; since at sight of them he betrays
motion, and makes an attempt to speak.

Only the coxswain stays to listen, or hear what he has to say.  The
others hurry on aft, making direct for the cabin, which, being between
decks, is approached by a stairway.

Reaching this, they rush down, and stand before the door, which they
find shut.  Only closed, not locked.  It yields to the turning of the
handle; and, opening, gives them admission.

They enter hastily, one after the other, without ceremony or
announcement.  Once inside, they as quickly come to a stop, both looking
aghast.  The spectacle in the caboose was nought to what is now before
their eyes.  That was but startling; this is appalling.

It is the main-cabin they have entered; not a large one, for the polacca
has not been constructed to carry passengers.  Still is it snug, and
roomy enough for a table six feet by four.  Such a one stands in the
centre, its legs fixed in the floor, with four chairs around it,
similarly stanchioned.

On the table there are decanters and dishes, alongside glasses and
plates.  It is a dessert service, and on the dishes are fruits, cakes,
and sweetmeats, with fragments of the same on the plates.  The decanters
contain wines of different sorts; and there are indications of wine
having been poured out into the glasses--some of them still containing
it.  There are four sets, corresponding to the four chairs; and, to all
appearance, this number of guests have been seated at the table.  But
two of the chairs are empty, as if those who occupied them had retired
to an inner state-room.  It is the side-seats that are vacant, and a fan
lying on one, with a scarf over the back of that opposite, proclaim
their last occupants to have been ladies.

Two guests are still at the table; one at its head, the other at the
foot, facing each other.  And such guests!  Both are men, though, unlike
him in the caboose, they are white men.  But, like him, they also appear
in the extreme of emaciation: jaws with the skin drawn tightly over
them, cheekbones prominent, chin protruding, eyes sunken in their
sockets!

Not dead neither; for their eyes, glancing and glaring, still show life.
Caprice determines their particular kinds and qualities. And good fortune
frequently contributes to all this, by discovering the effects that result
from the different mixtures and combinations of bodies. It is absurd,
therefore, to imagine, that each of these was foreseen and provided
for by nature, and that every new production of art, which causes pride
or humility; instead of adapting itself to the passion by partaking
of some general quality, that naturally operates on the mind; is
itself the object of an original principle, which till then lay
concealed in the soul, and is only by accident at last brought to
light.

Thus the first mechanic, that invented a fine scritoire, produced
pride in him, who became possest of it, by principles different
from those, which made him proud of handsome chairs and tables.

As this appears evidently ridiculous, we must conclude, that each cause
of pride and humility is not adapted to the passions by a distinct
original quality; but that there are some one or more circumstances common
to all of them, on which their efficacy depends.

Besides, we find in the course of nature, that though the effects be many,
the principles, from which they arise, are commonly but few and
simple, and that it is the sign of an unskilful naturalist to have
recourse to a different quality, in order to explain every different
operation.

How much more must this be true with regard to the human mind, which
being so confined a subject may justly be thought incapable of containing
such a monstrous heap of principles, as wou d be necessary to excite the
passions of pride and humility, were each distinct cause adapted
to the passion by a distinct set of principles?

Here, therefore, moral philosophy is in the same condition as
natural, with regard to astronomy before the time of COPERNICUS.

The antients, though sensible of that maxim, THAT NATURE DOES NOTHING
IN VAIN, contrived such intricate systems of the heavens, as seemed
inconsistent with true philosophy, and gave place at last to something
more simple and natural.

To invent without scruple a new principle to every new phaenomenon,
instead of adapting it to the old; to overload our hypotheses with
a variety of this kind; are certain proofs, that none of these
principles is the just one, and that we only desire, by a number
of falsehoods, to cover our ignorance of the truth.

SECT.

IV OF THE RELATIONS OF IMPRESSIONS AND IDEAS

Thus we have established two truths without any obstacle or difficulty,
that IT IS FROM NATURAL PRINCIPLES THIS VARIETY OF CAUSES EXCITES
PRIDE AND HUMILITY, and that IT IS NOT BY A DIFFERENT PRINCIPLE
EACH DIFFERENT CAUSE IS ADAPTED TO ITS PASSION.

We shall now proceed to enquire how we may reduce these
principles to a lesser number, and find among the causes something
common, on which their influence depends.

In order to this we must reflect on certain properties of human nature,
which though they have a mighty influence on every operation both
of the understanding and passions, are not commonly much insisted on by
philosophers. The first of these is the association of ideas, which
I have so often observed and explained. It is impossible for the mind to
fix itself steadily upon one idea for any considerable time; nor
can it by its utmost efforts ever arrive at such a constancy.

But however changeable our thoughts may be, they are not entirely
without rule and method in their changes. The rule, by which they
proceed, is to pass from one object to what is resembling, contiguous
to, or produced by it.

When one idea is present to the imagination, any other, united by
these relations, naturally follows it, and enters with more facility
by means of that introduction.

The second property I shall observe in the human mind is a like association
of impressions.

All resembling impressions are connected together, and no sooner one
arises than the rest immediately follow.
Grief and disappointment give rise to anger, anger to envy, envy to malice,
and malice to grief again, till the whole circle be compleated.
In like manner our temper, when elevated with joy, naturally throws
itself into love, generosity, pity, courage, pride, and the other
resembling affections.

It is difficult for the mind, when actuated by any passion, to confine
itself to that passion alone, without any change or variation. Human
nature is too inconstant to admit of any such regularity. Changeableness
is essential to it. And to what can it so naturally change as to
affections or emotions, which are suitable to the temper, and agree
with that set of passions, which then prevail? It is evident, then,
there is an attraction or association among impressions, as well
as among ideas; though with this remarkable difference, that ideas
are associated by resemblance, contiguity, and causation; and
impressions only by resemblance.

In the THIRD place, it is observable of these two kinds of association,
that they very much assist and forward each other, and that the transition
is more easily made where they both concur in the same object.
Thus a man, who, by any injury from another, is very much discomposed
and ruffled in his temper, is apt to find a hundred subjects of
discontent, impatience, fear, and other uneasy passions; especially
if he can discover these subjects in or near the person, who was
the cause of his first passion.

Those principles, which forward the transition of ideas, here concur
with those, which operate on the passions; and both uniting in one
action, bestow on the mind a double impulse. The new passion, therefore,
must arise with so much greater violence, and the transition to it
must be rendered so much more easy and natural.

Upon this occasion I may cite the authority of an elegant writer, who
expresses himself in the following manner.

"As the fancy delights in every thing that is great, strange, or beautiful,
and is still more pleased the more it finds of these perfections in
the same object, so it is capable of receiving a new satisfaction by the
assistance of another sense. Thus any continued sound, as the music
of birds, or a fall of waters, awakens every moment the mind of
the beholder, and makes him more attentive to the several beauties
of the place, that lie before him.

Thus if there arises a fragrancy of smells or perfumes, they heighten
the pleasure of the imagination, and make even the colours and
verdure of the landschape appear more agreeable; for the ideas of both
senses recommend each other, and are pleasanter together than when
they enter the mind separately: As the different colours of a
picture, when they are well disposed, set off one another, and
receive an additional beauty from the advantage of the situation."

[Addison, SPECTATOR 412, final paragraph.]
In this phaenomenon we may remark the association both of impressions
and ideas, as well as the mutual assistance they lend each other.

SECT. V OF THE INFLUENCE OF THESE RELATIONS ON PRIDE AND HUMILITY

These principles being established on unquestionable experience, I
begin to consider how we shall apply them, by revolving over all
the causes of pride and humility, whether these causes be regarded,
as the qualities, that operate, or as the subjects, on which the
qualities are placed.

In examining these qualities I immediately find many of them to concur
in producing the sensation of pain and pleasure, independent of those
affections, which I here endeavour to explain. Thus the beauty
of our person, of itself, and by its very appearance, gives pleasure,
as well as pride; and its deformity, pain as well as humility.

A magnificent feast delights us, and a sordid one displeases. What I
discover to be true in some instances, I suppose to be so in all; and
take it for granted at present, without any farther proof, that
every cause of pride, by its peculiar qualities, produces a separate
pleasure, and of humility a separate uneasiness.

Again, in considering the subjects, to which these qualities adhere,
I make a new supposition, which also appears probable from many
obvious instances, viz, that these subjects are either parts of
ourselves, or something nearly related to us.

Thus the good and bad qualities of our actions and manners constitute
virtue and vice, and determine our personal character, than which
nothing operates more strongly on these passions.

In like manner, it is the beauty or deformity of our person, houses,
equipage, or furniture, by which we are rendered either vain or
humble.

The same qualities, when transfered to subjects, which bear us no
relation, influence not in the smallest degree either of these
affections.

Having thus in a manner supposed two properties of the causes of these
affections, viz, that the qualities produce a separate pain or pleasure,
and that the subjects, on which the qualities are placed, are related
to self; I proceed to examine the passions themselves, in order to
find something in them, correspondent to the supposed properties
of their causes.

First, I find, that the peculiar object of pride and humility is
determined by an original and natural instinct, and that it is
absolutely impossible, from the primary constitution of the mind,
that these passions should ever look beyond self, or that individual
person. of whose actions and sentiments each of us is intimately
conscious.

Here at last the view always rests, when we are actuated by either of
these passions; nor can we, in that situation of mind, ever lose
sight of this object.

For this I pretend not to give any reason; but consider such a
peculiar direction of the thought as an original quality.

The SECOND quality, which I discover in these passions, and which
I likewise consider an an original quality, is their sensations,
or the peculiar emotions they excite in the soul, and which constitute
their very being and essence.

Thus pride is a pleasant sensation, and humility a painful; and upon
the removal of the pleasure and pain, there is in reality no pride nor
humility. Of this our very feeling convinces us; and beyond our feeling,
it is here in vain to reason or dispute.

If I compare, therefore, these two established properties of the passions,
viz, their object, which is self, and their sensation, which is either
pleasant or painful, to the two supposed properties of the causes,
viz, their relation to self, and their tendency to produce a pain
or pleasure, independent of the passion; I immediately find, that taking
these suppositions to be just, the true system breaks in upon me
with an irresistible evidence.

That cause, which excites the passion, is related to the object, which
nature has attributed to the passion; the sensation, which the cause
separately produces, is related to the sensation of the passion: From
this double relation of ideas and impressions, the passion is derived.
The one idea is easily converted into its correlative; and the one
impression into that, which resembles and corresponds to it: With
how much greater facility must this transition be made, where these
movements mutually assist each other, and the mind receives a double
impulse from the relations both of its impressions and ideas?

That we may comprehend this the better, we must suppose, that nature has
given to the organs of the human mind, a certain disposition fitted to
produce a peculiar impression or emotion, which we call pride: To this
emotion she has assigned a certain idea, viz, that of self, which
it never fails to produce. This contrivance of nature is easily
conceived.
We have many instances of such a situation of affairs. The nerves of
the nose and palate are so disposed, as in certain circumstances to convey
such peculiar sensations to the mind: The sensations of lust and hunger
always produce in us the idea of those peculiar objects, which are
suitable to each appetite. These two circumstances are united in pride.

The organs are so disposed as to produce the passion; and the
passion, after its production, naturally produces a certain idea.

All this needs no proof. It is evident we never should be possest of that
passion, were there not a disposition of mind proper for it; and it is
as evident, that the passion always turns our view to ourselves, and
makes us think of our own qualities and circumstances.

This being fully comprehended, it may now be asked, WHETHER NATURE PRODUCES
THE PASSION IMMEDIATELY, OF HERSELF; OR WHETHER SHE MUST BE ASSISTED
BY THE CO-OPERATION OF OTHER CAUSES?

For it is observable, that in this particular her conduct is different
in the different passions and sensations. The palate must be excited
by an external object, in order to produce any relish: But hunger arises
internally, without the concurrence of any external object. But however
the case may stand with other passions and impressions, it is certain,
that pride requires the assistance of some foreign object, and that
the organs, which produce it, exert not themselves like the heart and
arteries, by an original internal movement. For first, daily experience
convinces us, that pride requires certain causes to excite it, and
languishes when unsupported by some excellency in the character, in bodily
accomplishments, in cloaths, equipage or fortune. SECONDLY, it is evident
pride would be perpetual, if it arose immediately from nature;
since the object is always the same, and there is no disposition
of body peculiar to pride, as there is to thirst and hunger.

Thirdly, Humility is in the very same situation with pride; and therefore,
either must, upon this supposition, be perpetual likewise, or must destroy
the contrary passion from, the very first moment; so that none of
them coued ever make its appearance.

Upon the whole, we may rest satisfyed with the foregoing conclusion,
that pride must have a cause, as well as an object, and that the one
has no influence without the other.

The difficulty, then, is only to discover this cause, and find what it
is that gives the first motion to pride, and sets those organs in
action, which are naturally fitted to produce that emotion.

Upon my consulting experience, in order to resolve this difficulty, I
immediately find a hundred different causes, that produce pride; and upon
examining these causes, I suppose, what at first I perceive to be
probable, that all of them concur in two circumstances; which are,
that of themselves they produce an impression, allyed to the passion, and
are placed on a subject, allyed to the object of the passion.

When I consider after this the nature of relation, and its effects both
on the passions and ideas, I can no longer doubt, upon these
suppositions, that it is the very principle, which gives rise to
pride, and bestows motion on those organs, which being naturally
disposed to produce that affection, require only a first impulse
or beginning to their action.

Any thing, that gives a pleasant sensation, and is related to self, excites
the passion of pride, which is also agreeable, and has self for its
object.

What I have said of pride is equally true of humility. The sensation of
humility is uneasy, as that of pride is agreeable; for which reason
the separate sensation, arising from the causes, must be reversed,
while the relation to self continues the same.

Though pride and humility are directly contrary in their effects, and in
their sensations, they have notwithstanding the same object; so
that it is requisite only to change the relation of impressions,
without making any change upon that of ideas. Accordingly we find, that
a beautiful house, belonging to ourselves, produces pride; and that
the same house, still belonging to ourselves, produces humility, when
by any accident its beauty is changed into deformity, and thereby the
sensation of pleasure, which corresponded to pride, is transformed
into pain, which is related to humility.

The double relation between the ideas and impressions subsists in both
cases, and produces an easy transition from the one emotion to
the other.

In a word, nature has bestowed a kind of attraction on certain impressions
and ideas, by which one of them, upon its appearance, naturally introduces
its correlative.

If these two attractions or associations of impressions and ideas concur
on the same object, they mutually assist each other, and the transition
of the affections and of the imagination is made with the greatest ease
and facility. When an idea produces an impression, related to an
impression, which is connected with an idea, related to the first idea,
these two impressions must be in a manner inseparable, nor
will the one in any case be unattended with the other. It is after
this manner, that the particular causes of pride and humility are
determined. The quality, which operates on the passion, produces
separately an impression resembling it; the subject, to which the
quality adheres, is related to self, the object of the passion: No
wonder the whole cause, consisting of a quality and of a subject,
does so unavoidably give rise to the pass on.

To illustrate this hypothesis. we may compare it to that, by which I
have already explained the belief attending the judgments, which we form
from causation.

I have observed, that in all judgments of this kind, there is
always a present impression. and a related idea; and that the present
impression gives a vivacity to the fancy, and the relation conveys
this vivacity, by an easy transition, to the related idea. Without
the present impression, the attention is not fixed, nor the spirits
excited.

Without the relation, this attention rests on its first object, and has
no farther consequence. There is evidently a great analogy betwixt
that hypothesis. and our present one of an impression and idea, that
transfuse themselves into another impression and idea by means of their
double relation: Which analogy must be allowed to be no despicable
proof of both hypotheses.

SECT. VI LIMITATIONS OF THIS SYSTEM

But before we proceed farther in this subject, and examine particularly
all the causes of pride and humility, it will be proper to make some
limitations to the general system, THAT ALL AGREEABLE OBJECTS, RELATED
TO OURSELVES, BY AN ASSOCIATION OF IDEAS AND OF IMPRESSIONS, PRODUCE
PRIDE, AND DISAGREEABLE ONES, HUMILITY: And these limitations are
derived from the very nature of the subject.

I. Suppose an agreeable object to acquire a relation to self, the first
passion, that appears on this occasion, is joy; and this passion discovers
itself upon a slighter relation than pride and vain-glory. We may feel
joy upon being present at a feast, where our senses are regard
with delicacies of every kind: But it is only the master of the
feast, who, beside the same joy, has the additional passion of
self-applause and vanity.

It is true, men sometimes boast of a great entertainment, at which
they have only been present; and by so small a relation convert their
pleasure into pride: But however, this must in general be owned, that
joy arises from a more inconsiderable relation than vanity, and
that many things, which are too foreign to produce pride, are yet
able to give us a delight and pleasure, The reason of the difference
may be explained thus.

And gold they prove, when submitted to the
test of the alembic.

The son of Helvetia discovered the precious metal in grains, and
nuggets, interspersed with the drift of a fluvial deposit.  They were
not the first found in California, but the first coming under the eyes
of European settlers--men imbued with the energy to collect, and carry
them to the far-off outside world.

Less than two years have elapsed since the digging of Sutter's
mill-race.  Meantime, the specks that scintillated in its ooze have been
transported over the ocean, and exhibited in great cities--in the
windows of brokers, and bullion merchants.  The sight has proved
sufficient to thickly people the banks of the Sacramento--hitherto
sparsely settled--and cover San Francisco Bay with ships from every
quarter of the globe.

Not only is the harbour of Yerba Buena crowded with strange craft, but
its streets with queer characters--adventurers of every race and clime--
among whom may be heard an exchange of tongues, the like never listened
to since the abortive attempt at building the tower of Babel.

The Mexican mud-walled dwellings soon disappear--swallowed up and lost
amidst the modern surrounding of canvas tents, and weather-board houses,
that rise as by magic around them.  A like change takes place in their
occupancy.  No longer the tranquil interiors--the _tertulia_, with
guests sipping aniseed, curacoa, and Canario--munching sweet cakes and
_confituras_.  Instead, the houses inside now ring with boisterous
revelry, with a perfume of mint and Monongahela; and although the guitar
still tinkles, it is almost inaudible amid the louder strains of
clarionet, fiddle, and French horn.

What a change in the traffic of the streets!  No more silent, at certain
hours deserted for the _siesta_, at others trodden by sandalled monks
and shovel-hatted priests--both bold of gaze, when passing the dark-eyed
damsels in high shell-combs and black silk mantillas; bolder still,
saluting the brown-skinned daughters of the aboriginal wrapped in their
blue-grey _rebozos_.  No more trodden by garrison soldiers in uniforms
of French cut and colour; by officers glittering in gold lace; by
townsmen in cloaks of broadcloth; by country gentlemen (haciendados) on
horseback; and herdsmen, or small farmers (rancheros) in their splendid
Californian costume.

True, some of these are still seen, but not as of yore, swaggering and
conspicuous.  Amid the concourse of new-comers they move timidly,
jostled by rough men in red flannel shirts, buckskin and blanket coats,
with pistols in their belts, and knives hanging handy along their hips.
By others equally formidable, in Guernsey frocks, or wearing the
dreadnought jacket of the sailor; not a few scarce clothed at all,
shrouding their nakedness in such rags as remain after a long journey
overland, or a longer voyage by sea.

In all probability, since its beginning, the world never witnessed so
motley an assemblage of men, tramping through the streets of a seaport
town, as those seen in Yerba Buena, rebaptised San Francisco, in the
year of our Lord 1849.

Here, in our own dear Cornwall, the first mole was a lady of the land!
Her abode was in the far west, among the hills of Morwenna, beside the
Severn sea. She was the daughter of a lordly race, the only child of
her mother, and the father of the house was dead. Her name was Alice of
the Lea. Fair was she and comely, tender and tall; and she stood upon
the threshold of her youth. But most of all did men wonder at the glory
of her large blue eyes. They were, to look upon, like the
summer waters, when the sea is soft with light! They were to her mother
a joy, and to the maiden herself--ah!

benedicite--a pride.
She trusted in the loveliness of those eyes, and in her face, and
features, and form: and so it was that the damsel was wont to pass the
summer's day, in the choice of rich apparel, and precious stones,
and gold. Howbeit this was one of the ancient and common customs of
those old departed days. Now, in the fashion of her stateliness, and in
the hue and texture of her garments, there was none among the maidens
of old Cornwall like Alice of the Lea.

Men sought her far and nigh, but she was to them all, like a form
of graven stone, careless and cold.

Her soul was set upon a Granville's love, fair Sir Bevil of Stowe,
the flower of the Cornish chivalry--that noble gentleman!

that valorous knight! He was her star. And well might she wait upon his
eyes; for he was the garland of the west--the loyal soldier of a
sainted king. He was that stately Granville who lived a hero-life, and
died a warrior's death!

Now there was signal made of banquet in the halls of Stowe, of
wassail, and the dance. The messengers had sped, and Alice of the Lea
would be there. Robes, precious and many, were unfolded from their
rest, and the casket poured forth jewel and gem, that the maiden
might stand before the knight victorious! It was the day--the hour--the
time.

Her mother sate by her wheel at the hearth. The page waited in the hall.
She came down in her loveliness into the old oak room, and stood before
the mirrored glass. Her robe was of woven velvet, rich, and glossy,
and soft; jewels shone like stars in the midnight of her raven hair,
and on her hand there gleamed, afar off, a bright and glorious ring!
She {226} stood--she gazed upon her own countenance and form, and
worshipped! "Now all good angels succour thee, dear Alice, and bend Sir
Bevil's soul!
Fain am I to see thee a wedded wife, before I die! I yearn to hold thy
children on my knee! Often shall I pray to-night that the Granville
heart may yield! Thy victory shall be my prayer!"
"Prayer!" was the haughty answer; "with the eyes that I see in that
glass, and this vesture meet for a queen, I lack no doubting
prayer!" 
Saint Mary shield us! Ah words of evil soul!Gold itself cannot
lure them to leave a ship where things are so agreeable; for Captain
Bracebridge does all in his power to make matters pleasant, for men as
well as officers.  He takes care that the former get good grub, and
plenty of it--including full rations of grog.  He permits them to have
amusements among themselves; while the officers treat them to
_tableaux-vivants_, charades, and private theatricals.  To crown all, a
grand ball has been given aboard the ship, in anticipation of her
departure from the port--an event near at hand--at which more than one
of her officers have made acquaintances they would wish to meet again--
two of them desiring this with longings of a special kind.  These last
have fallen in love with a brace of shore damsels, with whom they had
danced, and done a little flirting at the ball.

It is the third day after, and these love-struck gentlemen are standing
upon the poop-deck, conversing about it.  They are apart from their
comrades--purposely, since their speech is confidential.  Both are young
men; the elder, by name Crozier, being a year or two over twenty; while
the younger, Will Cadwallader, is almost as much under it.  Crozier has
passed his term of probationary service, and is now "mate;" while the
other is still but a "midshipmite."  And a type of this last, just as
Marryat would have made him; bright face, light-coloured hair, curling
over cheeks ruddy as the bloom upon a Ribston pippin.  For he is Welsh,
with eyes of that turquoise blue often observed in the descendants of
the Cymri, and hair of aureous hue.

Quite different is Edward Crozier, who hails from an ancestral hall in
the East Riding of York.  His hair, also curling, is dark brown; his
complexion in correspondence.  Moustaches already well grown.  An
acquiline nose and broad jaw-blades denote resolution--a character borne
out by the glance of an eye that shows no quailing.  He is of medium
size, with a figure denoting strength, and capable of great endurance--
in short, carrying out any resolve his mind may make.  In point of
personal appearance he is the superior; though both are handsome
fellows, each in his own style.

And as the styles are different, so are their dispositions--these rather
contrasting.  Crozier is of a serious, sedate turn and, though anything
but morose, rarely given to mirth; while, from the countenance of
Cadwallader the laugh is scarce ever absent, and the dimple on his
cheek--to employ a printer's phrase--appears stereotyped.  With the
young Welshman a joke might be carried to extremes, and he would only
seek his _revanche_ by a lark of like kind.  But with him of Yorkshire,
practical jesting would be dangerous.

Notwithstanding this difference of disposition, the two officers are
fast friends; a fact perhaps due to the dissimilitude of their natures.
When not separated by their respective duties, they keep habitually
together on board the ship, and together go ashore.  And now, for the
first time in the lives of both, they have commenced making love
together.  Fortune has favoured them in this, that they are not in love
with the same lady.  Still further, that their sweethearts do not dwell
apart, but live under the same roof, and belong to one family.  They are
not sisters, for all that; nor yet cousins, though standing in a certain
relationship.  One is the aunt of the other.

Such kinship might argue inequality of age.  There is none, however, or
only a very little: scarce so much as between the young officers
themselves.  The aunt is but a year or so the senior of her niece.  And
as Fate has willed, the lots of the lovers have been cast to correspond
in proper symmetry and proportion.  Crozier is in love with the former--
Cadwallader with the latter.

Their sweethearts are both Spanish, of the purest blood, the boasted
_sangre azul_.  They are, respectively, daughter and grand-daughter of
Don Gregorio Montijo, whose house can be seen from the ship: a mansion
of imposing appearance, in the Mexican _hacienda_ style, set upon the
summit of a hill, at some distance inshore, and southward from the town.

While conversing, the young officers have their eyes upon it--one of the
two assisting his vision with a telescope.  It is Cadwallader who uses
the instrument.

Holding it to his eye, he says:

"I think I can see them, Ned.  At all events, there are two heads on the
house-top, just showing over the parapet.  I'll take odds it's them, the
dear girls.  I wonder if they see us."

"I should say, not likely; unless, as yourself, they're provided with a
telescope."

"By Jove!  I believe they've got one.  I see something glance.  My Inez
has it to her eye, I'll warrant."

"More likely it's my Carmen.  Give me that glass.  For all those blue
eyes you're so proud of, I can sight a sail farther than you."

"A sail, yes; but not a pretty face, Ned.  No, no; you're blind to
beauty; else you'd never have taken on to the old aunt, leaving the
niece to me.  Ha, ha, ha!"

"Old, indeed!  She's as young as yours, if not younger.  One tress of
her bright amber hair is worth a whole head of your sweetheart's black
tangle.  Look at that!"

He draws out such a tress, and unfolding, shakes it tauntingly before
the other's eyes.  In the sun it gleams golden, with a radiance of red;
for it is amber colour, as he has styled it.

"Look at this!" cries Cadwallader, also exhibiting a lock of hair.  "You
thought nobody but yourself could show love-locks.  This to yours, is as
costly silk alongside cheap cotton."

For an instant each stands caressing his particular favours; then both
burst into laughter, as they return them to their places of deposit.

Crozier, in turn taking the telescope, directs it on the house of Don
Gregorio; after a time saying:

"About one thing you're right, Will: those heads are the same from which
we've had our tresses.  Ay, and they're looking this way, through
glasses; perhaps, expecting us soon.  Well; we'll be with them, please
God, before many hours; or it may be minutes.  Then, you'll see how much
superior bright amber is to dull black--anywhere in the world, but
especially in the light of a Californian sun."

"Nowhere, under either sun or moon.  Give me the girl with the
crow-black hair!"

"For me, her whose locks are red gold!"

"Well; _cada uno a su gusto_, as my sweetheart has taught me to say in
her soft Andalusian.  But now, Ned, talking seriously, do you think the
governor will give us leave to go ashore?"

"He must; I know he will."

"How do you know it?"

"Bah! _ma bohil_; as our Irish second would say.  You're the son of a
poor Welsh squire--good blood, I admit.  But I chance to be heir to
twice ten thousand a year, with an uncle in the Admiralty.  I have asked
leave for both of us.  So, don't be uneasy about our getting it.
Captain Bracebridge is no snob; but he knows his own interests, and
won't refuse such fair request.  See!  There he is--coming this way.
Now for his answer--affirmative, you may rely upon it."

"Gentlemen," says the captain, approaching, "you have my permission to
go ashore for the day.  The gig will take you, landing wherever you
wish.  You are to send the boat back, and give the coxswain orders
where, and when, he's to await you on return to the ship.  Take my
advice, and abstain from drink--which might get you into difficulties.
As you know, just now San Francisco is full of all sorts of queer
characters--a very Pandemonium of a place.  For the sake of the service,
and the honour of the uniform you wear, steer clear of scrapes--and
above all, give a wide berth to _women_."

After thus delivering himself, the captain turns on his heel, and
retires--leaving mate and midshipman to their meditations.

They do not meditate long; the desired leave has been granted, and the
order issued for the gig to be got ready.  The boat is in the water, her
crew swarming over the side, and seating themselves upon the thwarts.

The young officers only stay to give a finishing touch to their toilet,
preparatory to appearing before eyes whose critical glances both more
fear than they would the fire of a ship's broadside.

Everything arranged, they drop down the man-ropes and seat themselves in
the stern-sheets; Crozier commanding the men to shove off.

Soon the little gig is gliding over the tranquil waters of San Francisco
Bay; not in the direction of the landing-wharf, but for a projecting
point on the shore, to the south of, and some distance outside, the
suburbs of the town.  For, the beacon towards which they steer is the
house of Don Gregorio Montijo.


CHAPTER TEN.

A PAIR OF SPANISH SENORITAS.

Don Gregorio Montijo is a Spaniard, who, some ten years previous to the
time of which we write, found his way into the Republic of Mexico,
afterwards moving on to "Alta California."  Settling by San Francisco
Bay, he became a _ganadero_, or stock-farmer--the industry in those days
chiefly followed by Californians.

His grazing estate gives proof that he has prospered.  Its territory
extends several miles along the water, and several leagues backward; its
boundary in that direction being the shore of the South Sea itself;
while a thousand head of horses, and ten times the number of horned
cattle, roam over its rich pastures.

His house stands upon the summit of a hill that rises above the bay--a
sort of spur projected from higher ground behind, and trending at right
angles to the beach, where it declines into a low-lying sand-spit.
Across this runs the shore-road, southward from the city to San Jose,
cutting the ridge midway between the walls of the house and the water's
edge, at some three hundred yards distance from each.

The dwelling, a massive quadrangular structure--in that Span-Moriscan
style of architecture imported into New Spain by the _Conquistadores_--
is but a single storey in height, having a flat, terraced roof, and
inner court: this last approached through a grand gate entrance,
centrally set in the front facade, with a double-winged door wide enough
to admit the coach of Sir Charles Grandison.

Around a Californian country-house there's rarely much in the way of
ornamental grounds--even though it be a _hacienda_ of the first-class.
And when the headquarters of a grazing estate, still less; its
inclosures consisting chiefly of "corrals" for the penning and branding
of cattle, these usually erected in the rear of the dwelling.  To this
almost universal nakedness the grounds of Don Gregorio offer some
exception.  He has added a stone fence, which, separating them from the
high road, is penetrated by a portalled entrance, with an avenue that
leads straight up to the house.  This, strewn with snow-white
sea-shells, is flanked on each side by a row of _manzanita_ bushes--a
beautiful indigenous evergreen.  Here and there a clump of California
bays, and some scattered peach-trees, betray an attempt, however slight,
at landscape gardening.

Taking into account the grandeur of his house, and the broad acres
attached to it, one may safely say, that in the New World Don Gregorio
has done well.  And, in truth, so has he--thriven to fulness.  But he
came not empty from the Old, having brought with him sufficient cash to
purchase a large tract of land, as also sufficient of horses and horned
cattle to stock it.  No needy adventurer he, but a gentleman by birth;
one of Biscay's bluest blood--hidalgos since the days of the Cid.

In addition to his ready-money, he also brought with him a wife--
Biscayan as himself--and a daughter, at the time turned eight years old.
His wife has been long ago buried; a tombstone in the cemetery of the
old Dolores Mission commemorating her many virtues.  Since, he has had
an accession to his contracted family circle; the added member being a
grand-daughter, only a year younger than his daughter, but equally well
grown--both having reached the ripest age of girlhood.  It is scarce
necessary to add, that the young ladies, thus standing in the
relationship of aunt and niece, are the two with whom Edward Crozier and
Willie Cadwallader have respectively fallen in love.

And while mate and midshipman are on the way to pay them a promised
visit--for such it is--a word may be said about their personal
appearance.  Though so closely allied, and nearly of an age, in other
respects the two differ so widely, that one unacquainted with the fact
would not suspect the slightest kinship between them.

The aunt, Dona Carmen, is of pure Biscayan blood, both by her father's
and mother's side.  From this she derives her blonde complexion, with
that colour of hair so admired by Mr Crozier; with the blue-grey eyes,
known as "Irish"--the Basques and Celts being a kindred race.  Her
Biscayan origin has endowed her with a fine figure of full development,
withal in perfect feminine proportions; while her mother has transmitted
to her what, in an eminent degree, she herself possessed--beauty of face
and nobleness of feature.

In the daughter neither has deteriorated, but perhaps improved.  For the
benignant clime of California has such effect; the soft breezes of the
South Sea fanning as fair cheeks as were ever kissed by Tuscan, or
Levantine wind.

A chapter might be devoted to the charms of Dona Carmen Montijo, and
still not do them justice.  Enough to say, that they are beyond cavil.
There are men in San Francisco who would dare death for her sake, if
sure of her smile to speak approval of the deed; ay, one who would for
as much do murder!

And in that same city is a man who would do the same for Inez Alvarez--
though she has neither blonde complexion, nor blue eyes.  Instead she is
a _morena_, or brunette, with eyes and hair of the darkest.  But she is
also a beauty, of the type immortalised by many bards--Byron among the
number, when he wrote his rhapsody on the "Girl of Cadiz."

Inez is herself a girl of Cadiz, of which city her father was a native.
The Conde Alvarez, an officer in the Spanish army, serving with his
regiment in Biscay, there saw a face that charmed him.  It belonged to
the daughter of Don Gregorio Montijo--his eldest and first-born, some
eighteen years older than Carmen.  The Andalusian count wooed the
Biscayan lady, won, and bore her away to his home.  Both have gone to
their long home, leaving their only child inheritress of a handsome
estate.  From her father, in whose veins ran Moorish blood, Inez
inherits jet-black eyes, with lashes nearly half-an-inch in length, and
above them brows shaped like the moon in the middle of her first
quarter.  Though in figure more slender than her aunt, she is quite
Carmen's equal in height, and in this may some day excel; since she has
not yet attained her full stature.

Such are the two damsels, who have danced with the young British
officers, and made sweet havoc in their hearts.  Have the hearts of the
_senoritas_ received similar hurt in return?  By listening to their
conversation we shall learn.


CHAPTER ELEVEN.

MUTUAL ADMISSIONS.

The dwelling of Don Gregorio Montijo, as already stated, is
terrace-topped, that style of roof in Spanish countries termed _azotea_.
This, surrounded by a parapet breast-high--beset with plants and
flowering shrubs in boxes and pots, thus forming a sort of aerial
garden--is reached by a stone stair, the _escalera_, which leads up out
of the inner court, called _patio_.  During certain hours of the day,
the azotea is a favourite resort, being a pleasant place of dalliance,
as also the finest for observation--commanding, as in this case it does,
a view of the country at back, and the broad bay in front.  To look upon
this last have the two "senoritas," on the same morning, ascended--soon
after breakfast, which in all parts of Spanish America is eaten at the
somewhat late hour of 11 a.m.

That they do not intend staying here long, is evident from the character
of their dresses.  Both are costumed and equipped for the saddle; having
hats of vicuna wool on their heads, riding-whips in their hands, and
spurs on their heels; while in the courtyard below stand four horses,
saddled and bridled, champing their bits, and impatiently pawing the
flagged pavement.

Since all the saddles are such as are usually ridden by men, it may be
supposed only men are to be mounted, and that the ladies' horses have
not yet been brought out of the stable.  This would naturally be the
conjecture of a stranger to Spanish California.  But one _an fait_ to
its fashions would draw deductions differently.  Looking at the spurred
heels upon the house-top, and the saddled horses below, he would
conclude that two of the steeds were intended to be ridden by the
ladies; in that style of equitation with which the famed Duchesse de
Berri was accustomed to astonish the Parisians.

The other two horses, having larger and somewhat coarser saddles, are
evidently designed for gentlemen; so that the cavalcade will be
symmetrically composed--two and two of each sex.

The gentlemen have not yet put in an appearance; but who they are may be
learnt from the dialogue passing between the two ladies.  From their
elevated, position they can see the rapidly growing city of San
Francisco, and the shipping in its harbour--north-east, and a little to
their left.  But there are several vessels riding at anchor out in front
of them; one a warship, towards which the eyes of both keep continuously
turning, as though they expected a boat soon to put off from her side.

As yet none such has been seen; and, withdrawing her gaze from the
warship, Inez opens the conversation by a question--

"Is it really true that we're going back to Spain?"

She has been in California only a short time, since the death of her
father and mother, which placed her under the guardianship of Don
Gregorio.  But though here, lovers have been all the while sighing
around her, she longs to return to her dear Andalusia.  Therefore has
she asked the question with more than a common interest.

"Quite true;" says Carmen, giving the answer, "and I'm sorry it is so."

"Why should you be sorry?"

"There are many reasons."

"Give one."

"I could give twenty."

"One will be sufficient--if good."

"They're all good."

"Let me hear them, then."

"First of all, I like California--I love it.  Its fine climate, and
bright blue sides."

"Not a bit brighter, or bluer, than those of Spain."

"Ten times brighter, and ten times bluer.  The skies of the Old-World
are to those of the New as lead to _lapis lazuli_.  In that respect,
neither Spain nor Italy can compare with California.  Its seas, too, are
superior.  Even the boasted Bay of Naples would be but a poor pond
alongside that noble sheet of water, far-stretching before our eyes.
Look at it!"

"Looking at it through _your_ eyes, I might think so; not through mine.
For my part, I see nothing in it to be so much admired."

"But something _on_ it; for instance, that grand ship out yonder.  Come,
now; confess the truth!  Isn't that something to admire?"

"But she don't belong to your bay," replies the Andalusian.

"No matter.  There is on it now, and in it--the ship I mean--somebody
who, if I mistake not, has very much interested somebody else--a certain
Andalusian lady, by name Inez Alvarez."

"Your words will answer as well for a Biscayan lady--by name Carmen
Montijo."

"Suppose I admit it, and say yes?  Well; I will.  There _is_ one in
yonder ship who has very much interested me.  Nay, more; I admire--ay,
love him!  You see I'm not ashamed to confess what the world affects to
consider a weakness.  We of the Celtic race don't keep secrets as you of
the further South; half Moors, as you are.  For all, _sobrina_, you
haven't kept yours; though you tried heard enough.  I saw from the first
you were smitten with that young English officer, who has hair the exact
colour of a carrot!"

"It isn't anything of the kind.  His hair is of a much more becoming hue
than that of the other English officer, who's taken your fancy, _tia_."

"Nothing to compare with it.  Look at this.  There's a curl; one of the
handsomest that ever grew on the head of man!  Dark and glossy, as the
coat of the fur-seal.  Beautiful!  I could kiss it over, and over
again!"

While speaking, she does so.

"And look at this!" cries the other, also drawing forth a lock of hair,
and displaying it in the sunlight, "See how it shines--like tissue of
gold!  Far prettier than that you've got, and better worth kissing."

Saying which she imitates the example set her, by raising the tress to
her lips, and repeatedly kissing it.

"So, so, my innocent!" exclaims Carmen, "you've been stealing too?"

"As yourself!"

"And, I suppose, you've given him a love-lock in exchange?"

"Have you?"

"I have.  To you, Inez, I make no secret of it.  Come, now!  Be equally
candid with me.  Have you done so?"

"I've done the same as yourself."

"And has your heart gone with the gift?  Tell the truth, _sobrina_."

"Ask your own, _tia_; and take its answer for mine."

"Enough, then; we understand each other, and shall keep the secret to
ourselves.  Now let's talk of other things; go back to what we began
with--about leaving California.  You're glad we're going?"

"Indeed, yes.  And I wonder you're not the same.  Dear old Spain, the
finest country on earth!  And Cadiz the finest city."

"Ah! about that we two differ.  Give me California for a country, and
San Francisco for a home; though it's not much of a city yet.  It will,
ere long; and I should like to stay in it.  But that's not to be, and
there's an end of the matter.  Father has determined on leaving.
Indeed, he has already sold out; so that this house and the lands around
it are no longer ours.  As the lawyers have the deed of transfer, and
the purchase money has been paid, we're only here on sufferance, and
must soon yield possession.  Then, we're to take ship for Panama, go
across the Isthmus and over the Atlantic Ocean; once more to renew the
Old-world life, with all its stupid ceremonies.  How I shall miss the
free wild ways of California--its rural sports--with their quaint
originality and picturesqueness!  I'm sure I shall die of _ennui_, soon
after reaching Spain.  Your Cadiz will kill me."

"But, Carmen; surely you can't be happy here--now that everything is so
changed?  Why, we can scarce walk out in safety, or take a promenade
through the streets of the town, crowded with those rude fellows in
red-shirts, who've come to dig for gold--Anglo-Saxons, as they call
themselves."

"What!  You speaking against Anglo-Saxons!  And with that tress
treasured in your bosom--so close to your heart!"

"Oh! _he_ is different.  He's not Saxon, but Welsh--and that's Celtic,
the same as you Biscayans.  Besides, he isn't to be ranked with that
rabble, even though he were of the same race.  The Senor Cadwallader is
a born hidalgo."

"Admitting him to be, I think you do wrong to these red-shirted gentry,
in calling them a rabble.  Rough as they may appear, they have gentle
hearts under their coarse homespun coats.  Many of them are true
bred-and-born gentlemen; and, what's better, behave as such.  I've never
received insult from them--not even disrespect--though I've been among
them scores of times.  Father wrongs them too: for it is partly their
presence here that's causing him to quit California--as also many others
of our old families.  Still, as we reside in the country, at a safe
distance from town, we might enjoy immunity from meeting _los barbaros_,
as our people are pleased contemptuously to style them.  For my part, I
love dear old California, and will greatly regret leaving it.  Only to
think; I shall never more behold the gallant _vaquero_, mounted on his
magnificent steed, careering across the plain, and launching his lazo
over the horns of a fierce wild bull, ready to gore him if he but miss
his aim.  Ah! it's one of the finest sights in the world--so exciting in
this dull prosaic age.  It recalls the heroic days and deeds of the
Great Conde, the Campeador, and Cid.  Yes, Inez; only in this modern
transatlantic land--out here, on the shores of the South Sea--do there
still exist customs and manners to remind one of the old knight-errantry
and times of the troubadours."

"What an enthusiast you are!  But apropos of your knights-errant, yonder
are two of them, if I mistake not, making this way.  Now, fancy yourself
on the donjon of an ancient Moorish castle, salute, and receive them
accordingly.  Ha, ha, ha!"

The clear ringing laugh of the Andalusian is not echoed by the Biscayan.
Instead, a shadow falls over her face, as her eyes become fixed upon
two mounted figures just distinguishable in the distance.

"True types of your Californian _chivalry_!" adds Inez ironically.

"True types of Californian _villainy_!" rejoins Carmen, in serious
earnest.


CHAPTER TWELVE.

A COUPLE OF CALIFORNIAN "CABALLEROS."

The horsemen, so oddly commented upon, have just emerged from the
suburbs of San Francisco, taking the road which leads southward along
shore.

Both are garbed in grand style, in the national costume of that country,
which, in point of picturesqueness is not exceeded by any other in the
world.

They wear the wide trousers (_calzoneras_), along the outer seams lashed
with gold lace, and beset with filigree buttons; the snow-white drawers
(_calzoncillas_) here and there puffing out; below, _botas_ and spurs--
the last with rowels several inches in diameter, that glitter like great
stars behind their heels.  They have tight-fitting jackets of velveteen,
closed in front, and over the bosom elaborately embroidered; scarfs of
China crape round their waists, the ends dangling adown the left hip,
terminating in a fringe of gold cord; on their heads _sombreros_ with
broad brim, and band of bullion--the _toquilla_.  In addition, each has
over his shoulders a _manga_--the most magnificent of outside garments,
with a drape graceful as a Roman _toga_.  That of one is
scarlet-coloured, the other sky-blue.  Nor are their horses less grandly
bedecked.  Saddles of stamped leather, scintillating with silver studs--
their cloths elaborately embroidered; bridles of plaited horse-hair,
jointed with tags and tassels; bits of the Mamaluke pattern, with
check-pieces and curbs powerful enough to break the jaw at a jerk.

The steeds thus splendidly caparisoned are worthy of it.  Though small,
they are of perfect shape--pure blood of Arabian sires, transmitted
through dams of Andalusia.  They are descended from the stock
transported to the New World by the _Conquistadores_; and the progenitor
of one or other may have carried Alvarado or Sandoval--perhaps Cortez
himself.

The riders are both men of swarthy complexion, with traits that tell of
the Latinic race.  Their features are Spanish; in one a little more
pronounced than the other.  He who wears the sky-coloured cloak has all
the appearance of being Mexican born.  The blood in his veins giving the
brown tinge to his skin, is not Moorish, but more likely from the
aborigines of California.  Thus, suppose a man, who takes a survey of
the fortifications of any city; considers their strength and
advantages, natural or acquired; observes the disposition and contrivance
of the bastions, ramparts, mines, and other military works; it is
plain, that in proportion as all these are fitted to attain their
ends he will receive a suitable pleasure and satisfaction. This pleasure,
as it arises from the utility, not the form of the objects, can be no
other than a sympathy with the inhabitants, for whose security all this
art is employed; though it is possible, that this person, as a
stranger or an enemy, may in his heart have no kindness for them, or may
even entertain a hatred against them.

It may indeed be objected, that such a remote sympathy is a very
slight foundation for a passion, and that so much industry and
application, as we frequently observe in philosophers, can never
be derived from so inconsiderable an original.

But here I return to what I have already remarked, that the
pleasure of study conflicts chiefly in the action of the mind, and the
exercise of the genius and understanding in the discovery or comprehension
of any truth. If the importance of the truth be requisite to compleat
the pleasure, it is not on account of any considerable addition,
which of itself it brings to our enjoyment, but only because it is,
in some measure, requisite to fix our attention.

When we are careless and inattentive, the same action of the understanding
has no effect upon us, nor is able to convey any of that satisfaction,
which arises from it, when we are in another disposition.

But beside the action of the mind, which is the principal foundation of
the pleasure, there is likewise required a degree of success in the
attainment of the end, or the discovery of that truth we examine. Upon
this head I shall make a general remark, which may be useful on many
occasions, viz, that where the mind pursues any end with passion; though
that passion be not derived originally from the end, but merely from
the action and pursuit; yet by the natural course of the affections,
we acquire a concern for the end itself, and are uneasy under any
disappointment we meet with in the pursuit of it.

This proceeds from the relation and parallel direction of the
passions above-mentioned.

To illustrate all this by a similar instance, I shall observe, that
there cannot be two passions more nearly resembling each other, than
those of hunting and philosophy, whatever disproportion may at first
sight appear betwixt them. It is evident, that the pleasure of hunting
conflicts in the action of the mind and body; the motion, the attention,
the difficulty, and the uncertainty. It is evident likewise, that
these actions must be attended with an idea of utility, in order to
their having any effect upon us.

A man of the greatest fortune, and the farthest removed from avarice,
though he takes a pleasure in hunting after patridges and pheasants,
feels no satisfaction in shooting crows and magpies; and that because
he considers the first as fit for the table, and the other as entirely
useless. Here it is certain, that the utility or importance of itself
causes no real passion, but is only requisite to support the
imagination; and the same person, who over-looks a ten times greater
profit in any other subject, is pleased to bring home half a dozen
woodcocks or plovers, after having employed several hours in hunting
after them.

To make the parallel betwixt hunting and philosophy more compleat, we
may observe, that though in both cases the end of our action may in
itself be despised, yet in the heat of the action we acquire such an
attention to this end, that we are very uneasy under any disappointments,
and are sorry when we either miss our game, or fall into any error
in our reasoning.

If we want another parallel to these affections, we may consider the
passion of gaming, which affords a pleasure from the same principles
as hunting and philosophy. It has been remarked, that the pleasure of
gaming arises not from interest alone; since many leave a sure gain for
this entertainment: Neither is it derived from the game alone;
since the same persons have no satisfaction, when they play for
nothing: But proceeds from both these causes united, though separately
they have no effect.

It is here, as in certain chymical preparations, where the mixture
of two clear and transparent liquids produces a third, which is opaque
and coloured..

The interest, which we have in any game, engages our attention, without
which we can have no enjoyment, either in that or in any other action.
Our attention being once engaged, the difficulty, variety, and sudden
reverses of fortune, still farther interest us; and it is from that
concern our satisfaction arises.

Human life is so tiresome a scene, and men generally are of such indolent
dispositions, that whatever amuses them, though by a passion mixt with
pain, does in the main give them a sensible pleasure. And this pleasure
is here encreased by the nature of the objects, which being sensible,
and of a narrow compass, are entered into with facility, and are
agreeable to the imagination.

The same theory, that accounts for the love of truth in mathematics
and algebra. may be extended to morals, politics, natural philosophy,
and other studies, where we consider not the other abstract relations
of ideas, but their real connexions and existence. But beside the love
of knowledge, which displays itself in the sciences, there is a certain
curiosity implanted in human nature, which is a passion derived
from a quite different principle.

Some people have an insatiable desire of knowing the actions and
circumstances of their neighbours, though their interest be no way
concerned in them, and they must entirely depend on others for their
information; in which case there is no room for study or application.
Let us search for the reason of this phaenomenon.

It has been proved at large, that the influence of belief is at once
to inliven and infix any idea in the imagination, and prevent all kind
of hesitation and uncertainty about it. Both these circumstances are
advantageous. By the vivacity of the idea we interest the
fancy, and produce, though in a lesser degree, the same pleasure,
which arises from a moderate passion.

As the vivacity of the idea gives pleasure, so its certainty prevents
uneasiness, by fixing one particular idea in the mind, and keeping it
from wavering in the choice of its objects. It is a quality
of human nature, which is conspicuous on many occasions, and is common
both to the mind and body, that too sudden and violent a change is
unpleasant to us, and that however any objects may in themselves
be indifferent, yet their alteration gives uneasiness.

As it is the nature of doubt to cause a variation in the thought,
and transport us suddenly from one idea to another, it must of consequence
be the occasion of pain.

This pain chiefly takes place, where interest, relation, or the greatness
and novelty of any event interests us in it. It is not every
matter of fact, of which we have a curiosity to be informed; neither
are they such only as we have an interest to know. It is sufficient
if the idea strikes on us with such force, and concerns us so
nearly, as to give us an uneasiness in its instability and inconstancy.

A stranger, when he arrives first at any town, may be entirely
indifferent about knowing the history and adventures of the
inhabitants; but as he becomes farther acquainted with them, and
has lived any considerable time among them, he acquires the same
curiosity as the natives.

When we are reading the history of a nation, we may have an ardent
desire of clearing up any doubt or difficulty, that occurs in it;
but become careless in such researches, when the ideas of these
events are, in a great measure, obliterated.

BOOK III OF MORALS

PART I OF VIRTUE AND VICE IN GENERAL

SECT. I MORAL DISTINCTIONS NOT DERIVed FROM REASON

There is an inconvenience which attends all abstruse reasoning.
that it may silence, without convincing an antagonist, and requires
the same intense study to make us sensible of its force, that was
at first requisite for its invention.

When we leave our closet, and engage in the common affairs of life,
its conclusions seem to vanish, like the phantoms of the night on
the appearance of the morning; and it is difficult for us to retain
even that conviction, which we had attained with difficulty.

This is still more conspicuous in a long chain of reasoning, where
we must preserve to the end the evidence of the first propositions,
and where we often lose sight of ail the most received maxims,
either of philosophy or common life.

I am not, however, without hopes, that the present system of philosophy
will acquire new force as it advances; and that our reasonings
concerning morals will corroborate whatever has been said concerning
the UNDERSTANDING and the PASSIONS.

Morality is a subject that interests us above all others: We fancy
the peace of society to be at stake in every decision concerning
it; and it is evident, that this concern must make our speculations
appear more real and solid, than where the subject is, in a great
measure, indifferent to us.

What affects us, we conclude can never be a chimera; and as our
passion is engaged on the one side or the other, we naturally think
that the question lies within human comprehension; which, in other
cases of this nature, we are apt to entertain some doubt of.

Without this advantage I never should have ventured upon a third
volume of such abstruse philosophy, in an age, wherein the greatest
part of men seem agreed to convert reading into an amusement, and
to reject every thing that requires any considerable degree of
attention to be comprehended.

It has been observed, that nothing is ever present to the mind but
its perceptions; and that all the actions of seeing, hearing,
judging, loving, hating, and thinking, fall under this denomination.

The mind can never exert itself in any action, which we may not comprehend
under the term of perception; and consequently that term is no less
applicable to those judgments, by which we distinguish moral good
and evil, than to every other operation of the mind.

To approve of one character, to condemn another, are only so many different
perceptions.

Now as perceptions resolve themselves into two kinds, viz. impressions
and ideas, this distinction gives rise to a question, with which
we shall open up our present enquiry concerning morals.

WHETHER IT IS BY MEANS OF OUR IDEAS OR IMPRESSIONS WE DISTINGUISH
BETWIXT VICE AND VIRTUE, AND PRONOUNCE AN ACTION BLAMEABLE OR
PRAISEWORTHY?

This will immediately cut off all loose discourses and declamations,
and reduce us to something precise and exact on the present subject.

Those who affirm that virtue is nothing but a conformity to reason;
that there are eternal fitnesses and unfitnesses of things, which
are the same to every rational being that considers them; that the
immutable measures of right and wrong impose an obligation, not
only on human creatures, but also on the Deity himself: All these
systems concur in the opinion, that morality, like truth, is discerned
merely by ideas, and by their juxta-position and comparison.

In order, therefore, to judge of these systems, we need only consider,
whether it be possible, from reason alone, to distinguish betwixt
moral good and evil, or whether there must concur some other
principles to enable us to make that distinction,
If morality had naturally no influence on human passions and actions,
it were in vain to take such pains to inculcate it; and nothing
would be more fruitless than that multitude of rules and precepts,
with which all moralists abound.

Philosophy is commonly divided into speculative and practical; and
as morality is always comprehended under the latter division, it
is supposed to influence our passions and actions, and to go beyond
the calm and indolent judgments of the understanding.

And this is confirmed by common experience, which informs us, that
men are often governed by their duties, and are detered from some
actions by the opinion of injustice, and impelled to others by that
of obligation.

Since morals, therefore, have an influence on the actions and
affections, it follows, that they cannot be derived from reason;
and that because reason alone, as we have already proved, can never
have any such influence.

Morals excite passions, and produce or prevent actions. Reason of itself
is utterly impotent in this particular. The rules of morality.
therefore, are not conclusions of our reason.

No one, I believe, will deny the justness of this inference; nor is there
any other means of evading it, than by denying that principle, on
which it is founded.

As long as it is allowed, that reason has no influence on our
passions and action, it is in vain to pretend, that morality is
discovered only by a deduction of reason.

An active principle can never be founded on an inactive; and if
reason be inactive in itself, it must remain so in all its shapes
and appearances, whether it exerts itself in natural or moral
subjects, whether it considers the powers of external bodies, or
the actions of rational beings.

It would be tedious to repeat all the arguments, by which I have
proved [Book II. Part III.

Sect 3.], that reason is perfectly inert, and can never either
prevent or produce any action or affection. it will be easy to
recollect what has been said upon that subject.

I shall only recall on this occasion one of these arguments, which
I shall endeavour to render still more conclusive, and more applicable
to the present subject.

Reason is the discovery of truth or falshood.

Truth or falshood consists in an agreement or disagreement either to the
real relations of ideas, or to real existence and matter of fact. Whatever,
therefore, is not susceptible of this agreement or disagreement, is
incapable of being true or false, and can never be an object of our
reason.

Now it is evident our passions, volitions, and actions, are not
susceptible of any such agreement or disagreement; being original
facts and realities, compleat in themselves, and implying no reference
to other passions, volitions, and actions.

It is impossible, therefore, they can be pronounced either true or false,
and be either contrary or conformable to reason.

This argument is of double advantage to our present purpose. For it
proves DIRECTLY, that actions do not derive their merit from a
conformity to reason, nor their blame from a contrariety to it; and
it proves the same truth more INDIRECTLY, by shewing us, that as
reason can never immediately prevent or produce any action by
contradicting or approving of it, it cannot be the source of moral
good and evil, which are found to have that influence.

Actions may be laudable or blameable; but they cannot be reasonable:
Laudable or blameable, therefore, are not the same with reasonable or
unreasonable.

That the visit designed for them is of no ordinary nature, but
for an all important purpose, can be gleaned from the speech passing
between the two horsemen as they ride along the road.

De Lara commences it by remarking:--

"Well, friend Faustino, from something you said before setting out, I
take it you're going to Don Gregorio's on an errand very similar to my
own?  Come, _camarado_! declare it!"

"Declare yours!"

"Certainly.  I shall make no secret of it to you; nor need I.  Why
should there be any between us?  We've now known one another long
enough, and intimately enough, to exchange confidences of the closest
kind.  To-day mine is--that I mean proposing to Don Gregorio's
daughter--offering her my hand in marriage."

"And I," returns Calderon, "intend doing the same to his
grand-daughter."

"In that case, we're both in the same boat; and, as there's no rivalry
between us, we can pull pleasantly together.  I've no objection to being
your uncle; even admitting you to a share in the old Spaniard's
property--proportioned to your claims of kinship."

"I don't want a dollar of the Don's money; only his grand-daughter.  I'm
deeply in love with her."

"And I," continues De Lara, "am just as deeply in love with his
daughter--it may be deeper."

"You couldn't.  I'm half-mad about Inez Alvarez.  I could kill her--if
she refuse me."

"I _shall_ kill Carmen Montijo--if she refuse _me_."  The two men are
talking seriously, or seem so.  Their voices, the tone, the flashing of
their eyes, the expression upon their faces, with their excited
gesticulation--all show them to be in earnest.

At the last outburst of passionate speech they turn in their saddles,
and look each other in the face.  De Lara continues the dialogue:

"Now, tell me, Faustino; what hope have you of success?"

"For that, fair enough.  You remember the last _fandango_ held at Don
Gregorio's--on the day of the cattle-branding!"

"Certainly I do.  I've good reason to remember it.  But go on."

"Well, that night," proceeds Calderon, "I danced twice with Inez, and
made many sweet speeches to her.  Once I went farther, and squeezed her
pretty little hand.  She wasn't angry, or at all events didn't say or
show it.  Surely, after such encouragement, I may ask that hand in
marriage--with fair presumption of not being refused.  What's your
opinion?"

"Your chances seem good.  But what about himself.  He'll have something
to say in the matter."

"Too much, I fear; and that's just what I do fear.  So long as his bit
of grazing-land was worth only some thirty thousand dollars, he was
amiable enough.  Now that by this gold discovery it's got to be good
value for eight or ten times the amount, he's become a different man,
and in all likelihood will go dead against me."

"Like enough; it's the way of the world.  And therefore, on that
account, you needn't have a special spite against the Senor Montijo.
You're sure no one else stands between you and your sweetheart?  Or is
there something in the shape of a rival?"

"Of course there is--a score of them, as you ought to know; same as with
yourself, De Lara.  Suitors have been coming and going with both, I
suppose, ever since either was old enough to receive them.  The last
I've heard of paying attentions to Inez is a young naval officer--a
midshipman on board a British man-of-war now lying in the harbour.
Indeed there are two of them spoken of; one said to be _your_ rival, as
the other is mine.  Shall I tell you what's been for some time the talk
of the town?  You may as well know it, if you don't already."

"What?" asks the Creole, excitedly.

"Why, that the one represented as your competitor has cut out all
Carmen's other admirers--yourself among the rest."

Bitter words to the ear of Francisco de Lara, bringing the red colour to
his cheeks, as if they had been smitten by a switch.  With eyes
flashing, and full of jealous fire, he exclaims:

"If that be so, I'll do as I've said--"

"Do what?"

"_Kill Carmen Montijo_!  I swear it.  I'm in earnest, Calderon, and mean
it.  If it be as you've heard, I'll surely kill her.  I've the right to
her life--by her giving me the right to her love."

"But did she do that?  Has she ever confessed to loving you?"

"Not in words, I admit.  But there are other signs of assent strong as
speech, or the hand-squeezings you speak of.  Carmen Montijo may be
cunning.  Some call her a coquette.  All I know is, that she has led me
to believe she loved me; and if she's been playing a false game, she
shall rue it, one way or the other.  This day I'm determined to
ascertain the truth, by offering her my hand, as I've said, and asking
hers.  If she refuse it, then I'll know how things stand, and take steps
for squaring accounts between us.  She shall find that Frank Lara is not
the sort of man to let one of womankind either laugh at, or play tricks
with him."

"I admire your spirit, _amigo_.  I catch courage from it, and will
imitate your action.  If it turn out that Inez has been trifling with
me, I'll--well, we must first find what answer there is for us; which we
shall, I suppose, soon after ascending yonder hill.  One of us may be
accepted, the other rejected.  In that case, one will be happy, the
other wretched.  Or both may be accepted, and then we'll both be
blessed.  Taking things at their worst, and that we both get refused--
what then?  Despair, and a speedy end, I suppose?"

"The last, if you like, but not the first.  When despair comes to Frank
Lara, death will come along with it, of soon after.  But we waste time
talking; let us forward and learn our fate!"

With stroke of spur, urging their horses into a gallop, the two hasten
on; in the countenances of both a cast showing them half-hopeful,
half-doubting--such as may be seen when men are about to make some
desperate attempt, with uncertainty as to the result.  On Calderon's,
notwithstanding his assumed levity, the expression is almost despairing;
on that of De Lara it is more defiant and demon-like.


CHAPTER FIFTEEN.

A RUDE RENCONTRE.

Having steeled themselves to the reception of their rival suitors, with
brave words one supporting the other, the two girls remain upon the
_azotea_.  Meanwhile, the man-o'-war's boat has been drawing in towards
the beach, heading for a little embayment, formed by the shore-line and
the sand-bar already spoken of.

The horsemen advancing from the town-side do not see it; nor can the
crew of the boat perceive them.  The land-ridge is between the two
parties, its crest concealing them from one another.

They are approaching it at a like rate of speed; for although the horses
appear to be in a gallop, it is only a fancy gait fashionable among
Spanish-Americans, its purpose to exhibit equestrian skill.  For the two
horsemen looking up the hill, have seen heads on the house-top, and know
that ladies' eyes are upon them.

Surreptitiously goaded by the spur, their steeds plunge and curvet,
apparently progressing at a rapid pace, but in reality gaining little
ground.

After a time both parties disappear from the eyes of those on the
_azotea_.  They have gone under the brow of the hill, which, overhanging
for a short distance, shuts out a view of the road, as also the
sea-shore, along the sand-spit.

Unseen from above, the man-o'-war's boat beaches, and the two officers
spring out upon the strand.  One of them turning, says something to the
coxswain, who has remained in the stern-sheets, with the tiller-ropes in
hand.  It is an order, with instructions about where and when he is to
wait for them on return to the ship.

"At the new wharf in the harbour," Crozier is heard to say; for it is he
who commands.

His order given, the boat shoves off, and is rowed back towards the
ship; while the officers commence climbing the slope, to get upon the
shore-road.

At the same time the horsemen are ascending from the opposite side.

Soon both parties are again within view of those on the house-top;
though neither as yet sees the other, or has any suspicion of such
mutual proximity.  The crest of the ridge is still between, but in a few
seconds more they will sight one another.

The men afoot are advancing at about the same rate of speed as those on
horseback.  The latter have ceased showing off, as if satisfied with the
impression they must have made, and are now approaching in tranquil
gait, but with an air of subdued triumph--the mock modesty of the
_matador_, who, with blood-stained sword, bends meekly before the box
where beauty sits smiling approbation.

The two pedestrians climb the hill less ceremoniously.  Glad to stretch
their limbs upon land--"shake the knots out of their knees," as
Cadwallader gleefully remarks--they eagerly scale the steep.  Not silent
either, but laughing and shouting like a couple of schoolboys abroad for
an afternoon's holiday.

Suddenly coming within view of the house, they bring their boisterous
humour under restraint at sight of two heads above the parapet.  For
they know to whom these belong, and note that the faces are turned
towards them.

At the same instant the horsemen also see the heads, and observe that
the faces are _not_ turned towards _them_.  On the contrary, _from_
them, the ladies looking in another direction.

Some chagrin in this.  After all their grand caracolling, and feats of
equitation, which must have been witnessed by the fair spectators.

At what are these now gazing?  Is it a ship sailing up the bay, or
something else on the water?  No matter what, and whether on land, or
water; enough for the conceited fellows to think they are being
slightingly received.

Disconcerted, they seek an explanation, mutually questioning one
another.  But before either can make answer in speech, they have it
under their eyes--in the shape of a brace of British naval officers.

Like themselves, the latter have just reached the summit of the ridge,
and are moving on towards Don Gregorio's gate.  It is midway between;
and keeping on at the same rate of speed, the two pairs will meet
directly in front of it.

Before that moment, neither has ever set eyes on the other.
Notwithstanding, there is an expression on the faces of all four, which
tells of mutual recognition, and of no friendly nature.

Calderon whispers to De Lara:

"The English officers!"

Cadwallader says, _sotto-voce_ to Crozier:

"The fellows we've heard about--our rivals, Ned, like ourselves, I
suppose, going to visit the girls."

De Lara makes no response to Calderon.  Neither does Crozier to
Cadwallader.  There is not time.  They are now close up to the gate, and
there is only its breadth between them.

They have arrived there at the same instant of time, and simultaneously
make stop.  Face to face, silence on both sides, neither word nor salute
offered in exchange.  But looks are quite as expressive--glances that
speak the language of jealous rivalry--of rage with difficulty
suppressed.

It is a question of precedence, as to who shall first pass into the
entrance.  Their hesitation was not from any courtesy, but the reverse.
The men on horseback look down on those afoot contemptuously,
scornfully.  Threateningly, too; as though they had thoughts of riding
over, and trampling them under the hoofs of their horses.  No doubt they
would like to do it, and might make trial, were the young officers
unarmed.  But they are not.  Crozier carries a pistol--Cadwallader his
midshipman's dirk, both weapons conspicuous outside their uniforms.

For a period of several seconds' duration, the rivals stand _vis-a-vis_,
neither venturing to advance.  Around them is a nimbus of angry
electricity, that needs but a spark to kindle it into furious flame.  A
single word will do it.  This word spoken, and two of the four may never
enter Don Gregorio's gate--at least not alive.

It is not spoken.  The only thing said is by Crozier to Cadwallader--not
in a whisper, but aloud, and without regard to what effect it may have
on the enemy.

"Come along, Will!  We've something better to do than stand
shilly-shallying here.  Heave after me, shipmate!"

Crozier's speech cut the Gordian knot; and the officers, gliding through
the gateway, advance along the avenue.

With faces now turned towards the house, they see the ladies still upon
the _azotea_.

Soon as near enough for Carmen to observe it, Crozier draws out the
treasured tress, and fastens it in his cap, behind the gold band.  It
falls over his shoulder like a cataract of liquid amber.

Cadwallader does likewise; and from his cap also streams a tress, black
as the plumes of a raven.

The two upon the house-top appear pleased by this display.  They show
their approval by imitating it.  Each raises hand to her riding-hat; and
when these are withdrawn, a curl of hair is seen set behind their
_toquillas_--one chestnut-brown, the other of yellowish hue.

Scarce is this love-telegraphy exchanged, when the two Californians come
riding up the avenue, at full speed.  Though lingering at the gate, and
still far-off, De Lara had observed the affair of the tresses, clearly
comprehending the symbolism of the act.  Exasperated beyond bounds, he
can no longer control himself, and cares not what may come.

At his instigation, Calderon spurs on by his side, the two tearing
furiously along.  Their purpose is evident: to force the pedestrians
from the path, and so humble them in the eyes of their sweethearts.

On his side, Crozier remains cool, admonishing Cadwallader to do the
same.  They feel the power of possession: assured by those smiles, that
the citadel is theirs.  It is for the outsiders to make the assault.

"Give a clear gangway, Will!" counsels Crozier; "and let them pass.  We
can talk to the gentlemen afterwards."

Both step back among the _manzanita_ bushes, and the _ginetes_ go
galloping past; De Lara on Crozier's side scowling down, as if he would
annihilate the English officer with a look.  The scowl is returned with
interest, the officer still reserves speech.

On the other edge of the avenue the action is a little different.  The
midshipman, full of youthful freak, determines on having his "lark."  He
sees the chance, and cannot restrain himself.  As Calderon sweeps past,
he draws his dirk, and pricks the Californian's horse in the hip.  The
animal, maddened by the pain, springs upward, and then shoots off at
increased speed, still further heightened by the fierce exclamations of
his rider, and the mocking laughter of the mid.

Under the walls the two horsemen come to a halt, neither having made
much by their bit of rude bravadoism.  And they know they will have a
reckoning to settle for it--at least De Lara does.  For on the brow of
Crozier, coming up, he can read a determination to call him to account.
He is not flurried about this.  On the contrary, he has courted it,
knowing himself a skilled swordsman, and dead shot.  Remembering that he
has already killed his man, he can await with equanimity the challenge
he has provoked.  It is not fear has brought the pallor to his cheeks,
and set the dark seal upon his brow.  Both spring from a different
passion: observable in his eyes as he turns them towards the house-top.
For the ladies are still there, looking down.

Saluting, he says:

"Dona Carmen, can I have the honour of an interview?"

She thus interrogated does not make immediate answer.  Spectator of all
that has passed, she observes the hostile attitude between the two sets
of visitors.  To receive both at the same time will be more than
embarrassing.  With their angry passions roused to such a pitch, it must
end in a personal encounter.

Her duty is clear.  She is mistress of the house, representing her
father, who is absent.  The English officers are there by invitation.
At thought of this she no longer hesitates.

"Not now, Don Francisco de Lara," she says, replying to his question;
"not to-day.  I must beg of you to excuse me."

"Indeed!" rejoins he sneeringly.  "Will it be deemed discourteous in me
to ask why I am denied?"

It is discourteous; and so Dona Carmen deems it.  Though she does not
tell him as much in words, he can take it from her rejoinder.

"You are quite welcome to know the reason.  We have an engagement!"

"Oh! an engagement!"

"Yes, sir, an engagement," she repeats, in a tone telling of irritation.
"Those gentlemen you see are our guests.  My father has invited them to
spend the day with us."

"Ah! your father has invited them!  How very good of Don Gregorio
Montijo, extending his hospitality to _gringos_!  And Dona Carmen has
added her kind compliments with earnest entreaties for them to come, no
doubt?"

"Sir!" says Carmen, no longer able to conceal her indignation, "your
speech is impertinent--insulting.  I shall listen to it no longer."

Saying which, she steps back, disappearing behind the parapet--where
Inez has already concealed herself, at the close of a similar short, but
stormy, dialogue with Calderon.

De Lara, a lurid look in his eyes, sits in his saddle as if in a stupor.
He is roused from it by a voice, Crozier's, saying:

"You appear anxious to make apology to the lady?  You can make it to
_me_."

"_Caraji_!" exclaims the gambler, starting, and glaring angrily at the
speaker.  "Who are you?"

"One who demands an apology for your very indecorous behaviour."

"You'll not get it."

"Satisfaction, then."

"That to your heart's content."

"I shall have it so.  The _Maitland_, engaged for North Australia, was diverted to Port
Phillip.

The men were promptly employed.

The considerable flockmasters were desirous of a regular supply,
while the colonists in general were far less cordial. Opposition
was, however, languid; and the occasional apathy of the public and the
indecision of the press were construed as assent.

While the home and colonial governments were constructing and dissolving
systems, the idea of abolition was started by the press. "The settlers,"
said the _Examiner_, "may not be prepared for this.

Our own impression is that they are not; but it is our firm opinion that
at no distant day the unanimous voice of the community will say, in
a tone not to be disregarded, cease transportation for ever."

(March, 1844.)

Events a few months after still more forcibly pointed to this issue.

Mr. M'Lachlan, in a letter to Mr. Gladstone, put the case of Van Diemen's
Land in a striking aspect.

"Shall the fairest isle in the south be converted into one huge gaol?
shall the free inhabitants be made the passive instruments of punishing
these criminals? Is this the only capacity in which the British
government will recognise the free colonists?

The petitioners have laid their case before the legislature.
They trust they have not appealed in vain--that they will not be driven
from a land where the best days of many of them have been spent"
(February, 1846).

The petition prepared by Mr. Pitcairn was presented in the lords
by the Marquis of Lansdowne (March, 1846). In remarking on its
contents, Lord Stanley begged their lordships to believe that the
question involved interests more important than a single colony!

He stated that Van Diemen's Land could not be swamped by an annual influx
of four thousand.
If, he said, the thirty thousand persons released from the prisons of
France were so intolerable, what must be the condition of England with
sixty thousand expirees then settled in the colonies? Van Diemen's
Land was always a penal colony, and he saw no reason that it should
be otherwise.

Earl Grey warmly censured this policy, and complained "that no hope
of relief from the frightful evils of transportation had been
afforded." He stated that he was "prepared to express an opinion that
transportation should be got rid of. He had long entertained that
opinion, and had never seen the arguments of the Archbishop of Dublin
refuted." A duplicate of this petition, presented to the Commons, was
followed by the motion of Mr. Ewart, "That it is inexpedient to make
Van Diemen's Land the sole receptacle of convicts, and that transportation
be abolished, except as a supplement to penal discipline" (May, 1846).

The day chosen was inauspicious. The "house" was gone to the Epsom
races. Mr.

Hudson, the railway king, not better employed, stumbled into the chapel
of St. Stephen, and counted out the members. Mr. Ewart renewed his
motion (July 6). A few days before Earl Grey and Mr. Hawes had obtained
the command of the colonies, they admitted the facts of the petition,
and promised redress. The liberal principles avowed by the new
government reassured the friends of Van Diemen's Land. Mr. Gladstone
had determined to arrest the influx of convicts for two years: this
was approved by his successor. In quashing the North Australian colony,
Earl Grey stated his dissent from the principles on which it had been
founded (September 30, 1846).

The whigs ever expressed a decided abhorrence of penal colonisation and
the collection of masses cradled in the traditions of crime. When taunted
with this accumulation in Van Diemen's Land as the result of his
policy of 1840, Lord John Russell explained:--"As to the sending
of convicts to Van Diemen's Land, he had intended to adopt the
policy recommended in the work of the Archbishop of Dublin.

Had his plan been carried out, instead of 4,000 convicts sent to Van
Diemen's Land there would not have been more than five or six hundred."

When Earl Grey instructed Sir William Denison in reference to certain
reforms, he intimated his expectation that transportation would
terminate. Soon after Sir William Denison addressed to the magistrates
of the territory a series of enquiries (March, 1847), of which the
first was awfully momentous.

"Do you consider it desirable that transportation of convicts to this
country should cease altogether?" The character of the enquiry
was described in a letter signed by the private secretary.

The governor preferred communicating with these gentlemen, and by
them with their neighbours, rather than with popular assemblies. It was
not, however, to be expected that a subject of direct and universal
concern would be resigned to the discussion of a single class; nor did
persons holding magisterial distinctions, on that account command
the confidence of the people.

This was felt by the magistrates themselves. A preliminary
meeting was convened at Hobart Town to discuss the subject
of the circular. A difference of opinion was apparent, and an angry
altercation ensued. Mr. Carter, a storekeeper, defended transportation
as necessary to trade. Mr. Gregson advised his auditors to cast the
question of crocks and slops to the wind, and to secure at once the final
liberation of the colony. A public meeting was held at Hobart Town.
Ineffectual attempts to postpone the question by the advocates of
transportation were offered, and the speakers on the popular side were
loudly cheered. The party defeated signed a memorial representing that
they were not heard at the meeting, and repudiating its decision.

Sir William Denison promised to place it in the hands of Earl Grey "as
a record to be employed in the support of the facts it contained."

This second petition, adopted by the colony (6th May, 1847), was
also drawn up by Mr.

Pitcairn. The editors of the London _Morning Chronicle_ remarked "That
they never read a public document more calculated to command both the
convictions and sympathies of those whom it addresses.
Future ages would contemplate with amazement the fact that wrongs so
cruel in their nature, and so enormous in their amount, have been
inflicted in civilized times."

It recapitulated the grievances of the colony with energy and clearness.
It complained that promises of relief had proved fallacious--that
the worst evils of transportation were continued; that there were
then four thousand prisoners more in the colony than were ever at one
time in New South Wales, and that 12,000 free persons had quitted the
country since 1841. The petition asked for representative government,
the abolition of transportation, and the importation of 12,000 free
immigrants at the expense of Great Britain; and it recommended the
removal of the men to the colony of North Australia, or wherever
they might be required.

Meetings were held by different classes in several districts of the
colony. In the most populous the feeling decidedly favored abolition.
Not the least important of the series were held in Launceston. Six
magistrates of the north determined to advise with the colonists at
large. The persons who assembled at their call were undecided; the friends
of abolition desired delay; its determined opponents deprecated
public discussion; but to the majority deliberation seemed
necessary, and on the motion of Mr.

Dry a committee was constituted who were requested to collect evidence,
to make a report, and draft a reply to the circular of the governor.[254]
The tradesmen of that public spirited community first expressed
their sentiments.

A few transportationists induced a respectable shopkeeper to propose
thirty-nine reasons for the continuance of transportation, but the warmth
of his elocution and the frequent repetition of "because" in an
Aberdeen accent, dissolved his party in laughter. The good humoured
logician acquiesced in the voice of the assembly and abandoned the cause
of transportation for ever. The meeting convened of the northern colonists
assembled on the 10th of May.

The committee appointed on the 3d of April having prepared a report, and
founded on its conclusions a reply to the circular, it was signed by the
chairman, James Cox, Esq., of Clarendon.[255] Many who were formerly
advocates for transportation as it once existed, saw its dangers
when they became anxious for the moral and social welfare of their
sons.

They were formerly but flockmasters, but they had become the founders
of a state. They learned from the discussions of the ministers that
what they had thought a service rendered to the crown was deemed disgraceful
and degrading.
Opulent settlers who visited Europe found it convenient to conceal
their home, and some less prudent were repelled with unconquerable
distrust.[256] In a small community the public reputation is of personal
importance, and it was alleged that to neglect the offer of social freedom
would be infamy unexampled. To this feeling the abolitionists appealed.
"Parents of Van Diemen's Land," said the author of a pamphlet
called _Common Sense_, "can you hesitate?

Let the timid and sordid doubt,--let them reckon the farthing they
may lose! Let your hearts dictate your answer to the circular. Let it
be worthy Britons, Christians, and Parents. Shew that you prize your
rights, and that you love your children. That land which they tell
you will become a desert when the clank of chains, the cries of
torture, the noise of riot, and the groans of despair shall be heard
no longer, will _not_ become a desert; 'it will blossom abundantly,
and rejoice with joy and singing,' when your sons and daughters
shall go forth, the free among the free.

Consult your own understandings, that you may obey the dictates of your
hearts. The Sovereign has invited you to express your desire. Let it
not be one that will cause the eyes of mankind to look upon you with
abhorrence, and turn away with contempt. Make not your name a scorn
and a hissing! Perform your duty, AND SAVE YOUR ADOPTED COUNTRY!"
FOOTNOTES:

[Footnote 252: Mr. Boyd, August 29, 1845.]
[Footnote 253: Dr. Hampton to the Commissioner of P. P., Aug. '45.]
[Footnote 254: The committee was constituted by the following
gentlemen:--Wm. Archer, J.P., W. H. Browne, L.L.D., James Cox, J.P.,
R.

Dry. M.L.C., F. M. Innes, Esq., J. G. Jennings, J.P., W. R. Pugh,
M.D., J.P., H. Reed, J.P., J. Thompson, Esq., and J. A. Youl, J. P.]
[Footnote 255: This document, some extracts of which express the
prevailing opinion, was read by Mr.

Dry:--
"The circular addressed by his Excellency to the magistrates of this
territory, has been made the subject of careful deliberation.

To his Excellency's first question--'Do you consider it desirable
that the transportation of convicts to this colony should cease
altogether?'

we reply that it is our opinion transportation 'to this country should
cease altogether.'

In connexion with this question we recognise the truth and importance
of his Excellency's caution, that no 'material advantage' ought to
'balance against any amount of moral evil, however small;' we have
therefore directed our attention to this point as preliminary to a
decision on others less vital.

In examining the moral bearings of transportation, we have enquired--

1. Are there any moral evils occasioned by the transportation of convicts
to the colony?

2. If so, are the moral evils now connected with transportation inherent
and inseparable?

3. Can it be presumed that other, and greater moral evils will accrue to
the colony from the stoppage of transportation?

It appears that the convicts in this colony out-number the children,
and amount to nearly double the adult free population; that since
the year 1840, 25,228 prisoners have been transported to Van Diemen's
Land and its dependencies; that one fifth only of these are females;
that the greater proportion of domestic servants as well as laborers
are convicts; that they are in constant contact with every class
of colonial society; and that though not universally, they are
generally persons of bad principles and vicious habits.

The numerical preponderance of prisoners has lowered the general
tone of society, encouraged fraud, obstructed the administration
of justice, and so far multiplied crime as to discourage its
prosecution; notwithstanding 521 persons were _tried_ before the
Supreme Court and Quarter Sessions, last year.

The second enquiry is,--are the evils in connection with transportation
inherent and inseparable?

Looking at the present condition of this island, it may be justly concluded
that they are.

Reason and experience justify the conclusion that the aggregation
of prisoners whether in close bondage or in society, must confirm
them in evil.

The effect of transportation is to force the free working classes from
the island, and to supply their place with prisoners. It appears,
therefore, demonstrable that as far as they are the instruments
of demoralization, it is inevitable, from their numerical
preponderance.

Their condition affords no prospect of extensive reformation, and
whatever evils they may be supposed to create, are essential
consequences of transportation.

3.

'Whether greater evils may not arise from the shock to society, which the
sudden cessation of a supply of labour may cause?'

It is not perceived in what manner the want of labour can be productive
of greater _moral_ evils than now exist.

An increase of wages must be so far beneficial to the employed, and
increase their means of comfort.

It is not supposed that a deficiency of labour will increase the
_immorality of the upper classes_; and no connexion can be discovered
between cessation and an increase of evil in any form whatever.

On the contrary, transportation, by raising the proportion of the
aged, the feeble, and the incapable, would seem to lead to the
apprehension that greater immorality may result as the growing
effect of want and distress.

Even were it true, that the more wealthy classes are safe from contamination
could a moral cordon be drawn--even could they be held safe from the
effects of unrestricted communication with men of the same language,
color, and nation--still there appears no propriety in leaving the
working classes generally out of account. Many were induced to settle
in this country by representations for which the government is
morally responsible. As subjects of the Queen, they are entitled to
be guarded against any measures which may destroy their social
position and domestic security; it would be difficult to justify
the sacrifice of their welfare for the sake of a class--numerically
much smaller--however rich.

And, in looking at the circumstances of this colony, no causes have
been discovered for inferring its decline, _excepting only such as
are the effects of transportation_."

The reply to the first query, "that transportation ought to cease at
once and for ever," elicited applause that lasted some minutes.]
[Footnote 256: In our native land we are looked upon with feelings
of horror.

An old and respected colonist, and a most intimate friend of his
own, had gone home, and had lately returned.

He had told him some stories, and he would vouch for the truth of
them.

When he arrived at home he took his family to an hotel.

He had not been there long before the landlord learnt that he had
come from this place: he came to him with a face full of concern,
and said, "You did not tell me, sir, that you came from Van Diemen's
Land; do not let it be known, or I shall be ruined."

On another occasion a friend of his had to assure the landlord that
he was a perfectly honest man, and he need not be afraid of him,
although he did come from Van Diemen's Land.

A short time after he had been in England he engaged a butler.

He had not been long in the family before he came and said the
place did not suit him, and he left at once.
The servants whom he had taken from this place soon found out the feeling
that existed; and, instead of saying they came from here, they used
to say they came from India.--_Speech of Robert Officer, M.

D., at Hobart Town Meeting._]

SECTION III.

The benefit derived from Mr. M'Lachlan's efforts was apparent to
all.

But he was returning to Van Diemen's Land.

The New South Wales legislature engaged the Honourable F. Scott, M.P., to
watch over their concerns. To this Lord Stanley demurred. He said a
retainer for a colony was inconsistent with the standing obligations
of a member of parliament, and that a committee to direct him would
usurp the functions of the executive (1845).

The old American colonies appointed agents:
sometimes acting for only one branch of the legislature where there
were two chambers.

They were often members of parliament.

Edmund Burke filled this office for the assembly of New York, with
a salary of £500.

The people of Van Diemen's Land formed "The London Agency Association,"
and appointed Mr.

J. A. Jackson to represent them. Their proceedings were adopted by
the colony, at a meeting called by the sheriff of Hobart Town;
they did not however pretend to public authority, and they confined
their attention to secular questions.

The subscribers were called together at this crisis. By a vote, almost
unanimous, they adopted a letter of instructions which directed Mr.

Jackson to support the cause of total abolition.

The London Agency Association expressed the opinions of the country
gentlemen.

There were several other organisations composed chiefly of tradesmen.
In reference, however, to representation and abolition, all classes
agreed.

The British Government seemed to anticipate the wishes of the colonists.

A despatch (February 5, 1847,) from Earl Grey, printed in the blue
book, informed the people that transportation to Van Diemen's Land,
except, indeed, as a part of the colonial empire, was finally
terminated.

There was nothing to prevent the arrival of exiles, when the state
of the colony could admit of their dispersion amidst a free people,--a
condition explicitly required by the primary object of
cessation. This despatch Sir William Denison laid on the table of the
council, and while he noticed its harmony with the wishes of a
large proportion of the free inhabitants, he exhorted them to beware
of undue exultation or despondency whatever the issue of the measure,
and in this crisis of their fate to confide in the goodness of God
(July, 1847).

The views of the government were expounded in official letters and
speeches in the British legislature.

Stated with brevity they expressed a purpose to punish crime in England,
and to assist the emigration to every British colony, individually
rather than collectively, of men with conditional pardons. Sir George
Grey asserted that the idea of resuming transportation to Van
Diemen's Land was illusory. He recommended that the governor should be
instantly informed of its termination. He condemned the practice of
sending many exiles to one place as likely to create a feeling of caste,
and in time produce the evils of penal colonisation. With these views
Earl Grey concurred (February 5, 1847).
He stated that they agreed with his established opinion, and he thought
that well trained convicts might be dispersed in the colonies, especially
taking care to promote the emigration of a considerable number of
persons untainted with crime.

To the same effect was his exposition of the future policy in the House
of Lords. He expressed a hope that exiles might be so distributed
that the chance of recognition should be slight. Lord Brougham made
merry at this notion of banishment as a game at which two could
play, and depicted the consternation of Calais at an arrival of
reformed Pentonvillians.

The chief reliance of Earl Grey was on the demand for convict labor
in the colonies, which he far too highly estimated.

When the intentions of the home government were declared, Sir W. Denison,
who had given opposite advice, hastened to recall his recommendation.

He stated that to resume transportation in any shape would be looked
upon as a breach of faith, and be very embarrassing to government
(August 28, 1847).

The publication of Earl Grey's policy occasioned general gladness
and gratitude.

But it was followed by a measure adverse to its whole spirit and
the facts on which it had been founded (September, 1847).

The governor was directed to remove the convicts at Norfolk Island
to Van Diemen's Land, and to receive those remaining in New South
Wales not entitled to release.

Drafts of transports were constantly arriving from every British
dependency, and thus additions were daily made to the overwhelming convict
population. The vices of the Norfolk Island prisoners had appalled
the empire.

The residuary convicts of New South Wales indicated their character by
their long detention. Some were imprisoned in caverns dug in the rocks,
and their depravity assumed the aspect of mania.

The whole colony was roused by these projects. Meetings and memorials were
multiplied. A deputation to the governor, then in Launceston, was
attended by a long and excited procession.

He concurred in their sentiments, suspended the progress of the scheme,
and received the thanks of the colonists and the minister. The result
was unimportant, for from Norfolk Island the convicts were silently
transmitted to Van Diemen's Land and distributed undistinguished.

Mr. Gladstone, when secretary for the colonies, addressed a confidential
despatch to Sir C. Fitz Roy (April, 1846), and left its publication to
his discretion.

It proposed to renew transportation to New South Wales with the assent of
the colonial legislature. This proposal was submitted to a committee of
the council. A report was founded on the evidence of employers and
forwarded to Earl Grey.

It consented, conditionally; that two free persons should be sent
at the expense of England for every prisoner, and that assignment
should be revived.

It admitted that the real welfare of the colony might be best
promoted by the total stoppage of transportation to Australasia;
and it yielded to a regulated and compensating scheme only as the
alternative of indirect transportation.

"Si, senor; they are perfectly satisfactory."

"I'll be answerable for the extra wages.  Anything to get away from this
Pandemonium of a place."

"In that case, senor, I think we'll have no great difficulty in
procuring hands.  You authorise me to advertise for them?"

"I do," answers Don Gregorio.

"Enough!" rejoins the skipper.  "And now, Senor Montijo, you may make
your preparations for embarking."

"I've not many to make; nearly all has been done already.  It's only to
get our personal baggage aboard, with the freight safely stowed.  By the
way," adds the Biscayan, speaking _sotto-voce_, "I wish to ship the gold
as soon as possible, and without attracting attention to it.  You
understand me, captain?"

"I do."

"I shall have it brought aboard at night, in a boat which belongs to
Silvestre.  It will be safer in your cabin than anywhere else--since no
one need be the wiser about the place of deposit."

"No one shall, through me."

"That I feel certain of, Senor Lantanas.  Don Tomas is your endorser;
and would be willing to be your bondsman, were it needed--which it is
not."

Again the _Condor's_ captain bows in acknowledgment of the confidence
reposed in him; and after some further exchange of speech, respecting
the shipment of the treasure, and the writing out an advertisement,
which Don Gregorio is to _get_ inserted in the _Diario_, the latter
returns to his boat, and is rowed back to the shore; while the Chilian
lights a fresh cigarette, and with elbows rested on the capstan-head,
resumes his customary attitude of _insouciance_, from which he had been
temporarily roused.


CHAPTER EIGHTEEN.

IN SEARCH OF A SECOND.

Just about the time Don Gregorio is taking leave of Captain Lantanas,
the two unwelcome, as unreceived, visitors are turning their backs upon
his house.

De Lara feels his discomfiture the keenest.  His heart is harrowed with
mingled emotions--passions of varied complexion, all evil.  His lips are
livid with rage, his brow black with chagrin, while his eyes fairly
scintillate with unsatisfied vengeance.

While returning along the avenue he neither looks back, nor up.  Not a
syllable escapes him; with glance upon the ground, he rides in sullen
silence.

After clearing the entrance-gate, and again upon the outside road, he
turns face toward the dwelling whose hospitality has been so insultingly
denied him.  He sees nought there to soothe, but something which still
further afflicts him.  Four horses are filing out through the front
gate, conducted by grooms.  They are saddled, bridled, ready for being
mounted.  To his practised eye, their caparison tells that they are
intended only for a short excursion, not a journey.  And though their
saddles are in shape nearly alike, he knows that two of them are to be
mounted by men, the other two to carry ladies.

"The senoritas are going out for a ride--a _paseo de campo_--accompanied
by their English guests," observes Calderon.

Simultaneously, as instinctively, de Lara arrives at this conclusion.
Both now know why they were not received; a knowledge which, instead of
tranquillising their chafed spirits, but maddens them the more.  The
thought of their sweethearts being escorted by these detested rivals,
riding along wild unfrequented paths, through trees overshadowing, away
from the presence of spying domestics, or the interference of protecting
relatives, beyond the eyes and ears of every one--the thought that
Carmen Montijo and Inez Alvarez are setting out on an excursion of this
kind, is to Francisco de Lara and Faustino Calderon bitter as deadliest
poison.

And reflection embitters it the more.  The excursionists will have every
opportunity of wandering at will.  They will become separated; and there
can be no doubt as to how the partition will be made; the older of the
two officers will pair off with Dona Carmen, the younger with Dona Inez.
Thus, they will ride unmolested, unobserved; converse without fear of
being overheard; clasp hands without danger of being seen--perhaps
exchange kisses!  Oh, the dire, desperate jealousy!  Even the dull brain
and cold heart of Calderon are fired by these reflections.  They sting
him to the quick.  But not as De Lara; for not as De Lara does he love.

After gazing for a while at the house--at the horses and grooms--at the
preparations that are being made for mounting--noting their magnificent
style--with a last glance such as Satan gave when expelled from
Paradise, the Creole drives the spur deep into his horse's ribs, and
dashes off down the hill the Californian after.

At its bottom they again come to a halt, being now out of sight of the
house.  Facing toward his companion, De Lara says:

"We're in for a fight, Faustino; both of us."

"Not both.  I don't think I'm called upon to challenge that youngster.
He's but a boy."

"He's been man enough to insult you; and, if I mistake not, you'll find
him man enough to meet you."

"I don't see that he _did_ insult me."

"Indeed; you don't?  Sticking your horse, as if it were a pig, and
sending him off in a stampede that well nigh dismounted you; all before
the face of your lady-love--right under her eyes!  You don't deem that
an insult, eh?"

"But you must remember I gave him provocation.  At your bidding, I all
but rode over him.  Looking at it in that light, he's in a sense
excusable for what he did.  Besides, he only meant it as a joke.  Didn't
you see, when it was all over, how he laughed at it?"

"Not at _it_, but at _you_.  So did your sweetheart, _amigo_.  As we
reined up under the walls, I could see her long lashes drooping down,
the eyes looking disdain at you, with her pretty lips pouting in very
scorn.  You're evidently out of her good graces, and you'll have to do
something ere you can reinstate yourself."

"Do you really think so?"

"I am sure of it.  Never surer of anything in my life."

"But what would you have me to do?"

"You ought to know without asking me.  Call out the cub, and _kill_
him--if you can.  What I design doing with my gentleman."

"Ah! you're a dead shot; and that makes all the difference.  These
Anglo-Saxons always use pistols; and if I challenge him, he'll have the
choice of weapons."

"Quite true.  With me it will be different.  I took care to _give_ the
affront, and you should have done the same.  Seeing you got the worst of
it, you ought to have followed up your first dash at him by something
besides--a slap across the cheek, or a cut with your whip."

"I'm sorry now I didn't give him one or the other."

"Well, you may find an opportunity yet.  For my quarrel, I don't care a
toss whether it be settled with swords or pistols.  We Creoles of
Louisiana are accustomed to the use of either weapon.  Thanks to old
Gardalet of the Rue Royale, I've got the trick of both; and am equally
ready to send a half-ounce of lead, or twelve inches of steel, through
the body of this Britisher.  By the way, what's his name?"

The speaker pulls out the card given him by the English officer, and
glancing at it, answers his own question: "Edward Crozier, H.M.S.
_Crusader_."

"Ha!  Mr Ned Crozier!" he exclaims, speaking in plain English, the
sight of the card seemingly giving a fresh fillip to his spleen; "you've
had your triumph to-day.  'Twill be mine to-morrow.  And, if my fortune
don't fail me, there'll be an empty seat at the mess-table of the ship
_Crusader_."

"You really intend fighting him?"

"Now, Don Faustino Calderon, why do you ask that question?"

"Because I think all might be arranged without--"

"Without what?  Speak out, man!"

"Why, without any spilling of blood."

"You may arrange it that way, if you like.  Your quarrel is a distinct
one, and I've nothing to do with it--having my own hands full.  Indeed,
if they were empty, I'm not so sure I should be your second--talking as
you do.  However, that's not the purpose now.  In answer to your first
question, I can only say what I've said before.  I not only intend
fighting this Crozier, but _killing_ him.  True, I may fail in my
intention; if so, there's an end of it, and of _me_.  For, once on the
ground, I don't leave it a living man, if he do.  One or both of us
shall stay there, till we're carried off--feet-foremost."

"_Carramba_! your talk gives one the trembles.  It's not pleasant to
think of such things, let alone doing them."

"Think your own way, and welcome.  To me it would be less pleasant to
leave them undone; less now, than ever in my life.  After what I've gone
through, I don't care much for character--in truth, not a straw.  That's
all stuff and pretension.  Money makes the man, and without it he's
nothing; though he were a saint.  Respectability--bah!  I don't value it
a _claco_.  But there's a reputation of another kind I _do_ value, and
intend to preserve.  Because in my world it counts for something--has
counted already."

"What is that?"

"Courage.  Losing it, I should lose everything.  And in this very city
of San Francisco, I'd be only a hound where I'm now a hunter; barked at
by every cur, and kicked by every coward who choose to pick a quarrel
with me."

"There's no danger of that, Don Francisco.  All who have had dealings
with you know better.  There's little fear of any one putting a slight
upon _you_."

"There would be, if I refused to fight this fellow.  Then you'd see the
difference.  Why, Faustino Calderon.  I couldn't sit at our monte table,
and keep the red-shirts from robbing us, if they didn't know 'twould be
a dangerous game to play.  However, it isn't _their_ respect I value
now, but that of one very different."

"Of whom?"

"Again you ask an idle question; so idle, that I don't believe you care
a straw for Inez Alvarez--or know what love is."

"What has she to do with it?"

"She--nothing.  That's true enough.  I don't care aught for her, or what
she might think of me.  But I do care for Carmen Montijo; above all
things I value her good opinion.  At least, so far, that she sha'n't
think me either a fool or a coward.  She may be fancying me the first;
but if so, she'll find herself mistaken.  At all events, she'll get
convinced I'm not the last.  And if it be as rumour reports, and as you
say you've heard, that she's given her heart to this _gringo_, I'll take
care she don't bestow her _hand_ upon him--not while I live.  When I'm
dead, she can do as she likes."

"But after what's passed, will you ever speak to her again?"

"Ay, that will I--in a way that'll make her listen to me."

"But, surely, you don't still intend proposing to her?"

"Perhaps.  Though not till I've finished this affair with the fellow who
interrupted me.  Yes; I'll give her every chance to save herself.  She
shall say yea, or nay, in straight speech, and in so many words.  After
that, I'll understand how to act.  But come! we're wasting time.  A
duel's a thing won't do to dally over.  Do you intend to meet your man,
or not?"

"I'd rather not," replies the poltroon, hesitatingly; "that is, if the
thing can be arranged.  Do you think it can, De Lara?"

"Of course, it can; your _thing_, as you call it; though not without
disgrace to you.  You should fight him, Faustino."

"Well; if you say I should, why, I suppose I must.  I never fired a
pistol in my life, and am only second-rate with the sword.  I can handle
a _machete_, or a _cuchilla_, when occasion calls for it; but these
weapons won't be admitted in a duel between gentlemen.  I suppose the
sailor fellow claims to be one?"

"Undoubtedly he does, and with good reason.  An officer belonging to a
British man-of-war would call you out for questioning his claim to the
epithet.  But I think you underrate your skill with the small-sword.
I've seen you doing very well with that weapon--at Roberto's
fencing-school."

"Yes; I took lessons there.  But fencing is very different from
fighting."

"Never mind.  When you get on the duelling-ground, fancy yourself within
the walls of Roberto's shooting-gallery, and that you are about to take
a fresh lesson in the _art d'escrime_.  About all, choose the sword for
your weapon."

"How can I, if I am to be the challenger?"

"You needn't be.  There's a way to get over that.  The English officers
are not going straight back to their ship; not likely before a late hour
of the night.  After returning from their ride, I take it they'll stay
to dinner at Don Gregorio's; and with wine to give them a start, they'll
be pretty sure to have a cruise, as they call it, through the town.
There, you may meet your man; and can insult him, by giving him a cuff,
spitting in his face--anything to put the onus of challenging upon him."

"_Por Dios_!  I'll do as you say."

"That's right.  Now let us think of what's before us.  As we are both to
be principals, we can't stand seconds to one another.  I know who'll act
for me.  Have you got a friend you can call upon?"

"Don Manuel Diaz.  He's the only one I can think of."

"Don Manuel will do.  He's a cool hand, and knows all the regulations of
the _duello_.  But he's not at home to-day.  As I chance to know, he's
gone to a _funcion de gallos_ at Punta Pedro; and by this time should be
in the cock-pit."

"Why can't we go there?  Or had we better send?"

"Better send, I think.  Time's precious--at least mine is.  As you know,
I must be at the monte table soon as the lamps are lit.  If I'm not, the
bank will go begging, and we may lose our customers.  Besides, there's
my own second to look up, which must be done this day before I lay a
hand upon the cards.  What hour is it?  I've not brought my timepiece
with me."

"Twelve o'clock, and a quarter past," answers Calderon, after consulting
his watch.

"Only that!  Then we'll have plenty of time to get to Punta Pedro, and
witness a main.  Don Manuel has a big bet on his _pardo_.  I'd like
myself to stake a doubloon or two on that bird.  Yes, on reflection,
we'd better go to the _pelea de gallos_.  That will be the surest way to
secure the services of Diaz.  _Vamonos_!"

At this the two intending duellists again set their steeds in motion;
and, riding for a short distance along the shore-road, turn into
another, which will take them to Punta Pedro.

With jealous anger still unappeased, they urge their horses into a
gallop, riding as if for life, on an errand whose upshot may be death--
to one or both of them.


CHAPTER NINETEEN.

A "PASEO DE CABALLO."

The promontory called Punta Pedro is not in San Francisco Bay, but on
the outside coast of the Pacific.  To reach it from the former, it is
necessary to traverse the dividing ridge between the two waters--this a
spur of the "Coast Range," which, running higher as it trends southward,
is known to Spanish Californians as the San Bruno Mountains.

Punta Pedro abuts from their base into the ocean; the coast in this
quarter being bold and picturesque, but almost uninhabited.  Here and
there only the solitary hut of a seal-hunter, or fisherman, with a small
collection of the same near the point itself, bearing its name, and a
somewhat indifferent reputation.  The Anglo-Saxon gold-seekers do not go
there; it is only frequented by the natives.

From San Francisco to Punta Pedro the road runs past Dolores--an ancient
mission of the Franciscan monks, whose port was, as already stated,
Yerba Buena, previous to becoming re-christened San Francisco.

This route De Lara and Calderon have taken, getting into it by a
cross-cut; and along it they continue to ride, still at a gallop, with
faces set for Dolores.

They are not the only equestrians moving along that road.  The dust
kicked up by their horses hoofs has just settled down when a second
party appears, going in the same direction, though at a gentler gait;
for it is a cavalcade composed partly of ladies.

It is a quartette, two of each sex; and as the horses are the same
already seen standing saddled in the courtyard of Don Gregorio's house,
it is not necessary to give the names of the riders.  These can be
guessed.

Dona Carmen is carrying out the instructions left by her father, who,
Californian fashion, supposed he could give his sailor-guests no greater
treat than a _paseo de caballo_, including an excursion to the old
Dolores Mission, without a visit to which no exploration of the country
around San Francisco can be considered complete.  It is not the least of
California's "lions."

Like most Spanish-American ladies, Don Gregorio's daughter takes delight
in the saddle, and spends some part of each day in it.  An accomplished
_equestrienne_, she could take a five-barred gate, or a bullfinch, with
any of the hunting Dianas of England; and, if she has not ridden to
hounds, she has chased wild horses, mounted on one but little less wild.
That on which she now sits seems but half-tamed.  Fresh from the
stable, he rears and pitches, at times standing erect on his hind legs.
For all, his rider has no fear of being unhorsed.  She only smiles,
pricks him with the spur, and regardlessly cuts him with her _cuarto_.

Much after the same fashion acts Inez, for she, too, has learned the
Californian style of equitation.

The two present a picture that, to the eye unaccustomed to Mexican
habits, might seem somewhat _bizarre_.  Their mode of mount--as already
said, _a la Duchesse de Berri_--their half-male attire, hats of vicuna
wool, _calzoncillas_ lace-fringed over their feet, buff boots, and large
rowelled spurs--all these give them an air of _bizarrerie_, at the same
time a pleasing picturesqueness; and, if appearing bold, still
beautiful, as the South Sea wind flouts back the limp brims of their
sombreros, and tosses their hair into dishevelment, while the excitement
of the ride brings the colour to their cheeks--with flashes, as of fire,
from their eyes.

The young English officers regard them with glances of ardent
admiration.  If they have been but smitten before, they are getting fast
fixed now; and both will soon be seriously in love.  The _paseo de
caballo_ promises to terminate in a proposal for a longer journey in
companionship--through life, in pairs.

They are thus grouped: Crozier alongside Carmen--Cadwallader with Inez.
The officers are in their uniforms--a costume for equestrian exercise
not quite shipshape as they would phrase it.  On horseback in a naval
uniform!  It would not do riding thus on an English road; there the
veriest country lout would criticise it.  But different in California,
where all ride, gentle or simple, in dresses of every conceivable cut
and fashion, with no fear of being ridiculed therefor.  None need attach
to the dress worn by Edward Crozier.  His rank has furnished him with a
frock-coat, which, well-fitting, gives a handsome contour to his person.
Besides, he is a splendid horseman--has followed hounds before he ever
set foot aboard a ship.  Carmen Montijo perceives this; can tell it with
half a glance; and it pleases her to reflect that her escorting cavalier
is equal to the occasion.  She believes him equal to anything.

With the other pair the circumstances are slightly different.  Will
Cadwallader is no horseman, having had but scant practice--a fact patent
to all--Inez as the others.  Besides, the mid is dressed in a
pea-jacket; which, although becoming enough aboard ship, looks a little
_outre_ in the saddle, especially upon a prancing Californian steed.
Does it make the young Welshman feel ashamed of himself?  Not a bit.  He
is not the stuff to be humiliated on the score of an inappropriate
costume.  Nor yet by his inferiority in horsemanship, of which he is
himself well aware.  He but laughs as his steed prances about--the
louder when it comes near pitching him.

How does he appear in the eyes of Inez Alvarez?  Does she think him
ridiculous?  No.  On the contrary, she seems charmed, and laughs along
with him--delighted by his _naivete_, and the courage he displays in not
caring for consequences.  She knows he is out of his own element--the
sea.  She believes that on it he would be brave, heroic; among ropes the
most skilled of reefers; and if he cannot gracefully sit a home, he
could ride big billows, breasting them like an albatross.

Thus mutually taking each other's measure, the four equestrians canter
on, and soon arrive at the mission.

But they do not design to stay there.  The ride has _been_ too short,
the sweet moments have flown quickly; and the summit of a high hill,
seen far beyond, induces them to continue the excursion.

They only stop to give a glance at the old monastery, where Spanish
monks once lorded it over their copper-skinned neophytes; at the church,
where erst ascended incense, and prayers were pattered in the ears of
the aborigines--by them ill understood.

A moment spent in the cemetery, where Carmen points out the tomb
enclosing the remains of her mother, dropping a tear upon it--perhaps
forced from her by the reflection that soon she will be far from that
sacred spot--it may be, never to revisit it!

Away from it now; and on to that hill from which they can descry the
Pacific!

In another hour they have reined up on its summit, and behold the great
South Sea, stretching to far horizon's verge, to the limit of their
vision.  Before them all is bright and beautiful.  Only some specks in
the dim distance--the lone isles of the Farrallones.  More northerly,
and nearer, the "Seal" rocks and that called _Campana_--from its arcade
hollowed out by the wash of waves, giving it a resemblance to the belfry
of a church.  Nearer still, below a belt of pebbly beach, a long line of
breakers, foam-crested, and backed by a broad reach of sand-dunes--there
termed _medanos_.

Seated in the saddle, the excursionists contemplate this superb
panorama.  The four are now together, but soon again separate into
pairs, as they have been riding along the road.  Somehow or other, their
horses have thus disposed themselves: that ridden by Crozier having
drawn off with the one carrying Carmen; while the steed so ill-managed
by Cadwallader has elected to range itself alongside that of Inez.

Perhaps the pairing has not been altogether accidental.  Whether or no,
it is done; and the conversation, hitherto general, is reduced to the
simplicity of dialogue.

To report it correctly, it is necessary to take the pairs apart, giving
priority to those who by their years have the right to it.

Crozier, looking abroad over the ocean, says--

"I shall ere long be upon it."  He accompanies the speech with a sigh.

"And I, too," rejoins Carmen, in a tone, and with accompaniment,
singularly similar.

"How soon do you think of leaving California?" queries the young
officer.

"Oh, very soon!  My father is already making arrangements, and hopes
being able to set sail in a week, if not less.  Indeed, he has this day
been to see about taking passages to Panama.  That's why he was not at
home to receive you; leaving me to do the honours of the house, and
apologise for his seeming rudeness."

For that not much apology was needed, thinks Crozier, who is for a time
silent, not knowing what next to say.  Love, reputed eloquent, is oft
the reverse; and though opening the lips of a landsman, will shut those
of men who follow the sea.  There is a remarkable modesty about the
latter more than the former--in the presence of women.  Why, I cannot
tell; only knowing that as a rule it is so; and certainly in the case of
Edward Crozier.

In time he gets over his embarrassment, so far as to venture upon an
interrogatory, not very pertinent--

"I suppose, Dona Carmen, you are very happy at the prospect of returning
to Spain?"

"No, indeed," answers Don Gregorio's daughter.  "On the contrary, it
makes me rather melancholy.  I love dear California, and could live in
it all my life.  Couldn't you?"

"Under certain circumstances, I could."

"But you like the country, don't you?"

"I do, now.  In ten days from this time, I shall no longer care for it--
not three straws."

"Why do you say that, Don Eduardo?  There's an enigma in your words.
Please explain them?"

While asking the question, her grey-blue eyes gaze into his, with an
expression of searching eagerness--almost anxiety.

"Shall I tell you why, senorita!"

"I have asked you, senor."

"Well, then, I like California now, because it contains the fairest
object on earth--to me the dearest--the woman I love.  In ten days or
less, by her own showing, she will be away from it; why should I care
for it then?  Now, Dona Carmen, I've given you the key to what you've
called an enigma."

"Not quite.  Perhaps you will pardon a woman's curiosity, if I ask the
name of the lady who thus controls your likes and dislikes."

Crozier hesitates, a red spot flushing out upon his cheek.  He is about
to pronounce a name--perhaps make a speech, the most important he has
ever made in his life--because laden with his life's happiness, or
leading to the reverse.  What if it should be coldly received?

But no; he cannot be mistaken.  Her question, so quaintly, yet so
impressively put--surely courts the answer he intends giving?  And he
gives it without further reflection--her own name, not an added word.

"_Carmen Montijo_."

"Eduardo," she asks, after a pause, dropping the Don, "are you in
earnest?  Can I take this as true?  Do not deceive me--in honour do not!
To you--and I truly tell you--I have surrendered all my heart.  Say
that I have yours!"

"I have said it, Carmen," he too adopting the familiar language of love.
"Have I not?"

"Sincerely?"

"Look in my eyes for the answer."

She obeys; and drawing closer, tiny gaze into one another's eyes; the
flashes from the blue crossing and commingling with those from the
brown.  Neither could mistake the meaning of the glance, for it is the
true light of love, pure as passionate.

Not another word passes between them.  The confession, with its dreaded
crisis, is passed; and, with hearts quivering in sweet content, they
turn their thoughts to the future, full of pleasant promise.

Near by are two other hearts, quite as happy as theirs; though after a
scene less sentimental, and a dialogue that, to a stranger overhearing
it, might appear to be in jest.  For all, in real earnest, and so
ending--as may be inferred from the young Welshman's final speech, with
the reply of his Andalusian sweetheart:

"Inez, you're the dearest girl I've met in all my cruisings.  Now, don't
let us beat about any longer, but take in sail, and bring the ship to an
anchor.  Will you be mine, and marry me?"

"I will."

No need to stay longer there--no object in continuing to gaze over the
ocean.

The horses seem instinctively to understand this; and, turning together,
set their heads for home.


CHAPTER TWENTY.

POT VALIANT.

The bright Californian sun is declining towards the crest of the Coast
Range, when two horsemen, coming from the Pacific side, commence
ascending the ridge.

As the sultry hours have passed, and a chill breeze blows from the
outside ocean, they have thrust their heads through the central slits of
their cloaks--these being _mangas_--leaving the circular skirts to droop
down below their knees--while draping back, cavalry fashion, over the
hips of their horses.  The colours of these garments--one scarlet, the
other sky-blue--enable us to identify the wearers as Don Francisco de
Lara and Don Faustino Calderon; for in truth it is they, returning from
the _pelea de gallos_ at Punta Pedro.

They have seen Diaz, and arranged everything about the duel.  Faustino
has finally determined upon fight.  Instigated by his more courageous
confederate, and with further pressing on the part of Diaz--a sort of
Californian bravo--his courage has been at length screwed up to the
necessary pitch; and kept there by the potent spirit of Catalonian
brandy, found freely circulating around the cock-pit.

A flask of the _Catalan_ he has brought away with him, and at intervals
takes a pull from it, as he rides along the road.  Under its influence
he becomes pot valiant; and swears, if he can but again set eyes upon
the English _guardia-marina_, he will affront him in such fashion as to
leave him no loophole of escape from being the challenger.  _Carrai_! he
will do as De Lara has recommended: cuff the young officer, kick him,
spit in his face, anything to provoke the _gringo_ to a fight--that
yellow-haired cub without _bigots_ or beard.  And if the cur won't
fight, then he shall apologise--get down upon his knees, acknowledge
him, Faustino Calderon, the better man, and for ever after surrender all
claim to the smiles, as to the hand, of Inez Alvarez!

With such swaggering talk he entertains his companion, as the two are
returning to town.

De Lara, less noisy, is nevertheless also excited.  The fiery alcohol
has affected him too.  Not to strengthen his courage; for of this he has
already enough; but to remove the weight from off his soul, which, after
the scene at Don Gregorio's, had been pressing heavily upon it.  Six
hours have since elapsed, and for the first three he had been brooding
over his humiliation, his spirit prostrate in the dust.  But the
_Catalan_ has again raised it to a pitch of exultation; especially when
he reflects upon the prospect of the sure and speedy vengeance he is
determined to take.

It does not occur to him to doubt of success.  With thorough reliance on
his skill as a swordsman, he feels sure of it.  Though also a good shot,
he prefers the steel for his weapon; like most men of the southern
Latinic race, who believe Northerners to be very bunglers at sword-play,
though admitting their superiority in the handling of the pistol.  As
things stand, unlike his comrade Calderon, he will have the choice of
weapons.  His intended antagonist was the first to demand the card, and
must needs be challenger.

As the two ride on, they talk alternately, both giving vent to their
spleen--the man of courage, as the coward.  If not so loud, or
boastingly, as his companion, De Lara expresses himself with a more
spiteful and earnest determination; repeating much of what he has
already said at an earlier hour, but with added emphasis.  Once he sees
the English officer at his rapier's point, he will show him no mercy,
but run him through, without the slightest compunction.  In vain may his
adversary cry "Quarter."  There can be none conceded, after what has
that day passed between them.

"_Maldita_! it shall be a duel to the death!" he exclaims, after having
given way to a series of threats, the words pronounced with an
_empressement_ that tells him to be truly, terribly in earnest.

They have been carrying on this excited dialogue, as their horses
climbed the slope from the Pacific side, its steepness hindering them
from going at their usual gait--a gallop.  On rising the ridge's crest,
and catching sight of San Francisco, with its newly painted white walls,
and shining tin roofs, reflected red in the rays of the setting sun, De
Lara, suddenly remembering the pressure upon him as to time, strikes the
spur sharp against his horse's ribs, and puts the animal to speed.  The
other imitating his example, they dash on towards Dolores.

They have no intention to make stop at the mission; but, on reaching it,
they draw up; obedient to the hail of a man seen standing in the door of
a little tavern, or _tinacal_, frequented by the lower class of native
Californians.

A rough, swarthy-skinned fellow, in a garb that proclaims his calling to
have connection with the sea, though not that of a sailor.  He may be a
shore-boatman--perhaps a _piscador_--though, judging by his general
appearance, and the uncanny cast of his countenance, he might well pass
for a pirate.

Stepping a few paces out from the _tinacal_, he salutes the two
horsemen, who have halted in the middle of the road to await his
approach.  Despite his coarse, brutal aspect, and common habiliments, he
is evidently on terms of familiarity with both--the style of his
salutation showing it.  It is with De Lara, however, his business lies,
as signified by his saying:

"I want a word with you, Don Francisco."

"What is it, Rocas?" asks the Creole.  "Anything about _seal-skins_?"
laying a significant emphasis on the last word.

"_Carramba_!  No.  Something of more importance than that."

"Money, then?"

"Money."

"Do you wish our speech to be private?"

"Just now, yes.  Perhaps, in time, Don Faustino--"

"Oh!" interrupts the _ganadero_, "don't let me stand in the way.  I'll
ride slowly on; you can overtake me, Don Francisco."

"Do," says De Lara, at the same time stooping down in his saddle, and
continuing the conversation with Rocas, in tone so low as to prevent
their speech being overheard by other queer-looking customers who have
just stepped out of the _tinacal_, and stand loitering at its door.

Whatever Rocas may have said, it appears to make a vivid impression on
the gambler.  His eyes kindle up with a strange light, in which surprise
is succeeded by an expression of cupidity; while his manner proclaims
that the revelation made to him is not only important, as he has been
forewarned, but also pleasing.

Their muttered dialogue is of brief duration; ending with a remark which
shows it to be only preliminary to a further and more prolonged
conference.

"I shall be with you to-morrow, by mid-day."  It is De Lara who has said
this; after which adding: "_Adios, Don Rafael!  Hasta manana_!" he gives
his horse the spur, and gallops to overtake his travelling companion;
Rocas sauntering back towards the _tinacal_.


CHAPTER TWENTY ONE.

A "GOLPE DE CABALLO."

On coming up with the _ganadero_, De Lara rides on silently by his side,
without exhibiting any desire to satisfy the other's curiosity.  He but
piques it by saying, that Rocas has a made communication of an intensely
interesting kind; which he will impart to him, Faustino, in due time;
but now there are other matters of more importance to be attended to.
The fighting is before them; and that cannot be set aside.

Calderon wishes it could: for the flask has been for a time forgotten,
and the spirit has been getting cold within him.

"Take another pull!" counsels his companion; "you may need it.  We'll
soon be in the town, and, perhaps, the first man we meet there will be
your yellow-haired rival."

Scarcely have the words passed De Lara's lips when something in front
fixes his attention, as also that of his companion.  At some distance
along the road a cloud of dust is ascending; in its midst a darker
nucleus, distinguishable as the forms of horses with riders on their
backs.  There appear to be four of them, filed two and two.

Plying their spurs, and galloping closer, the gamblers perceive that
this equestrian party is proceeding in the same direction as
themselves--towards the town.

But they are soon near enough to know that such is not their
destination.  For, despite the enshrouding dust, they have no difficulty
in identifying the individuals before them.  The horses are the same
seen that morning, saddled and bridled, in front of Don Gregorio's
house.  Two of the riders are Carmen Montijo and Inez Alvarez; the other
two--

At this point conjecture terminates.  De Lara, certain, and no longer
able to control himself, cries out:

"_Carajo_! it's they returning from their excursion--paired off, as I
supposed they would be!  So, Calderon, you have your chance sooner than
you expected.  And without seeking it--a lucky omen!  There's your
rival, riding by the side of your sweetheart, and pouring soft speech
into her ear!  Now's your time to set things straight--insult him to
your heart's content.  I feel like giving a fresh affront to mine."

He draws rein, bringing his horse to a halt.  The _ganadero_ does the
same.  Scanning the equestrians ahead, they see them two and two, each
pair some ten or twelve paces apart from the other.  Crozier and Carmen
are in the advance, Cadwallader and Inez behind.

De Lara looks not at the latter couple; his eyes are all upon the
former, staring with fixed intensity, full of jealous fire, in a glare
such as only a tiger might give, on seeing Carmen Montijo turn towards
her escorting cavalier, and bend over--he to her--till their heads are
close together, and their lips seemingly in contact!

"_Carrai_! they're kissing!" he exclaims, in a tone of bitter
exasperation.

He can bear it no longer.  With a shout, half angry, half anguished, he
digs the spur deep, and dashes forward.

The clattering of hoofs behind first warns Cadwallader, who is nearest
to the noise.  For, up to this time, the lovers, absorbed in sweet
converse, dreamed not of danger.

The young Welshman, glancing back, sees what it is, at the same time
hears De Lara's wild cry.  Intuitively he understands that some outrage
is intended--a repetition of the morning's work, with doubtless
something more.

Quickly he draws his dirk: not now to be used in sport, for the mere
pricking of a horse, but in serious earnest, to be buried in the body of
a man--if need be.  This resolve can be read in his attitude, in his
eyes, in his features.  These no longer bent in the laugh of a reckless
boy, but the rigid, resolute determination of a man.  Badly as he sits
his horse, it will not do now to dash against him.  The collision may
cost life--in all likelihood, that of the aggressor.

De Lara sweeps past the midshipman without saying a word; without even
taking notice of him.  His affair is with one further on.

But now Calderon is coming up, clearly with the intent to assault, as
shown in his eyes.

Suddenly, however, their expression changes at sight of the bared blade.
Again that diabolical dirk!  Despite a pull he has just taken from the
flask, his courage fails him; and crestfallen, as a knight compelled to
lower his plume, he too passes Cadwallader, without a word--riding on
after De Lara.

He overtakes the latter in time to be spectator of a scene; in its
commencement somewhat similar to that enacted by himself, but with a
very different termination.

Crozier, whose ear has also caught the sounds from behind, draws bridle,
and looks back.  He sees De Lara making towards him; and, at a glance,
divines the intent.  It is a _golpe de caballo_, or collision of
horses--a common mode of assault among Spanish Californians.

Instead of turning aside to avoid it, he of Shropshire determines on a
different course.  He knows he is upon a strong horse, and feels
confident he can stay there.

With this confidence he faces towards the advancing enemy, and after
taking true bearing, spurs straight at him.

Breast to breast the horses meet, shoulder to shoulder the men.  Not a
word between these themselves, both too maddened to speak.  Only a cry
from Carmen Montijo, a shriek from Inez Alvarez, heard simultaneously
with the shock.

When it is over, Don Francisco de Lara is seen rolling upon the road--
his horse kicking and sprawling in the dust beside him.

Regaining his feet, the gambler rushes to get hold of a pistol, whose
butt protrudes from his saddle-holster.

He is too late: Cadwallader has come up; and, dropping down out of his
saddle, as if from a ship's shrouds, makes himself master of the weapon.

Thus at a season of commercial stagnation the benefit of convict labor
was withdrawn, while the charges for police and gaols rose to
one-third of the entire revenue of the colony, and in two years and
a-half a debt accumulated to £100,000.

Notwithstanding the obvious injustice of this burden, the treatment
of the New South Wales legislature gave slight hope of redress.

Lord Stanley directed Sir George Gipps to obviate the threatened
resistance of that council by hastening pardons to the prisoners,
by withdrawing them from the service of the settlers, and by sending
those not otherwise disposable to Van Diemen's Land.

He was forbidden to relieve extreme financial difficulties by drafts on
England, or draw from the military chest, although at the period
an immense body of convicts remained long after transportation had ceased.
This disregard of a more powerful colony led the people of Van Diemen's
Land to infer that from a minister so unscrupulous no justice could be
expected while evasion was possible.

Wilmot was deeply embarrassed, but he determined to adhere to the
instructions of the secretary of state, whose distance prevented his
perceiving the hopelessness of his project until that discovery
was unavailing.

The positive nature of these injunctions left no room for discretion. The
governor was commanded not to adopt any detailed regulations at
variance with the scheme prescribed by the crown, or to depart from
its provisions without express authority.[234]
Sir Eardley Wilmot resolved that the utmost extent of taxation
should be tried rather than infringe the orders of Stanley.

A bill to raise the duties on sugar, teas, and foreign goods from
5 to 15 per cent.
encountered an earnest but unavailing opposition.

This bill was still more obnoxious from a clause, afterwards
abandoned, to levy the duty on the current value of goods at the
market of consumption, instead of export--a mode which taxed all
the expenses of shipment.

Mr. Gregson proposed the rejection of an impost required only by the
extraordinary pressure of convictism. Several of the non-official members
voted with the governor for the last time.

A committee of the council had been appointed to ascertain how the expenditure
could be reduced and the revenue augmented. They enumerated various
forms in which further taxation might be practicable. These were
proposed by the governor. Auctioneers, pawnbrokers, publicans, butchers,
eating-house keepers, stage-coach and steam-boat proprietors, cabmen,
and watermen, were to be subject to new or increased license
fees.

This project aroused the people to an unusual degree. On the day of public
meeting[235] a procession of cabs and waggons, decorated with flags
bearing the inscription, "No taxation without representation,"
presented a novelty in colonial agitation.

Mr. Kemp, the veteran politician, presided. The opposition prevailed,
and the governor resolved to withdraw the obnoxious measure. It would
be difficult to discern a line beyond which taxation might not
pass, if every trade and profession can be subject to arbitrary
imposts levied by a legislature at the mere dictation of the crown.

Referring to this meeting as a triumph which history would report to the
latest posterity, the _Courier_ added--"Rulers will henceforth
recoil from the virtuous indignation of the people, as the reptile
recoiled from the touch of Ithuriel's spear." It was supposed by
Wilmot that this not very lucid prediction conveyed a gross and
personal insult, and that it attributed to him the artifices and
loathsome habits of the fiend.
The private secretary was instructed to withdraw the subscription of
the governor, and to explain the cause of his displeasure. Such
petulance took the colony by surprise. A less experienced politician
might have been expected to disregard a heavier censure; and this
conflict with a local editor was noticed by the London press as a
curious instance of official sensibility.

The sheriff refused to call a meeting to consider the condition of the
colony, because one of the objects was to notice the appropriation of
the public revenue. This he had been advised was an interference with
the royal prerogative!

The friendly tone of his refusal restrained the wrath it was calculated
to excite. It is quite impossible to suppose any branch of politics
more clearly within the sphere of popular remonstrance than the
expenditure of the public money (August, 1845).

Mr. Bicheno, the colonial secretary, who, like the governor, might have
been popular in quiet times, was little qualified for a stormy debate.

He announced the most arbitrary notions in the blandest tones, and
asserted that the doctrine of concurrent representation and taxation
was a wild revolutionary idea, exploded by American independence.
The revenues he called the Queen's, and thought it monstrous that
any should dispute her right to her own.

Though he compared the parent country to the hen and the colonies
to chickens, he could see nothing to disturb the analogy in a demand
for fresh contributions. He asserted that all constitutional history
showed that it was the prerogative of the crown to tax the people,
and instanced the Cape--a conquered province--as an example. He
affirmed that customs were not taxes, as the public were not compelled
to use the articles on which they were levied.

The prosperity of communities he asserted rose with the increase of
taxation; that the placards posted over the town were a complete delusion.
Taxation and representation--a cry first introduced by Lord Chatham,
was, he said, never adopted by the liberal whigs (August, 1845).

Such un-English notions were no assistance to the cause of the executive,
and were distasteful to all who pretended to value constitutional
government.

The _ad valorem_ duties, raised to 15 per cent., for some time produced
less than they realised at five.

The licensing scheme being rejected, nothing remained but to reduce the
expenditure or increase the debt. To relieve the revenue and employ the
convicts the executive proposed a road act, and another for lighting
and paving Hobart Town.

The great objection to these measures was their design to evade the
question at issue between the home government and the colony;--with
many more odious still as recognising a right in a crown appointed
legislature either directly or indirectly to tax the people.

Mr. Gregson stated early in the session that he would not levy a shilling
additional until the burdens of police were equitably adjusted.
Supported by Captain Swanston, formerly a staunch adherent of Sir G.

Arthur, he successfully moved the rejection of these bills. Their
discussion drew forth many expressions of personal feeling. The governor
declared he would not stay in office one hour did he not believe that
Lord Stanley meant fairly by the colony, or could he not conscientiously
act upon his lordship's instructions; and he begged that all the
opprobrium cast on Lord Stanley might be considered equally applied
to himself.

He remarked that the opposition had exhibited a spirit "more radical and
even Jacobinical" than he ever had witnessed in parliamentary factions.
These reproaches were repelled by Mr. Gregson, who contended that in
resisting unjust exactions for convict purposes he was promoting the real
interests of the colonial government. The governor retorted that
with such support as the honorable member afforded he would readily
dispense.

When the estimates for the year were presented (August 20th) the country
party insisted on enquiry, and Mr. Dry proposed the appointment of
a committee to ascertain the proportionate burdens transportation
imposed.
This motion was rejected by the governor's casting vote. Another, made
for adjournment, to give the members time to investigate the items,
met a similar fate. It was, however, discovered when the estimates
were read that they differed from the copy in the hands of the members.
The chief justice supported a second motion for adjournment, to
enable the colonial secretary to correct these discrepancies. On the
re-assembling of the council (25th) the governor stated that considering
the determination avowed by the members to refuse all items for the
expenses of convictism, and the general state of popular feeling, he
had resolved to pause, and to await the arrival of expected despatches
on the subject of dispute from Lord Stanley, in reply to his own.

Sir E. Wilmot was sensible of the financial burden inflicted by the
convict establishments. A committee of government officers sat shortly
after his arrival, and pointed out the many and large items to be
traced to the prevention and punishment of crime. This report he
forwarded to Lord Stanley.

He complained that charges never before thought of were levied by
the commissariat, as well as the full value of convict labor, and
insisted that the expences incurred by the colonists for police
ought in fairness to be defrayed by the crown, or that the labor at its
disposal should as formerly be allowed in compensation.[236]
So late as August, 1844, the secretary of state refused to entertain
the claim for relief.

He stated that the colony would be obliged to expend a sum nearly equal,
although all the convicts were withdrawn; for their sakes, he
said, the island was colonised; they constituted the working population;
and he added that in the military and naval protection, the support
of the unemployed convict, and the capital and cheap labor poured
into the colony, a fair proportion of expenditure was borne by the
crown.

Pressed by extraordinary difficulties, Wilmot again[237] urged the
injustice of these conclusions. He complained that not only India, China,
and the Cape of Good Hope, but New South Wales, were pouring in
felons of the worst description, who, as pass-holders, occasioned
a vast outlay for the suppression of crime.

He told his lordship that for several years the land fund had totally
failed, while the expenses of police and gaols, of judges and
witnesses, had risen to £50,000.

At this time the number of arrivals was five thousand annually, sent
from every colony and dependency of the empire, as well as from the
United Kingdom.
There were between three and four thousand pass-holders unemployed, 7,000
in private service, 6,000 about to emerge from the gangs, 8,000 with
tickets-of-leave or conditional pardons, and in all more than 30,000
unqualified to quit the island without the consent of the crown.[238]

It is impossible to read these representations without feeling indignant
at the nobleman who suffered the representative of the Queen to struggle
with difficulties so manifold and great,--who left him to the alternative
of breaking through positive prohibitions or of incurring popular distrust
and aversion.

To this delay the governor owed much of the opposition he suffered, and
the imperial government inconveniences of lasting consequence. Nothing
was conceded to justice--nothing to entreaty; and the secretary
of state yielded at last as despotism must ever yield,--without
merit and without thanks.

The whole change in the details of the convict department was marked
by a spirit eminently opposed to the colonial welfare. With
singular acuteness and perspicuity Lord Stanley described the former
systems as subject to local influence and subservient to local ends.

Every governor, he alleged, was under a strong bias in favor of
expense, as the patron of a multitude of officials. He stated
that the executive council were equally benefited by the wasteful
expenditure, either in their own persons or those of their official
brethren, and that every colonist had an interest in the multiplication
of bills on the British treasury.

To prevent these abuses, the convict estimates were thenceforth to be
prepared by the colonial secretary, the comptroller-general, and the
commissariat officer, subject to the approval of the secretary of
state.

The management of the prisoners being confided to the judgment of the
governor, Lord Stanley deemed the chief cause of its many changes,
and its subservience to colonial prosperity. The deference of the ministers
to this discretion he attributed to the unwillingness of the home office
to interfere with a functionary in correspondence with the colonial
office, and the reluctance of the secretary for the colonies to
guide a penal system designed for interests exclusively imperial.

Thus, he stated, the governor was practically independent, and had
strong inducements to render the labor of convicts subservient to
colonial wealth, and to disregard the great design--the prevention
of crime in Great Britain.

He declared that all schemes of convict management were of colonial
origin, and all contemplated local interests as their main object. To
prevent these devices he proposed to retain in the colonial-office
the exclusive management of the details of transportation.[239]

Among the items of convict expense was a charge of £164,000 for rations.

This Lord Stanley considered an extravagant outlay. He deemed it highly
improper that in a country where all the means of subsistence
existed in such abundance with an unlimited supply of manual labor,
this charge should remain.

He however feared that while the convicts were permitted to labor on works
of colonial utility the local authorities would always find means
to increase the charges for their subsistence (Feb. 28, '43).

The treasury concurred in this view, and requested that explicit
instructions might be given to Wilmot and the comptroller-general to
prevent the employment of labor for the colonial benefit, and to devote
their utmost efforts to raise the food on the waste lands of the
colony.

The convict department attempted agriculture, and they selected for
the experiment cold, damp, and barren soils.

Gardens of a few acres occupied a thousand men: the cleared land was
utterly worthless. Garden seeds were brought into the colonial market,
and potatos sold at twenty shillings which cost the government £10 per
ton. Several hundred men idled their time in cultivating land which
did not equal in the aggregate a single farm.[240] The estimated
value of all the articles produced on two stations, Deloraine and
Westbury, in 1846, by four hundred men, was less than £2 per man;
while the salaries of their officers were nearly double that sum.[241]
Mr.

Montagu, the late colonial secretary, in estimating the cost of the
convict department, presented a calculation £100,000 annually less than
the estimate of the officers on the spot. This difference Lord Stanley
set up as proof of the culpable negligence and profligacy of
colonial expense.

He considered the body of persons employed in the control of prisoners
excessive.

A reduction was therefore enforced, and in the end less surveillance was
employed than free labor usually requires.

To each party of three hundred seven overseers were attached, without
constables or other restraint.

The sub-division of these parties in labor left them often to the
practical oversight of a single person, and he an expiree.

Thus they were able to make excursions for the purposes of robbery and
pleasure: their clothing tended rather to disguise than distinguish
them. As the terms of their service expired they were discharged
in the prison dress, and no one could tell whether they were or
not illegally at large. Escaped prisoners have been known to walk through
bodies of men on the road without challenge. In several instances
robberies were committed on travellers within the precincts of the stations.
The enclosures were often merely the common garden fence.
The judges avowed that in passing sentence for crimes they could
not punish them with severity, considering the strong temptations
of the men.

Remembering the number virtually and legally at large, the degree of safety,
or rather the instances of exemption from pillage, must be considered
almost miraculous. A great portion of minor crimes were not
prosecuted, and a still larger number were undetected; but eight hundred
recorded crimes--a scourge to ten thousand families, and full of
terror and danger to all--would not seem extravagant when divided
among thirty thousand prisoners.

The despatches of Wilmot to Lord Stanley described with accurate minuteness
the social effects of the probation system. Those who remember his
apparent apathy when those evils were the topics of colonial complaint
will deplore the strange fidelity to his political chief which induced
him to conceal his own sentiments from the colonists. He stated that
the territory was inundated with unemployed prisoners; that no labor
being in demand, they must either starve or steal; that a yearly increasing
pauper population, without adding one atom to colonial wealth, would
swell the catalogue of crime and increase the public expense in
every form; that the number out of employment was fearfully great;
and that land--cleared, fenced, in complete cultivation, with houses
and buildings--might be bought at the upset price of waste land.

To remedy these evils he proposed the extension of conditional pardons
to the Australian colonies, the remission of the price of crown lands
to emigrants, and the letting of allotments at a nominal rental for seven
years to conditionally pardoned men, with a contingent right of
purchase.[242]
To all these remonstrances, so far as they affected the colonist, Lord
Stanley had a ready reply. The colony was originally penal, and could
claim neither compensation nor relief. He considered that in
emigrating the colonists surrendered at discretion; that they were
not entitled to object to the trebling of their police burdens and to
the importation of all instead of a small part of the convicts of
the empire, as was the case up to 1840. His rejoinder was felt with that
bitterness which none can realise who have not known the tyranny of
irresistible despotism.
Happily for mankind there is no power above the steady and determined
operations of truth and right.

The cruel desertion of the people in the hour of their distress--the
scornful defiance of their complaints, has involved the cabinet of
England in difficulties for which nothing but great sacrifices will
fully obviate. No people in this hemisphere will entirely trust a British
minister until the history of Van Diemen's Land is forgotten.

The anticipated relief not having arrived, the governor again
assembled the council on the 21st of October.

He now proposed several expedients to meet the exigencies of the moment.
He had, unauthorised by the council, borrowed money of a bank.
He proposed to stop the forage allowance of the clergy, and to retain
12-1/2 per cent. of the salaries of the officials. Both these measures
were withstood--the last effectively.

The chief justice denied the power of the council to interfere with
his income. When a new set of estimates was offered they were found to
be unintelligible, and an adjournment, to enable the colonial secretary
to afford the necessary information, was proposed by Mr. Dry. This
reasonable request was lost by the governor's casting vote, and
several motions with a similar object were defeated in the same
manner.

Mr. O'Connor, the non-official member who supported the executive, was
absent, and thus the votes of the official and country party were
equal, and the balance was in the governor's hands.[243] At the
next sitting of the council Wilmot proposed to pass the
estimates.
Ineffectual efforts to postpone their consideration exhausted all
means of evasion, and Mr.

Dry moved that the Appropriation Act should be read that day six months.
He expatiated on the injustice of the system which condemned the colony
to the cost of an imperial scheme, and insisted on the solemn
obligation of the council to resist an accumulation of debt which
must involve the colony in ruin.

Mr. Gregson followed, and referred to the unavailing representations
of Sir G.

Arthur, Sir John Franklin, and Sir E. Wilmot himself, in reference to
police expenses, and dwelling on the evils of the convict system.

An adjournment of the debate being moved the governor opposed it
with his deliberative and casting vote, and added that he resisted
the motion because it was only intended to embarrass.

The Appropriation Act would then have gone to the third reading, but the
non-official members at once quitted the chamber, and reduced the
number below the legal quorum. On the day following Mr.
Gregson appeared at the table and apologised for the absence of his
honorable brethren, who were preparing a protest to present on the
morrow. Wilmot complained of discourtesy, and denounced the opposition
as disloyal and unconstitutional. They asserted that quitting the council
chamber was not unusual, and was not a concerted movement, and
resented in decided language the charge of disloyalty,--amounting
in sworn councillors to perjury, if rigorously construed.

The governor afterwards explained that he had reference only to the
particular instance, and not to their general intentions.

It had been publicly rumored that rather than allow the Appropriation
Act to pass, several members had resolved to resign.

Captain Swanston, less prominent in opposition, waited on the governor,
and earnestly advised him to forward another set of estimates, prepared
by Captain Swanston, for the approval of the secretary of state. He
warned him that should he persevere a rupture would inevitably
follow.

In this interview the governor expressed his determination to proceed. He
forgot, it would seem, some of those forms of civility which no man can
safely neglect, and Captain Swanston left him with a sense of personal
affront,--an immedicable wound.[244]
In this temper the council met on the 3rd of October.

Mr. Gregson called the attention of the members to a question submitted
to Mr. Francis Smith, a barrister: Whether, as chairman of a committee,
the governor had a deliberate and casting vote, and whether the quorum
required by law at a meeting of council was requisite in
committee; and thus whether the estimates were legally passed through the
committee, the numbers present being less than one third, and the
governor giving his double vote. Mr. Smith gave his opinion that the
estimates were in law rejected instead of carried; but the chief justice
considered the sitting of committee merely a convenient method to sift
beforehand items afterwards to receive a legal sanction in the council.
The attorney-general without notice was unprepared to give an
opinion, and a motion of Mr.

Gregson for delay was lost.

The colonial secretary then moved the third reading of the obnoxious
bill, when Mr.

Dry rose to read a minute, signed by the members in opposition, objecting
to the proceedings. This being rejected as irregular, Mr. Gregson proposed
that the third reading should be delayed that the members dissenting
might bring forward other estimates. In urging this motion he rebutted
the "disloyal" imputation, and referred the governor to the unity existing
in the country party in proof that inevitable necessity alone had prompted
the co-operation of persons hitherto adverse.

This motion being lost--before the Appropriation Act could be carried--the
opposition quitted the council. Those remaining did not constitute a
quorum, and the legislative session was abruptly terminated. The _Gazette_
of November the 4th announced that Charles Swanston, Michael Fenton,
John Kerr, William Kermode, Thomas G. Gregson, and Richard Dry,
Esquires, had resigned their seats.

The obligation of the official members of the council to vote with
the governor on all government questions had been long before decided.

I saw the tears trickling down his cheeks, as you
shook hands with him over the rail.  Even then, if you'd said stay, I
believe he'd have turned back into his old berth."

"I didn't, because I wished him to do better.  You know he'd have a
splendid chance here in California--to get rich by gold-digging, which
no doubt he might, like a great many other humble sailors as himself.
But now, this other chance has turned up in his favour, which I should
say is surer.  Don Gregorio has told us he can get from the Chilian
captain almost any pay he may please to ask; besides, a fair likelihood
of being made his first mate.  That would suit Harry to a hair; in my
opinion, answering his purpose far better than any gold-washing
speculation.  Though a man of first rating aboard ship, he's a mere
child when ashore; and would be no more able to protect himself against
the land-sharks of San Francisco, than he was to get out of the way of
that sea-skimmer at Guaymas.  Even if he should succeed in growing rich
up the Sacramento River, I'd lay large odds, he'd be back here in port,
and poor as ever, within a week.  We must save him from that if we can.
His natural element is the ocean.  He has spent the greater part of his
life on it, and here's a fine opportunity for him to return to, and stay
upon it.  That for life, if he likes, with better prospects than he
could ever have had on board a man-o'-war.  The question is, how we
shall be able to find him in this rookery of a place.  Did he say
anything, when you saw him, about where he was sojourning!"

"By Jove! he just did.  Now, I recall our conversation, I remember him
telling me that he was staying at a sort of a boarding-house, or
restaurant, called the `Sailor's Home,' though he made no mention of the
street.  But, if I mistake not, I know the place, and can steer pretty
straight for it."

"Straight or crooked, let's set head for it at once.  We've plenty of
time, if that were all.  I told the coxswain not to come for us till
well after eleven.  I want to see something of this queer Californian
life, of which I haven't had much experience yet."

"The same with myself."

"Well, we may never again get such a chance.  Indeed, it's not likely
we'll be allowed another night ashore, before the _Crusader_ sails.
Therefore, let us make hay while the sun shines, or, to speak less
figuratively, a little merriment by the light of the moon.  We've been
either savage, or sentimental, all the day, and need changing our tune."

"You're right about that; but the music is not likely to be made by
moonlight--not much of it.  See those great clouds rolling up yonder!
They'll be all over the sky in ten minutes' time, making it black as a
pot of pitch."

"No matter; for what we want, gas-light will serve as well; and there's
plenty of that in San Francisco.  Now for Harry Blew.  After him, whisky
punches at the _Parker_."

"And after that?"

"A _Hell_, if you feel that way inclined."

"Surely, Ned, you don't want to go gambling!"

"I want to see life in San Francisco, as I've said; and, as you know,
gambling's an important part of it.  Yes; I wish to inspect the
elephant, and I don't mind making an attempt to draw the teeth of the
tiger.  _Allons_! or, as I should say, in the softer language of
Andalusia, _Nos vamos_!"

Thus jocosely terminating the conversation, the young officers continue
on at increased speed, and are soon threading the streets of San
Francisco in search of the "Sailor's Home."


CHAPTER TWENTY FOUR.

A TAR OF THE OLDEN TYPE.

Harry Blew is a tar of the true man-o'-war type; this of the time when
sailors were sailors, and ships were oak, not iron.  Such ships are
scarce now; but scarcer still the skilled men who handled their ropes,
and kept everything taut and trim--in short, the true tars.

Than Harry, a finer specimen of the foremast-man never reefed topsail,
or took his glass of grog according to allowance.  Of dark complexion
naturally, exposure to sun, sea, and storm has deepened it, till his
cheeks and throat are almost copper-coloured; somewhat lighter in tint
upon Sundays, after they have had their hebdomadal shave.  His face is
round, with features fairly regular, and of cheerful cast, their
cheerfulness heightened by the sparkle of keen grey eyes, and two rows
of sound white teeth, frequently, if not continuously shown in smile.  A
thick shock of curling brown hair, with a well-greased ringlet drooping
down over each eyebrow, supports a round-rimmed, blue-ribboned hat, well
aback on his head.  His shaven chin is pointed and prominent, with a
dimple below the lip; while the beardless jaws curve smoothly down to a
well-shaped neck, symmetrically set upon broad shoulders, that give
token of strength almost herculean.  Notwithstanding an amplitude of
shirt-collar, which falls back full seven inches, touching the
shoulder-tips, the throat and a portion of the expansive chest are
habitually exposed to view; while on the sun-browned skin of the latter
may be seen a tattooed anchor.  By its side, but not so openly
exhibited, is the figure of a damsel done in dark blue--no doubt a
souvenir, if not the exact similitude, of a sweetheart--some Poll of
past time, or perhaps far-off port.

But there is a doubt whether Harry's heart has been true to her.
Indeed, a suspicion of its having been false cannot fail to strike any
one seeing him with his shirt-sleeves rolled up, since upon the flat of
his right fore-arm is the image of another damsel, done more recently,
in lighter blue, while on the left is a Cupid holding an unbent bow, and
hovering above a pair of hearts, which his arrow has just pierced,
impaling them through and through!

All those amorous emblems would seem to argue our true tar inconstant as
the wind, with which he has so oft to contend.  But no, nothing of the
kind.  Those well acquainted with him and his history can vouch for it,
that he has never had a sweetheart save one--she represented in that
limning of light blue; and to her he has been true as steel, up to the
hour of her death, which occurred just as she was about to become Mrs
Blew.

And that sad event has kept him a bachelor up to the present hour of his
life.  For the girl on his breast in dark blue is a merely mythical
personage, though indelibly stained into his skin by a needle's point
and a pinch of gunpowder--done by one of his man-o'-war shipmates while
he was still only a sailor-lad.

He is now forty years of age, nearly thirty of which he has passed upon
the sea, being off it only in short spells while his ship lay in port.
And he has seen service on several vessels--corvettes, frigates, double
and treble deckers--all men-of-war, in which he has thrice
circumnavigated the globe.

For all, he is yet hale, hearty, and in the perfect plenitude of his
strength; only with a slight stoop in the shoulders, as if caught from
continually swarming up shrouds, or leaning over the yard while stowing
sails.  This gives him the appearance of being shorter than he really
is: for when straightened up, with back well braced, he stands six feet
in his stockings.  And his limbs show symmetrical proportion.  His duck
trousers, fitting tightly over the hips, display a pair of limbs supple
and muscular, with thighs that seem all sinew from skin to bone.

In spite of his sterling qualities as a seaman, and noble character as a
man, Harry has never risen to any rank in the service.  With him has it
been literally true, "Once a sailor, still a sailor;" and though long
ago rated an A.B. of the first order, above this he has not ascended a
single step.  Were he to complain, which he rarely ever does, he would
in all probability say, that his non-promotion has been due to
independence of spirit, or, shaping it in his own phraseology, owing to
his not having "bootlicked the swabs above him."  And there is some
truth in this, though another reason might be assigned by those disposed
to speak slightingly of him; this, that although liking salt water, he
has a decided antipathy to that which is fresh, unless when taken with
an admixture of rum.  Then he is too fond of it.  But it is his only
fault, barring which, a better man than Harry Blew--and, when sober, a
steadier--never trod the deck of ship.

As already said, he has trod many, the latest being that of the
_Crusader_, in which vessel he has spent five years of his life.  His
engagement terminating almost on the very day she dropt anchor before
San Francisco, he has been set free, either to stay in the ship, by
entering his name upon her books for a fresh period of service, or step
out of her, and go cruising on his own account, whithersoever he may
wish.

Taking into consideration the state of things in San Francisco just at
this time, it is not strange his having elected to leave the ship.  It
would be stranger if he had even hesitated about it, though this he had
indeed done, for some days lingering with mind only half made up.  But
the golden lure proved at length too temptingly attractive, and,
yielding to it, he took a last leave of his old shipmates, was rowed
ashore, and has since been sojourning at the "Sailor's Home"--for he is
still there, as Cadwallader rightly surmised--there in a very miserable
state of mind, not knowing how his wretchedness will be relieved.


CHAPTER TWENTY FIVE.

THE SAILOR'S HOME.

There is a "Sailor's Home," or "Snug Harbour" tavern in every seaport
town, often anything but home, or harbour, in a pleasant sense.  This of
San Francisco, 1849, is a hostelry, half eating-house, half
drinking-saloon, of somewhat unpretentious appearance--being a rough,
weather-boarded building, without planing, or paint, and only two
storeys in height.  But if low in stature, it is high enough in its
charges, as Harry Blew has learnt long since; these being out of all
proportion to the outside appearance of the place, or its interior
accommodation; though quite in keeping with the prices of other like
houses of entertainment in the Pacific seaport.

Harry's original intention was to make only a short stay at the
"Sailor's Home"--just long enough to put him through a bit of a spree;
for which twelve months' pay, received from the frigate's purser at
parting, had amply provided him.  Then he would start off for the
Feather River, or some other tributary stream of the Sacramento, where
gold was being gathered, or dug for.

The first part of this programme he has already carried out, with
something besides; that something being the complete expenditure of all
his pay--every shilling he received from the ship, and in an incredibly
short space of time.  He had been scarcely six days ashore when he
discovers his cash exchequer quite cleared out.  As for credit, there is
no such thing in San Francisco.  A shop parcel sent home always comes
conspicuously marked C.O.D.--"Cash on Delivery."

Since landing, he has not very carefully kept his dead-reckoning, and is
at first somewhat surprised to find himself so far out in it.  He has
plunged his hands into his pockets without encountering coin.  He
searches in his sea-chest and every other receptacle where he has been
accustomed to carry, with similar disappointing result.  What can have
become of his twelve months' wage, drawn on the day he left the
_Crusader_?  It has all disappeared!

No wonder he is unable to account for its disappearance; for ever since
that day he has been anything but himself--in short, has given way to
dissipation of longer continuance than ever before in his life.  It has
lasted six days, with most part of six nights, at the end of which time
he has only pulled up for want of the wherewith to continue it--credit
being denied him at the very counter over which he has passed all his
pay.

Impecuniosity is an unpleasant predicament in any country, and at all
times; but in the San Francisco of 1849 it was a positive danger--where
six dollars were demanded, and obtained, for the most meagre of meals;
the same for sleeping on a blanketless bed, in a chilly night, within a
rough weather-boarded room, or under the yet thinner shelter of a canvas
tent.  It was a boon to be allowed to lie on the lee-side of a
wooden-walled stable; but cost money for the privilege of sleeping in a
stall, with straw litter for couch, and the radiating heat from the
horses in lieu of coverlet.

In the necessity of seeking some such indifferent accommodation, Harry
Blew finds himself, on the seventh night after having received his
discharge from the _Crusader_.  And as he has now got somewhat sobered,
with brain clear enough to think, it occurs to him that the time is come
for carrying out the second part of his programme--that is, going on to
the gold-diggings.

But how to get off, and get there?  These are separate questions, to
neither of which can he give a satisfactory answer.  Passage to
Sacramento, by steamer, costs over a hundred dollars, and still more by
stage-coach.  He has not a shilling--not a red cent; and his sea-kit
sold would not realise a sum sufficient to pay his fare, even if it (the
kit) were free.  But it is not.  On the contrary, embargoed, "quodded,"
by the keeper of the "Sailor's Home," against a couple of days' unpaid
board and lodging--with sundry imbibings across the counter, scored on
the slate.

The discharged man-o'-war's man sees himself in a nasty dilemma--all the
more from its having a double horn.  He can neither go to the
gold-diggings, nor stay in the "Sailor's Home."  Comparatively cheap as
may be this humble hostelry, it is yet dear enough to demand ten dollars
a day for indifferent bed and board.  Both have been thought bad enough
by Harry Blew, even though only a foremast-man.  But he is threatened
with a still worse condition of things.  Inappropriate the title
bestowed on his house, for the owner of the "Home" has not the slightest
hospitality in his heart.  He has discovered that his English guest is
"dead broke," drawing his deductions from the two days' board, and as
many nights' bed, remaining unpaid.

There is a notice conspicuously posted above the bar that "scores must
be settled daily."  And Harry having disregarded this, has received
private, but positive, notice of another kind; to the effect that he is
forthwith to discontinue taking a seat at the _table-d'hote_, as also to
surrender up his share of the bed he has been occupying, for he has not
had a complete couch to himself.  At this the discharged man-o'-war's
man has shown no anger, nor does he feel in any way affronted.  He has
that correct sense common to sailors, with most others trained by travel
in strange lands, and knows that when cash is not forthcoming, credit
cannot be expected.  In California, as elsewhere, such is the universal
and rigorous custom, to which man must resign himself.  The English
sailor is only a bit sorry to think he has expended his cash so freely;
a little repentant at having done it so foolishly; and, on the whole, a
good deal downhearted.

But there is a silver lining to the cloud.  The _Crusader_ is still in
port, and not expected to sail for some days.  He may once more place
his name upon the frigate's books, and rejoin her.  He knows he will not
only be received back by her commander, but welcomed by all his old
officers and shipmates.  A word spoken to the first boat coming ashore,
and all will be well.  Shall he speak such word?  That has become the
question.  For in this, as every other step in life, there is a _pro_
and _contra_.  Humiliating the thought of going back to service on the
ship, after taking leave of everybody aboard; returning to a dingy
forecastle hard, and the handling of tarry ropes, after the bright
dreams he had been indulging in; to forego the gathering of gold-dust,
and the exchanging it for doubloons or dollars; in short, turning his
back upon fortune--the prospect of a life competence, perhaps plenitude
of wealth, with its resulting ease and idleness--and once more facing
stormy seas, with only hard knocks and laborious work in store for him
the remainder of his life!

While the sovereigns were still clinking in his pockets, this was the
dark side of the picture--towards Sacramento, the bright one.  Now that
the pockets are empty, everything seems changed, and the golden sheen
lies on the side of the ship.

Still the sailor hesitates how to decide.  Despite the pressure upon
him, he ponders and reflects; as he does so, plunging his hands into his
pockets, apparently searching for coin.  It is merely mechanical, for he
knows he has not a shilling.

While thus occupied, he is seated in the little sanded bar-room of the
"Home" alone with the bar-keeper; the latter eyeing him with anything
but a sympathetic air.  For the book is before him, showing that
indebtedness for bed and board--to say nothing of the unsettled
bar-score--and the record makes a bar-sinister between them.  Another
drink could not be added now, even though but a bottle of ginger-beer.
The door of credit is closed, and only cash could procure an extension
of that hospitality hitherto scant enough.

The sailor thinks.  Must he surrender?  Give up his dreams of fingering
yellow gold, and return to clutching black shrouds?  A glance at the
grim, unrelaxed, and unrelenting visage of the bar-keeper decides him.

His decision is expressed in characteristic speech, not addressed to the
drink-dispenser, nor aloud, but in low, sad soliloquy:

"Wi' me, I see, the old sayin's to stan' good--`Once a sailor, still a
sailor.'  Harry Blew, there be no help for't, ye maun steer back for the
_Crusader_!"


CHAPTER TWENTY SIX.

OPPORTUNE VISITORS.

Having resolved upon returning to his ship--and that very night, if he
can but get a boat--Harry Blew is about to sally forth into the street,
when his egress is unexpectedly prevented.  Not by the landlord of the
"Sailor's Home," nor his representative behind the bar.  These would
only be too glad to get rid of a guest with two days' reckoning in
arrear.  For they have surreptitiously inspected his sea-chest, and
found it to contain a full suit of "Sunday go-ashores," with other
effects, which they deemed sufficient collateral security for the debt.
And as it has been already hypothecated for this, both Boniface and
bar-keeper would rather rejoice to see their sailor-guest clear out of
the "Home" for good, leaving the chest behind him.  On this condition
they would be willing to wipe out the debt, both boarding and bar-score.
Harry has no thought of thus parting with his kit.  Now that he has
made up his mind to return to the _Crusader_, a better prospect is
opened up to him.  He has hopes that on his making appearance aboard,
and again entering his name on the frigate's books, the purser will
advance him a sum sufficient to release his retained chattels.  Or, he
can in all likelihood collect the money among his old messmates.  Not
for this reason is he so anxious to reach the ship that night, but
because he has no other chance of having any place to sleep in--save the
street.  The tavern-keeper has notified him, in plain terms, that he
must peremptorily leave; and he is about to act upon the notification,
and take departure, when prevented, as already said.

What now hinders him from going out of the "Home" is a man coming into
it; or rather two--since two shadows have suddenly darkened the door,
and are projected across the sanded floor of the bar-room.  Not like
shadows in the eyes of Harry Blew, but streaks of brightest sunlight!
For in the individuals entering he recognises two of his officers; one
of them his best friend, who saved his life.  Crozier and Cadwallader
have discovered him.

At sight of them the discharged sailor salutes promptly, and with as
much respect as if all were on the quarterdeck of the _Crusader_.  But
with much more demonstration; for their well-timed appearance draws from
him an exclamation of joy.  Jerking off his straw hat, and giving a
twitch to one of his brow-locks, he bobs his head several times in
succession, with a simultaneous back-scrape of his foot upon the floor.

His obeisance ended, he stands silently awaiting whatever communication
the young officers have to make.  He is already aware that their
business is with himself: for the bar-room is but dimly lit, and
Crozier, while crossing its threshold, not at once recognising him, had
called out:

"Is there a sailor staying here, by name Harry Blew!"

"Ay, ay, sir!" was the prompt response, the sailor himself giving it,
along with the salutation described.

During the short interval of silence that succeeds, Harry's heart can be
distinctly heard beating.  Lately depressed--"Down in the dumps," as he
himself would word it--it is now up in his throat.  The sight of his
patron, the saver of his life, is like having it saved a second time.
Perhaps they have come to ask him to rejoin the ship?  If so, 'tis the
very thing he was thinking of.  He will not anticipate, but waits for
them to declare their errand.

"Well, Harry, old boy," says Crozier, after warmly shaking the sailor's
hand, "I'm right glad to find you here.  I was afraid you'd gone off to
the diggings."

"True, Master Ed'ard; I did intend standin' on that tack, but ha'n't
been able to get under way, for want o' a wind."

"Want of a wind?  I don't quite understand you."

"Why, you see, sir, I've been a little bit spreeish since comin' ashore,
and my locker's got low--more'n that, it's total cleared out.  Though I
suppose there be plenty of gold in them diggin's, it takes gold to get
there; and as I ha'n't any, I'm laid up here like an old hulk foul o' a
mud bank.  That's just how it be, gen'lemen."

"In which case, perhaps you mightn't feel indisposed to go to sea
again?"

"Just the thing I war thinkin' o', Master Ed'ard.  I'd a'most made up my
mind to it, sir, an' war 'bout startin' to try get aboard the old
_Crusader_, and askin' your honour to ha' my name entered on her books
again.  I'm willin' to join for a fresh tarm, if they'll take me."

"They'd take, and be glad to get you, Harry; you may be sure of that.
Such a skilled sailor need never be without a ship, where there's a
British man-of-war within hailing distance.  But we don't want you to
join the _Crusader_."

"How is that, sir?"

"Because we can help you to something a little better.  At least, it
will be more to your advantage in a pecuniary sense.  You wouldn't mind
shipping in a merchant-vessel, with wages three or four times as much as
you can get in a man-of-war?  How would you like that, Harry?"

"I'd like it amazin'ly, sir.  And for the matter o' being a merchanter,
that's neither here nor there, so long's _you_ recommend it.  I'll go as
cook, if you tell me to."

"No, no, Harry, not that," laughingly replies the young officer.  "That
would never do.  I should pity those who had to eat the dishes you'd
dress for them.  Besides, I should be sorry to see you stewing your
strength away in front of a galley-fire.  You must do better than that;
and it chances I'm authorised to offer you something better.  It's a
berth on board a trading-ship, and one with some special advantages.
She's a Chilian vessel, and her captain is, I believe, either Chilian or
Spanish.  That won't make any difference to you?"

"Not a doit, sir.  I don't care what the ship's colours be, nor what
country her skipper, so long's he allows good wages an' plenty o' grub."

"And plenty of grog too, Harry?"

"Ay, ay, sir.  I confess to a weakness for that--leastways the reg'lar
three times a day."

"No doubt you'll get it, as often as you've a mind.  But, Harry, I have
a word to say about that.  Besides my interest in your own welfare, I've
another and more selfish one in this Chilian ship.  So has Mr
Cadwallader.  We both want you to be on your best behaviour during the
trip you're to take in her.  On board will be two lady passengers, as
far as Panama; for the ship is bound thither, and for ports beyond--I
believe as far as Valparaiso.  But the ladies are to land at Panama;
and, so long as they're with you, you must do everything in your power
to make things agreeable for them.  If they should ever be in any
danger--from storm, shipwreck, or otherwise--you'll stand by them?"

"Yes, Harry," adds Cadwallader, "you'll do that, won't you?"

"Lor', your honours!" exclaims the sailor, showing surprise.  "Sure ye
needn't put sich a questin to me--a British man-o'-war's man?  I'd do
that much, anyhow, out o' sheer starn sense o' duty.  But when it comes
to takin' care o' two ladies--to say nothin' about theer bein' so young,
and so beautiful--"

"Avast, Harry!  How do you know they are either one or the other?" asks
Crozier, surprised; Cadwallader repeating the question.

"Lor' love ye, masters!  Do ye think a common sailor han't got eyes in
his head, for anythin' but ropes an' tar?  You forget I war o' the
boat's crew as rowed two sweet creeturs on board the _Crusader_, the
night o' the grand dancin'; and arterward took the same ashore, along
wi' two young gen'lemen, as went to see 'em home.  Sure, sirs, actin'
cox on that occasion, I couldn't help hearin' some o' the speeches as
passed in the starn-sheets--tho' they wur spoken in the ears of the
senoritas, soft as the breeze that fanned their fair cheeks, an' brought
the colour out on 'em red as Ribston pippins."

"Avast again, you rascal!  So you've been eavesdropping, have you?  I
quite forgot you understood Spanish."

"Only a trifle, Master Ed'ard."

"Too much for that occasion."

"Ah! well, your honour, it may stand me in good stead now--aboard the
ship you speak o'."

"Well, Harry, I'm not going to scold you, seeing that you couldn't help
hearing what you did.  And now, I may as well tell you that the young
ladies you saw that night in the boat _are_ the same who are to be the
passengers in the Chilian ship.  You'll take good care of them, I know."

"That you may depend on, sir.  Any one as touches hair o' their heads,
to do 'em an injury, 'll have to tear the whole o' his off the head o'
Harry Blew.  I'll see 'em safe to Panama, or never show myself there.  I
promise that; an' I think both your honours 'll take the word of a
British man-o'-war's man."

"That's enough--perfectly satisfactory!  Now to give you the necessary
directions about joining this ship.  She's lying at anchor somewhere
about in the bay.  I didn't think of getting her name, but you'll find
her easily enough.  An' you needn't go in search of her till you've seen
the gentleman whose name is upon this card.  You see: `Don Tomas
Silvestre,' a ship-agent.  His office is down in one of the streets by
the strand.  Report yourself to him first thing in the morning.  In all
likelihood he'll engage you on sight, make out your papers, and give you
full directions for getting aboard the ship.  It appears she's short of
hands; indeed, even without a single sailor.  _And_, by the way, Harry,
if you apply soon enough, it's good as certain you'll be made mate--
first at that; all the more from your being able to speak Spanish.  It's
too late for you to do anything about it to-night; but don't oversleep
yourself.  Be at the ship-agent's to-morrow betimes."

"Ye can trust me for that, sir.  I'll show my figurehead there first
thing in the mornin'.  No fears o' any one getting theer afore me, if
they've not gone a'ready."

"I think no one will be before you--I hope not.  Send us word how you
have succeeded, as the _Crusader_ will likely be in port long enough for
us to hear from you.  Still, as she may sail on short notice, we may not
see you again.  Remember, then, what we've said about the senoritas.  We
shall rely upon your fidelity."

"An' well may ye, masters.  You can both trust your lives to Harry Blew,
an' those of them as is dear to you."

"All right, old boy!" exclaims Crozier, satisfied.  "We must now part;
but let's hope we'll meet again.  When you get back to England you know
where to find me.  So, good-bye!  Give us a grip of your honest fist,
and God bless you!"

Saying this, he grasps the horny hand of the sailor, and warmly presses
it.  The pressure is returned by a squeeze that gives assurance of more
than ordinary friendship.  It is the grip of true gratitude; and the
look which accompanies it tells of a devoted friendship, bordering on
adoration.

Cadwallader also exchanges a like parting salutation; after which, the
young officers start off, to continue their cruise through the streets
of "Frisko."


CHAPTER TWENTY SEVEN.

AN INHOSPITABLE HOSTELRY.

Harry Blew stands in the doorway of the "Sailor's Home," watching the
two gentlemen as they walk away, his eyes glowing with gratitude and
sparkling with joy.  And no wonder, considering the change in his
situation brought about by their influence.  Ten minutes before, his
spirits were at the lowest and darkest.  But the prospect of treble, or
quadruple pay on board a snug ship, though it be a trading-vessel, with
the additional chance of being mate instead of foremast-man, has given
him a fillip, not only restoring them to their ordinary condition of
cheeriness, but raising them to the highest exaltation.

The only damper is regret at parting with the fine young fellow who has
done so much for him.  But he has passed through that already, when
separating from his ship, and can now better bear it under the
reflection that, though apart from his patron, he will have an
opportunity of doing something to show his gratitude.  He knows how much
Crozier is interested in the wellbeing of Carmen Montijo--for Harry has
been made acquainted with her name, as also that of Inez Alvarez--and to
be entrusted with a sort of guardianship over these young ladies is a
proud thought to the ex-man-o'-war's man--a fine feather in his cap.

To carry out the confidence thus reposed in him will be a labour of
love; and he vows in his heart it shall be done, if need be, at the risk
of life.

Indeed, the interview just ended has made a new man of him in more
senses than one; for upon the spot he registers a mental resolve to give
up dram-drinking for ever, or at all events till he has seen his
charge--the two Spanish senoritas--safe landed at Panama, and the
Chilian ship snug in the harbour of Valparaiso.  After that, he is less
sure that he may not again go upon a spree, and possibly a big one.

Heaving a sigh as the English officers pass out of sight, he turns back
into the bar-room.  It is no longer a question of his going aboard the
_Crusader_.  He must remain ashore, to be up betimes in the morning, so
that he may be early at the office of the ship-agent.

And now, again, a shadow, though only a slight one, comes over his
countenance.  He has still before him the undetermined question, where
he is to sleep.  Notwithstanding his fine prospects for the future, the
present is still unchanged, and yet unprovided for.

Unfortunately, he did not think of this while the officers were with
him, else a word would have made all well.  Either of them, he doubted
not, would have relieved his necessities had they been but told of them.
Too late now; they are gone out of sight, out of hail, and whether he
cannot tell or guess; and to attempt searching for them in such crowded
streets would be only a waste of time.

While thus ruefully reflecting, he is confronted by the bar-keeper,
whose usually grave countenance is now beset with smiles.  The fellow
has got it into his head that his sailor-guest is no longer impecunious.
The navy gentlemen just gone have no doubt been to engage him for their
ship, and perhaps made him an advance of wages.

"Well, my salt," says he, in a tone of jocular familiarity, "I guess
you've got the shiners now, an' kin settle up your score?"

"No, indeed, sir," answers Harry, more than ever taken aback; "I'm sorry
to say I ha'n't."

"You hain't!  Then what hev them gold-buttoned fellers been palaverin'
ye about?"

"Not about money, master.  Them's two o' the officers belongin' to my
old ship--the British frigate _Crusader_.  An' fine young fellows they
be too."

"Much good their finikin fineness seems to hev done you!  So they hain't
gin you nuthin' better than their talk, hev they?  Nuthin' besides?"

"Nothing besides," rejoins Blew, restraining his temper, a little
touched by the bar-keeper's inquisitiveness, as also his impertinent
manner.

"Nuthin' but fine words, eh?  Well, thar's plenty o' them 'bout hyar,
but they won't butter no parsnips; and let me tell you, my sailor-man,
they won't pay your board bill."

"I know that," returns the other, still keeping his temper.  "But I hope
to have money soon."

"Oh! that's been your story for the last two days; but it won't
bamboozle me any longer.  You get no more credit here."

"Can't I have supper, and bed for another night?"

"No; that you can't--not so much as a shake-down."

"I'll pay for them first thing in the mornin'."

"You'll pay for 'em this night--now, if you calc'late to get 'em.  An'
if you've no cash, tain't any use talkin'.  What d'ye think we keep a
tavern for?  'Twould soon be to let--bar, beds, and all--if we'd only
such customers as you.  So, the sooner you slope, the better the
landlord 'll like it.  He's jest gin me orders to tell ye to clar out."

"It's gallows hard, master," says Harry, heaving a sigh; "the more so,
as I've got the promise o' a good berth 'board a ship that's down in the
harbour.  The gentlemen you seed have just been to tell me about it."

"Then why didn't they give you the money to clar your kit?"

"They'd have done that--no doubt of it--if I'd only thought o' askin'
them.  I forgot all about it."

"Ah, that's all very fine--a likely tale; but I don't believe a word of
it.  If they cared to have you in their ship, they'd have given you the
wherewithal to git there.  But, come! it's no use shilly-shallyin' any
longer.  The landlord won't like it.  He's gin his orders sharp: Pay or
go."

"Well, I suppose I must go."

"You must; an', as I have already said, the sooner you're off the
better."

After delivering this stern ultimatum, the bar-keeper jauntily returns
behind his bar, to look more blandly on two guests who have presented
themselves at it, called for "brandy smashes," and tossed down a couple
of dollars to pay for them.

Harry Blew turns towards the door; and, without saying another word,
steps out of the room.

Once on the street, he does not stop or stand hesitating.  The
hospitality of the so-called "home" has proved a sorry sham; and,
indignant at the shabby treatment received, he is but too glad to get
away from the place.  All his life used to snug quarters in a fine
ship's forecastle, with everything found for him, he has never before
experienced the pang of having no place to lay his head.  He not only
feels it now, in all its unpleasantness, but fancies the passers-by can
tell all about the humiliating position he is placed in.

Haunted by this fancy--urged on by it--he quickens his steps; nor stays
them till out of sight of the "Sailor's Home," out of the street in
which the detestable tavern stands.  He even dislikes the idea of having
to go back for his chest; which, however, he must some time do.

Meanwhile what is to become of him for the remainder of that night?
Where is he to obtain supper, and a bed?  About the latter he cares the
least; and having had no dinner and but a spare breakfast he is hungry--
half-famished--and could eat a pound or two of the saltest and toughest
junk ever drawn out of a ship's cask.

In this unhappy frame of body as of mind he strays on along the street.
There is no lack of food before his eyes, almost within reach of his
hand; but only to tantalise, and still further whet the edge of his
appetite.  Eating-houses are open all around him; and under their
blazing gas-jets he can see steaming dishes, and savoury joints, in the
act of being set upon tables surrounded by guests seeming hungry as
himself, but otherwise better off.  He, too, might enter there without
fear of being challenged as an intruder; for among the men inside are
many in coarse garb, some of them not so respectably apparelled as
himself.  But what would be the use of his going into a restaurant
without even a penny in his pockets?  He could only gaze at dishes he
may not eat, and dare not call for.  He remembers his late discomfiture
too keenly to risk having it repeated.

Thus reflecting, he turns his back upon the tables so temptingly spread,
and keeps on along the street.

Again the double question recurs: Where is he to get supper, and where
sleep?

And again he regrets not having given his confidence to the young
gentlemen, and told them of the "fix" he was in.  Either would have
relieved him on the instant, without a word.  But it is too late now to
think of it, or hope seeing them in the streets.  By this time, in all
likelihood, they have started back to their ship.

How he wishes himself aboard the _Crusader_!  How happy he would feel in
her forecastle, among his old shipmates!  It cannot be; and therefore it
is idle to ponder upon it.

What on earth is he to do?

A thought strikes him.

It is of the ship-agent whose card Crozier left with him, and which he
has thrust into his coat-pocket.  He draws the bit of pasteboard out,
and holds it up to a street-lamp, to make himself acquainted with the
ship-agent's address.  The name he remembers, and needs not that.

Though but a common sailor, Harry is not altogether illiterate.  The
seaport town where he first saw the light had a public school for the
poorer people, in which he was taught to read and write.  By the former
of these elementary branches--supplemented by a smattering of Spanish,
picked up in South American ports--he is enabled to decipher the writing
upon the card--for it is in writing--and so gets the correct address,
both the street and number.

Having returned it to his pocket, he buttons up his dreadnought; and,
taking a fresh hitch at his duck trousers, starts off again--this time
with fixed intent: to find Don Tomas Silvestre.


CHAPTER TWENTY EIGHT.

THE "HELL" EL DORADO.

A Monte Bank in the city of San Francisco, in the establishment y-cleped
"El Dorado"--partly drinking-house, for the rest devoted to gambling on
the grandest scale.  The two are carried on simultaneously, and in a
large oblong saloon.  The portion of it devoted to Bacchus is at the end
farthest from the entrance-door; where the shrine of the jolly god is
represented by a liquor-bar extending from side to side, and backed by
an array of shining bottles, glittering glasses, and sparkling
decanters; his "worship" administered by half-a-dozen "bartenders,"
resplendent in white shirts with wrist ruffles, and big diamond
breast-pins--real, not paste!

The altar of Fortuna is altogether of a different shape and pattern,
occupying more space.  It is not compact, but extended over the floor,
in the form of five tables, large as if for billiards; though not one of
them is of this kind.  Billiards would be too slow a game for the
frequenters of "El Dorado."  These could not patiently wait for the
scoring of fifty points, even though the stake were a thousand dollars.
"No, no!  _Monte_ for me!" would be the word of every one of them; or a
few might say "_Faro_."  And of the five tables in the saloon, four are
for the former game, the fifth furnished for the latter; though there is
but little apparent difference in the furniture of the two; both having
a simple cover of green baize, or broadcloth, with certain crossing
lines traced upon it, that of the Faro table having the full suite of
thirteen cards arranged in two rows, face upwards and fixed; while on
the Monte tables but two cards appear thus--the Queen and Knave; or, as
designated in the game--purely Spanish and Spanish-American--"Caballo"
and "Sota."  For how can an impression represent a substance, otherwise
than by resembling it?

And how can an impression resemble a substance, since, according to this
philosophy, it is not a substance, and has none of the peculiar
qualities or characteristics of a substance?

But leaving the question of what may or may not be, for that other what
actually is, I desire those philosophers, who pretend that we have
an idea of the substance of our minds, to point out the impression that
produces it, and tell distinctly after what manner that impression
operates, and from what object it is derived. Is it an impression
of sensation or of reflection?

Is it pleasant, or painful, or indifferent? I Does it attend us at all
times, or does it only return at intervals? If at intervals, at
what times principally does it return, and by what causes is it
produced?

If instead of answering these questions, any one should evade the
difficulty, by saying, that the definition of a substance is
something which may exist by itself; and that this definition ought
to satisfy us:
should this be said, I should observe, that this definition agrees
to every thing, that can possibly be conceived; and never will serve
to distinguish substance from accident, or the soul from its
perceptions.

For thus I reason. Whatever is clearly conceived may exist; and whatever
is clearly conceived, after any manner, may exist after the same
manner.
This is one principle, which has been already acknowledged. Again, every
thing, which is different, is distinguishable, and every thing which
is distinguishable, is separable by the imagination. This is another
principle. My conclusion from both is, that since all our perceptions
are different from each other, and from every thing else in the universe,
they are also distinct and separable, and may be considered as
separately existent, and may exist separately, and have no need of any
thing else to support their existence.

They are, therefore, substances, as far as this definition explains a
substance.

Thus neither by considering the first origin of ideas, nor by means
of a definition are we able to arrive at any satisfactory notion of
substance; which seems to me a sufficient reason for abandoning utterly
that dispute concerning the materiality and immateriality of the
soul, and makes me absolutely condemn even the question itself. We
have no perfect idea of any thing but of a perception.

A substance is entirely different from a perception. We have, therefore,
no idea of a substance. Inhesion in something is supposed to be
requisite to support the existence of our perceptions. Nothing appears
requisite to support the existence of a perception. We have, therefore,
no idea of inhesion. What possibility then of answering that question,
Whether perceptions inhere in a material or immaterial substance, when
we do not so much as understand the meaning of the question?

There is one argument commonly employed for the immateriality of the soul,
which seems to me remarkable. Whatever is extended consists of parts;
and whatever consists of parts is divisible, if not in reality, at
least in the imagination. But it is impossible anything divisible can
be conjoined to a thought or perception, which is a being altogether
inseparable and indivisible.

For supposing such a conjunction, would the indivisible thought exist
on the left or on the right hand of this extended divisible body? On
the surface or in the middle? On the back or fore side of it? If
it be conjoined with the extension, it must exist somewhere within its
dimensions. If it exist within its dimensions, it must either exist in
one particular part; and then that particular part is indivisible,
and the perception is conjoined only with it, not with the extension:
Or if the thought exists in every part, it must also be extended, and
separable, and divisible, as well as the body; which is utterly
absurd and contradictory.

For can any one conceive a passion of a yard in length, a foot
in breadth, and an inch in thickness? Thought, therefore, and
extension are qualities wholly incompatible, and never can
incorporate together into one subject.

This argument affects not the question concerning the substance of the
soul, but only that concerning its local conjunction with matter; and
therefore it may not be improper to consider in general what objects
are, or are not susceptible of a local conjunction. This is a curious
question, and may lead us to some discoveries of considerable
moment.

The first notion of space and extension is derived solely from the senses
of sight and feeling; nor is there any thing, but what is coloured or
tangible, that has parts disposed after such a manner, as to convey
that idea. When we diminish or encrease a relish, it is not after the
same manner that we diminish or encrease any visible object; and when
several sounds strike our hearing at once, custom and reflection
alone make us form an idea of the degrees of the distance and
contiguity of those bodies, from which they are derived.

Whatever marks the place of its existence either must be extended, or
must be a mathematical point, without parts or composition.
What is extended must have a particular figure, as square, round,
triangular; none of which will agree to a desire, or indeed to any
impression or idea, except to these two senses above-mentioned. Neither
ought a desire, though indivisible, to be considered as a mathematical
point. For in that case it would be possible, by the addition
of others, to make two, three, four desires, and these disposed and
situated in such a manner, as to have a determinate length, breadth and
thickness; which is evidently absurd.

It will not be surprising after this, if I deliver a maxim, which is
condemned by several metaphysicians, and is esteemed contrary to the
most certain principles of hum reason. This maxim is that an object
may exist, and yet be no where: and I assert, that this is not only
possible, but that the greatest part of beings do and must exist
after this manner. An object may be said to be no where, when its parts
are not so situated with respect to each other, as to form any
figure or quantity; nor the whole with respect to other bodies so as
to answer to our notions of contiguity or distance.

Now this is evidently the case with all our perceptions and objects,
except those of the sight and feeling. A moral reflection cannot be
placed on the right or on the left hand of a passion, nor can a smell
or sound be either of a circular or a square figure. These objects and
perceptions, so far from requiring any particular place, are absolutely
incompatible with it, and even the imagination cannot attribute
it to them.

And as to the absurdity of supposing them to be no where, we may
consider, that if the passions and sentiments appear to the perception
to have any particular place, the idea of extension might be derived
from them, as well as from the sight and touch; contrary to what
we have already established.

If they APPEAR not to have any particular place, they may possibly
exist in the same manner; since whatever we conceive is possible.

It will not now be necessary to prove, that those perceptions, which
are simple, and exist no where, are incapable of any conjunction in
place with matter or body, which is extended and divisible; since it
is impossible to found a relation but on some common quality. It
may be better worth our while to remark, that this question of
the local conjunction of objects does not only occur in metaphysical
disputes concerning the nature of the soul, but that even in common
life we have every moment occasion to examine it. Thus supposing we
consider a fig at one end of the table, and an olive at the other, it
is evident, that in forming the complex ideas of these substances, one
of the most obvious is that of their different relishes; and it is as
evident, that we incorporate and conjoin these qualities with such as
are coloured and tangible. The bitter taste of the one, and sweet of
the other are supposed to lie in the very visible body, and to be
separated from each other by the whole length of the table. This
is so notable and so natural an illusion, that it may be proper to consider
the principles, from which it is derived.

Though an extended object be incapable of a conjunction in place with
another, that exists without any place or extension, yet are they
susceptible of many other relations.

Thus the taste and smell of any fruit are inseparable from its other
qualities of colour and tangibility; and whichever of them be the cause
or effect, it is certain they are always co-existent. Nor are they
only co-existent in general, but also co-temporary in their appearance
in the mind; and it is upon the application of the extended body to our
senses we perceive its particular taste and smell. These relations,
then, of causation, and contiguity in the time of their appearance,
betwixt the extended object and the quality, which exists without any
particular place, must have such an effect on the mind, that upon the
appearance of one it will immediately turn its thought to the
conception of the other. Nor is this all. We not only turn our thought
from one to the other upon account of their relation, but likewise
endeavour to give them a new relation, viz. that of a CONJUNCTION
IN PLACE, that we may render the transition more easy and natural.

For it is a quality, which I shall often have occasion to remark in
human nature, and shall explain more fully in its proper place, that
when objects are united by any relation, we have a strong propensity
to add some new relation to them, in order to compleat the union. In
our arrangement of bodies we never fail to place such as are
resembling, in contiguity to each other, or at least in correspondent
points of view:
Why? but because we feel a satisfaction in joining the relation of
contiguity to that of resemblance, or the resemblance of situation to
that of qualities. The effects this propensity have been [Sect. 2,
towards the end.] already observed in that resemblance, which we
so readily suppose betwixt particular impressions and their external
causes.

But we shall not find a more evident effect of it, than in the present
instance, where from the relations of causation and contiguity in time
betwixt two objects, we feign likewise that of a conjunction in
place, in order to strengthen the connexion.

But whatever confused notions we may form of an union in place betwixt
an extended body, as a fig, and its particular taste, it is certain
that upon reflection we must observe this union something altogether
unintelligible and contradictory. For should we ask ourselves one
obvious question, viz.
if the taste, which we conceive to be contained in the circumference of
the body, is in every part of it or in one only, we must quickly find
ourselves at a loss, and perceive the impossibility of ever giving a
satisfactory answer. We cannot rely, that it is only in one part: For
experience convinces us, that every part has the same relish. We can
as little reply, that it exists in every part: For then we must
suppose it figured and extended; which is absurd and incomprehensible.

Here then we are influenced by two principles directly contrary to
each other, viz.
that inclination of our fancy by which we are determined to incorporate
the taste with the extended object, and our reason, which shows
us the impossibility of such an union.

Being divided betwixt these opposite principles, we renounce neither one
nor the other, but involve the subject in such confusion and obscurity,
that we no longer perceive the opposition. We suppose, that the taste
exists within the circumference of the body, but in such a manner, that
it fills the whole without extension, and exists entire in every part
without separation. In short, we use in our most familiar way of
thinking, that scholastic principle, which, when crudely proposed,
appears so shocking, of TOTUM IN TOTO & TOLUM IN QUALIBET PARTE: Which
is much the same, as if we should say, that a thing is in a certain
place, and yet is not there.

All this absurdity proceeds from our endeavouring to bestow a place
on what is utterly incapable of it; and that endeavour again arises
from our inclination to compleat an union, which is founded on
causation, and a contiguity of time, by attributing to the objects
a conjunction in place.

But if ever reason be of sufficient force to overcome prejudice, it is
certain, that in the present case it must prevail. For we have
only this choice left, either to suppose that some beings exist without
any place; or that they are figured and extended; or that when they are
incorporated with extended objects, the whole is in the whole, and the
whole in every part. The absurdity of the two last suppositions proves
sufficiently the veracity of the first. Nor is there any fourth opinion.
For as to the supposition of their existence in the manner of mathematical
points, it resolves itself into the second opinion, and supposes, that
several passions may be placed in a circular figure, and that a
certain number of smells, conjoined with a certain number of sounds,
may make a body of twelve cubic inches; which appears ridiculous
upon the bare mentioning of it.

But though in this view of things we cannot refuse to condemn the materialists,
who conjoin all thought with extension; yet a little reflection will
show us equal reason for blaming their antagonists, who conjoin all thought
with a simple and indivisible substance.

The most vulgar philosophy informs us, that no external object can
make itself known to the mind immediately, and without the
interposition of an image or perception. That table, which just now
appears to me, is only a perception, and all its qualities are
qualities of a perception. Now the most obvious of all its qualities
is extension. The perception consists of parts. These parts are so
situated, as to afford us the notion of distance and contiguity; of length,
breadth, and thickness. The termination of these three dimensions
is what we call figure. This figure is moveable, separable, and
divisible.

Mobility, and separability are the distinguishing properties of extended
objects. And to cut short all disputes, the very idea of extension is
copyed from nothing but an impression, and consequently must perfectly
agree to it.

To say the idea of extension agrees to any thing, is to say it is
extended.

The free-thinker may now triumph in his turn; and having found there
are impressions and ideas really extended, may ask his antagonists,
how they can incorporate a simple and indivisible subject with an
extended perception?

All the arguments of Theologians may here be retorted upon them. Is the
indivisible subject, or immaterial substance, if you will, on the
left or on the right hand of the perception?

Is it in this particular part, or in that other?

Is it in every part without being extended? Or is it entire in any one
part without deserting the rest?
It is impossible to give any answer to these questions, but what
will both be absurd in itself, and will account for the union of
our indivisible perceptions with an extended substance.

This gives me an occasion to take a-new into consideration the
question concerning the substance of the soul; and though I have
condemned that question as utterly unintelligible, yet I cannot
forbear proposing some farther reflections concerning it.

I assert, that the doctrine of the immateriality, simplicity, and
indivisibility of a thinking substance is a true atheism, and will
serve to justify all those sentiments, for which Spinoza is so
universally infamous.

From this topic, I hope at least to reap one advantage, that my adversaries
will not have any pretext to render the present doctrine odious
by their declamations, when they see that they can be so easily
retorted on them.

The fundamental principle of the atheism of Spinoza is the doctrine of
the simplicity of the universe, and the unity of that substance,
in which he supposes both thought and matter to inhere. There is only
one substance, says he, in the world; and that substance is perfectly
simple and indivisible, and exists every where, without any local
presence.

Whatever we discover externally by sensation; whatever we feel internally
by reflection; all these are nothing but modifications of that one,
simple, and necessarily existent being, and are not possest of any
separate or distinct existence.

Every passion of the soul; every configuration of matter, however different
and various, inhere in the same substance, and preserve in themselves
their characters of distinction, without communicating them to that
subject, in which they inhere.

The same substratum, if I may so speak, supports the most different
modifications, without any difference in itself; and varies them, without
any variation. Neither time, nor place, nor all the diversity of nature
are able to produce any composition or change in its perfect simplicity
and identity.

I believe this brief exposition of the principles of that famous atheist
will be sufficient for the present purpose, and that without entering
farther into these gloomy and obscure regions, I shall be able to
shew, that this hideous hypothesis is almost the same with that of the
immateriality of the soul, which has become so popular. To make this
evident, let us [Part II, Sect. 6.] remember, that as every idea is
derived from a preceding perception, it is impossible our idea of
a perception, and that of an object or external existence can ever
represent what are specifically different from each other.

Whatever difference we may suppose betwixt them, it is still incomprehensible
to us; and we are obliged either to conceive an external object merely
as a relation without a relative, or to make it the very same with a
perception or impression.

The consequence I shall draw from this may, at first sight, appear
a mere sophism; but upon the least examination will be found solid
and satisfactory.

I say then, that since we may suppose, but never can conceive a specific
deference betwixt an object and impression; any conclusion we form
concerning the connexion and repugnance of impressions, will not
be known certainly to be applicable to objects; but that on the
other hand, whatever conclusions of this kind we form concerning
objects, will most certainly be applicable to impressions.

The reason is not difficult. As an object is supposed to be different
from an impression, we cannot be sure, that the circumstance, upon
which we found our reasoning, is common to both, supposing we form
the reasoning upon the impression.

It is still possible, that the object may differ from it in that
particular. But when we first form our reasoning concerning the object,
it is beyond doubt, that the same reasoning must extend to the impression:
And that because the quality of the object, upon which the argument is
founded, must at least be conceived by the mind; and coued not be
conceived, unless it were common to an impression; since we have
no idea but what is derived from that origin.

Thus we may establish it as a certain maxim, that we can never,
by any principle, but by an irregular kind [Such as that of Sect. 2, form
the coherence of our perceptions.] of reasoning from experience, discover
a connexion or repugnance betwixt objects, which extends not to
impressions; though the inverse proposition may not be equally
true, that all the discoverable relations of impressions are common
to objects.

To apply this to the present case; there are two different systems
of being presented, to which I suppose myself under .t necessity
of assigning some substance, or ground of inhesion.

I observe first the universe of objects or of body: The sun, moon
and stars; the earth, seas, plants, animals, men, ships, houses,
and other productions either of art or nature.

Here Spinoza appears, and tells me, that these are only modifications; and
that the subject, in which they inhere, is simple, incompounded, and
indivisible.

After this I consider the other system of beings, viz. the universe of
thought, or my impressions and ideas.

There I observe another sun, moon and stars; an earth, and seas, covered
and inhabited by plants and animals; towns, houses, mountains,
rivers; and in short every thing I can discover or conceive in the
first system. Upon my enquiring concerning these, Theologians present
themselves, and tell me, that these also are modifications, and modifications
of one simple, uncompounded, and indivisible substance.

Immediately upon which I am deafened with the noise of a hundred voices,
that treat the first hypothesis with detestation and scorn, and the
second with applause and veneration.

I turn my attention to these hypotheses to see what may be the reason
of so great a partiality; and find that they have the same fault of being
unintelligible, and that as far as we can understand them, they
are so much alike, that it is impossible to discover any absurdity
in one, which is not common to both of them.

We have no idea of any quality in an object, which does not agree to,
and may not represent a quality in an impression; and that because all
our ideas are derived from our impressions.
They who may have been thus conjecturing, with everybody else, are taken
by surprise, in fact, somewhat startled, when the older of the two
officers, bending across the table, tosses a hundred pound Bank of
England note upon the baize, with as much nonchalance as if it were but
a five-dollar bill!

"Shall I give you cheques for it?" asks the croupier, after examining
the crisp note--current over all the earth--and knowing it good as gold.

"No," answers Crozier; "not yet.  You can give that after the bet's
decided--if I win it.  If not, you can take the note.  I place it on the
Queen, against the Knave."

The croupier, simply nodding assent, places the note as directed.

During the interregnum in which this little episode occurs, the English
officers, hitherto scarce noticed, are broadly stared at, and closely
scrutinised--Crozier becoming the cynosure of every eye.  He stands it
with a placid tranquillity, which shows him as careless about what they
may think him, as he is of his cash.

Meanwhile, the cards have had a fresh shuffle, and the deal begins anew;
all eyes again turning upon the game.  In earnest expectancy; those who,
like Crozier, have placed upon the Queen, wishing her to show her face
first.  And she does.

"_Caballo en la puerta mozo_!"  (The Queen in the door wins) cries the
dealer, the words drawled out with evident reluctance, while a flash of
fierce anger is seen scintillating in his eyes.

"Will you take it in cheques?" asks the croupier addressing himself to
Crozier, after settling the smaller bets.  "Or shall I pay you in
specie?"

"You needn't pay yet.  Let the note lie.  Only cover it with a like
amount.  I go it double, and again upon the Queen."

Stakes are re-laid--some changed--others left standing or doubled, as
Crozier's, which is now a bet for two hundred pounds.

On goes the game, the piece of smooth pasteboard slipping silently from
the jewelled fingers of the dealer, whose eye is bent upon the cards, as
if he saw through them--or would, if he could.  But whatever his wish,
he has no power to change the chances.  If he have any professional
tricks, there is no opportunity for him to practise them.  There are too
many eyes looking on; too many pistols and bowie-knives about; too many
men ready to stop any attempt at cheating, and punish it, if attempted.

Again he is compelled to call out:

"_Caballo en la puerta mozo_!"

"Now, sir," says the croupier to Crozier, after settling other scores,
"you want your money, I suppose?"

"Not yet.  I'm not pressed, and can afford to wait.  I again go double,
and am still contented with my Queen."

The dealing proceeds; with four hundred pounds lying on the _Caballo_ to
Crozier's account--and ten times as much belonging to other bettors.
For now that the luck seems to be running with the Englishman, most lay
their stakes beside his.

Once again: "_Caballo en la puerta mozo_!"

And again Crozier declines to take up his bet.

He has now eight hundred pounds sterling upon the card--sixteen hundred
on the turn of the game--while the others, thoroughly assured that his
luck is on the run, double theirs, till the bets against the bank post
up to as many thousands.

De Lara begins to look anxious, and not a little downhearted.  Still
more anxious, and lower in heart, appears him seated on the opposite
side--Calderon; for it is his money that is moving away.  He is visibly
excited.  On the contrary, Crozier is as cool as ever, his features set
in a rigid determination to do what he promised--break the bank, or lose
all he has got about him.  The last, not likely yet, for soon again
comes the cry:

"_The Queen winner_!"

There is a pause longer than usual, for the settling of such a large
score; and after it an interval of inaction.  The dealer seems inclined
to discontinue; for still lying upon the Queen is Crozier's stake, once
more doubled, and now counting three thousand two hundred pounds!

Asked if he intends to let it remain, he replies sneeringly:

"Of course I do; I insist upon it.  And once more I go for the Queen.
Let those who like the Knave better, back him!"

"Go on!  Go on!" is the cry around the table, from many voices speaking
in tone of demand.

De Lara glances at Calderon furtively, but, to those observing it, with
a look of interrogation.  Whatever the sign, or answer, it decides him
to go on dealing.

The bets are again made; to his dismay, almost everybody laying upon the
Queen, and, as before, increasing their stakes.  And in like proportion
is heightened the interest in the game.  It is too intense for any
display of noisy excitement now.  And there is less throughout the
saloon; for many from the other tables, as all the saunterers, have
collected round, and standing several deep, gaze over one another's
shoulders, with as much eager earnestness as if a man were expiring in
their midst.

The ominous call at length comes--not in clear voice, or tone exultant,
but feeble, and as if rung reluctantly from the lips of the Monte
dealer.  For it is again a verdict adverse to the bank:

"_Caballo en la puerta mozo_!"

As De Lara utters the words, he dashes the cards down, scattering them
all over the table.  Then rising excitedly from his chair, adds in
faltering tone:

"Gentlemen, I'm sorry to tell you the bank's broke!"


CHAPTER THIRTY ONE.

A PLUCKY "SPORT."

"_The bank's broke_!"

Three words, that, despite their bad grammar, have oft--too oft--
startled the ear, and made woe in many a heart.

At hearing them, the gamesters of the "El Dorado" seated around Frank
Lara's Monte table spring to their feet, as if their chairs had suddenly
become converted into iron at white heat.  They rise simultaneously, as
though all were united in a chain, elbow and elbow together.

But while thus gesturing alike, very different is the expression upon
their faces.  Some simply show surprise; others look incredulous; while
not a few give evidence of anger.

For an instant there is silence--the surprise, the incredulity, the
anger having suspended speech.  This throughout the saloon; for all,
bar-drinkers as well as gamesters, have caught the ominous words, and
thoroughly understand their import.  No longer resounds the chink of
ivory cheques, or the metallic ring of doubloons and dollars.  No longer
the thudding down of decanters, nor the jingle of glasses.  Instead, a
stillness so profound that one entering at this moment might fancy it a
Quakers' meeting, but for the symbols seen around--these, anything but
Quakerish.  Easier to imagine it a grand gambling-hell, where dealers,
croupiers, players, and spectators have all been suddenly turned to
stone, or have become figures in wax-work.

The silence is of the shortest--as also the immobility of the men
composing the different groups--only for a half-score seconds.  Then
there is noise enough, with plenty of gesticulation.  A roar arises that
fills the room; while men rush about wildly, madly, as if in the
courtyard of a lunatic asylum.  Some show anger--those who are losers by
the breaking of the bank.  Many have won large bets, their stakes still
lying on the table, which they know will not be paid.  The croupier has
told them so, confessing his cash-box cleared out at the last
settlement; even this having been effected with the now protested ivory
cheques.

Some gather up their gold or silver, and stow it in safety, growling,
but satisfied that things are no worse.  Others are not so lenient.
They do not believe there is a good cause for the suspension, and insist
on being paid in full.  They rail at the proprietor of the bank, adding
menace.  De Lara is the man thus marked.  They see him before them,
grandly dressed, glittering with diamonds.  They talk of stripping him
of his _bijouterie_.

"No, gentlemen!" he exclaims, with a sardonic sneer.  "Not that, if you
please--not yet.  First hear me, and then it will be time for you to
strike."

"What have you to say?" demands one, with his fists full of ivory
counters, unredeemed.

"Only that I'm not the _owner_ of this bank, and never have been."

"Who is, then?" ask several at the same time.

"Well; that I can't tell you just now; and, what's more, I _won't_.  No,
that I won't."

The gambler says this with emphasis, and an air of sullen determination,
that has its effect upon his questioners--even the most importunate.
For a time it stays their talk, as well as action.

Seeing this, he follows it up with further speech, somewhat mere
conciliatory.

"As I've said, gentlemen, I'm not the owner of this concern--only the
dealer of the cards.  You ask, who's proprietor of the smashed table.
It's natural enough you should want to know.  But it's just as natural
that it ain't my business to tell you.  If I did, it would be a shabby
trick; and, I take it, you're all men enough to see it in that light.
If there's any who isn't, he can have my card, and call upon me at his
convenience.  My name's Francisco de Lara--or Frank Lara, for short.  I
can be found here, or anywhere else in San Francisco, at such time as
may suit anxious inquirers.  And if any wants me now, and can't wait,
I'm good this minute for pistols across that bit of board we've just
been seated at.  Yes, gentlemen!  Any of you who'd relish a little
amusement of that kind, let him come on!  It'll be a change from the
Monte.  For my part, I'm tired of shuffling cards, and would like to
rest my fingers on a trigger.  Which of you feels disposed to give me
the chance?  Don't all speak at once!"

No one feels disposed, and no one speaks; at least in hostile tone, or
to take up the challenge.  Instead, half a score surround the "sport,"
and not only express their admiration of his pluck, but challenge him to
an encounter of drinks, not pistols.

Turning towards the bar, they vociferate "Champagne."

Contented with the turn things have taken, and proud at the volley of
invitations, De Lara accepts; and soon the vintage of France is seen
effervescing from a dozen tall glasses, and the Monte dealer stands
drinking in the midst of his admirers.

Other groups draw up to the bar-counter, while twos and solitary
tipplers fill the spaces between.

The temple of Fortuna is for a time deserted, her worshippers
transferring their devotion to the shrine of Bacchus.  The losers drink
to drown disappointment, while the winners quaff cups in the
exhilaration of success.

If a bad night for the bank, it is a good one for the bar.  Decanters
are speedily emptied, and bottles of many kinds go "down among the dead
men."

The excitement in the "El Dorado" is soon over.  Occurrences of like
kind, but often of more tragical termination, are too common in
California to cause any long-sustained interest.  Within the hour will
arise some new event, equally stirring, leaving the old to live only in
the recollection of those who have been active participants in it.

So with the breaking of Frank Lara's bank.  A stranger, entering the
saloon an hour after, from what he there sees, could not tell, neither
would he suspect that an incident of so serious nature had occurred.
For in less than this time the same Monte table is again surrounded by
gamesters, as if its play had never been suspended.  The only difference
observable is that quite another individual presides over it, dealing
out the cards, while a new croupier has replaced him whose cash receipts
so suddenly ran short of his required disbursements.

The explanation is simply that there has been a change of owners,
another celebrated "sport" taking up the abandoned bank and opening it
anew.  With a few exceptions the customers are the same, their number
not sensibly diminished.  Most of the old players have returned to it,
while the places of those who have defected, and gone off to other
gambling resorts, are filled by fresh arrivals.

A small party of gentlemen, who think they have had play enough for that
night, have left the "El Dorado" for good.  Among these are the English
officers, whose visit proved so prejudicial to the interests of the
place.

De Lara, too, and Calderon, with other confederates, have forsaken the
saloon.  But whither gone no one knows, or seems to care; for the
fortunes of fallen men soon cease to interest those who are themselves
madly struggling to mount up.


CHAPTER THIRTY TWO.

A SUPPER CARTE-BLANCHE.

On parting from the "El Dorado," Crozier and Cadwallader do not go
directly aboard the _Crusader_.  They know that their boat will be
awaiting them at the place appointed.  But the appointment is for a
later hour; and as the breaking of the Monte bank, with the incidents
attendant, occupied but a short while, there will be time for them to
see a little more of San Francisco life.  They have fallen in with
several other young officers, naval like themselves, though not of their
own ship, nor yet their own navy, or nation, but belonging to one
cognate and kindred--Americans.  Through the freemasonry of their common
profession, with these they have fraternised, and it is agreed they
shall all sup together.  Crozier has invited the Americans to a repast
the most _recherche_, as the costliest, that can be obtained at the
grandest hotel in San Francisco, the _Parker House_.  He adds
humorously, that he is able to stand the treat.  And well he may; since,
besides the English money with which he entered the "El Dorado," he has
brought thousands of dollars out of it, and would have brought more had
all the ivory cheques been honoured.  As it is, his pockets are filled
with notes and gold; as also those of Cadwallader, who helps him to
carry the shining stuff.  Part of the heavy metal he has been able to
change into the more portable form of bank-notes.  Yet the two are still
heavily weighted--"laden like hucksters' donkeys!" jokingly remarks
Cadwallader, as they proceed towards the _Parker_.

At the hotel a private room is engaged; and, according to promise,
Crozier bespeaks a repast of the most sumptuous kind, with
_carte-blanche_ for the best wines--champagne at three guineas a bottle,
hock the same, and South-side Madeira still more.  What difference to
him?

The supper ordered in the double-quick soon makes its appearance.
Sooner in San Francisco than in any other city in the world; in better
style, too, and better worth the money; for the Golden City excels in
the science of gastronomy.  Even then, amidst her canvas sheds, and
weather-boarded houses, could be obtained dishes of every kind known to
Christendom, or Pagandom: the _cuisine_ of France, Spain, and Italy; the
roast beef of Old England, as the pork and beans of the New; the _gumbo_
of Guinea, and _sauerkraut_ of Germany, side by side with the
swallow's-nest soup and sea-slugs of China.  Had Lucullus but lived in
these days, he would have forsaken the banks of the Tiber, and made
California his home.

The repast furnished by the _Parker House_, however splendid, has to be
speedily despatched; for unfortunately time forbids the leisurely
enjoyment of the viands, to a certain extent marring the pleasure of the
occasion.  All the officers, American as English, have to be on their
respective ships at the stroke of twelve.

Reluctantly breaking up their hilarious company, they prepare to depart.

They have forsaken the supper-room, and passed on to the outer saloon of
the hotel; like all such, furnished with a drinking-bar.

Before separating, and while buttoning up against the chill night-air,
Crozier calls out:

"Come, gentlemen; one more glass!  The stirrup-cup!"

In San Francisco this is always the wind up to a night of revelry.  No
matter how much wine has been quaffed, the carousal is not deemed
complete without a last "valedictory" drink taken standing at the bar.

Giving way to the Californian custom, the officers range themselves
along the marble slab; bending over which, the polite bar-keeper asks:

"What is it to be, gentlemen?"

There is a moment of hesitation, the gentlemen--already well wined--
scarce knowing what to call for.  Crozier cuts the Gordian knot by
proposing:

"A round of punches _a la Romaine_!"

Universal assent to this delectable drink; as all know just the thing
for a night-cap.

Soon the cooling beverage, compounded with snow from the Sierra Nevada,
appears upon the counter, in huge glasses, piled high with the sparkling
crystals; a spoon surmounting each--for punch _a la Romaine_ is not to
be drunk, but eaten.

Shovelling it down in haste, adieus are exchanged, with a hearty shake
of hands.  Then the American officers go off, leaving Crozier and
Cadwallader in the saloon; these only staying to settle the account.

While standing by the bar, waiting for it to be brought, they cast a
glance around the room.  At first careless, it soon becomes concentrated
on a group seen at some distance off, near one of the doors leading out,
of which there are several.  There are also several other groups; for
the saloon is of large dimensions, besides being the most popular place
of resort in San Francisco.  And for San Francisco the hour is not yet
late.  Along the line of the drinking-bar, and over the white-sanded
floor, are some scores of people of all qualities and kinds, in almost
every variety of costume; though they who compose the party that has
attracted the attention of the English officers show nothing
particular--that is, to the eye of one unacquainted with them.  There
are four of them, two wearing broadcloth cloaks, the other two having
their shoulders shrouded under _serapes_.  Nothing in all that.  The
night is cold, indeed wet, and they are close to the door, to all
appearance intending soon to step out.  They have only paused to
exchange a parting word, as if they designed to separate before issuing
into the street.

Though the spot where they stand is in shadow--a folding screen
separating it from the rest of the saloon--and it is not easy to get
sight of their faces--the difficulty increased by broad-brimmed hats set
slouchingly on their heads, with their cloaks and serapes drawn up
around their throats--Crozier and Cadwallader have not only seen, but
recognised them.  A glance at their countenances, caught before the
muffling was made, enabled the young officers to identify three of them
as De Lara, Calderon, and the _ci-devant_ croupier of the Monte bank.
The fourth, whose face they have also seen, is a personage not known to
them; but, judging by his features, a suitable associate for the other
three.

Soon as catching sight of them, which he is the first to do, Crozier
whispers to his companion:

"See, Will!  Look yonder!  Our friends from the `El Dorado!'"

"By Jove! them, sure enough.  Do you think they've been following us?"

"I shouldn't wonder.  I was only surprised they didn't do something,
when they had us in their gambling den.  After the heavy draw I made on
Mr Lara's bank, I expected no less than that he'd try to renew his
acquaintance with me; all the more from his having been so free of it in
the morning.  Instead, he and his friend seemed to studiously avoid
coming near us--not even casting a look in our direction.  That rather
puzzled me."

"It needn't.  After what you gave him, I should think he'll feel shy of
another encounter."

"No; that's not it.  Blackleg though the fellow be, he's got game in
him.  He gave proof of it in the `El Dorado,' defying, and backing
everybody out.  It was an exhibition of real courage, Will; and, to tell
the truth, I couldn't help admiring it--can't now.  When I saw him
presiding over the gambling table, and dealing out the cards, I at once
made up my mind that it would never do to meet him--even if he
challenged me.  Now, I've decided differently; and if he call me out,
I'll give him a chance to recover a little of his lost reputation.  I
will, upon my honour."

"But why should you?  A `sport,' a professional gambler!  The thing
would be simply ridiculous."

"Nothing of the kind--not here in California.  On the contrary, I should
cut a more ridiculous figure by refusing him satisfaction.  It remains
to be seen whether he'll seek it according to the correct code."

"That he won't; at least, I don't think he will.  From the way that lot
have got their heads together, it looks as if they meant mischief,
_now_.  They may have been watching their opportunity--to get us two
alone.  What a pity we didn't see them before our friends went off!
They're good fellows, those Yankee officers, and would have stood by
us."

"No doubt they would.  But it's too late now.  They're beyond hailing
distance, and we must take care of ourselves.  Get your dirk ready,
Will, and have your hand close to the butt of that shooting-iron, you
took from Mr De Lara."

"I have it that way.  Never fear.  Wouldn't it be a good joke if I have
to give the fellow a pill out of his own pistol?"

"No joking matter to us, if they're meditating an attack.  Though we
disarmed him in the morning, he'll be freshly provided, and with weapons
in plenty.  I'll warrant each of the four has a battery concealed under
his cloak.  They appear as if concocting some scheme--which we'll soon
know all about--likely before leaving the house.  Certainly, they're up
to something."

"Four hundred and ninety dollars, gentlemen!"

The financial statement is made by the office clerk presenting the bill.

"There!" cries Crozier, flinging down a five hundred dollar bill.  "Let
that settle it.  You can keep the change for yourself."

"Thank ye," dryly responds the Californian dispenser of drinks, taking
the ten dollar tip with less show of gratitude than a London waiter
would give for a fourpenny piece--little as that may be.

Turning to take departure, the young officers again look across the
saloon, to learn how the hostile party has disposed itself.  To their
surprise, the gamblers are gone; having disappeared while the account
was being paid.

"I don't like the look of it," says Crozier, in a whisper.  "Less now
than ever.  No doubt we'll find them outside.  Well; we can't stay here
all night.  If they attack us, we must do our best.  Take a firm grip of
your pistol, with your finger close to the trigger; and if any of them
shows sign of shooting, see that you fire first.  Follow me; and keep
close!"

On the instant of delivering these injunctions, he starts towards the
door, Cadwallader following as directed.

Both step out, and for a short while stand gazing interrogatively around
them.  People they see in numbers, some lounging by the hotel porch,
others passing along the street.  But none in cloaks or _serapes_.  The
gamblers must have gone clear away.

"After all, we may have been wronging them," remarks Urozier, as in his
nature, giving way to a generous impulse.  "I can hardly think that a
fellow who's shown such courage would play the assassin.  Maybe they
were but putting their heads together about challenging us?  If that's
it, we may expect to hear from them in the morning.  It looks all right.
Anyhow, we can't stay dallying here.  If we're not aboard by eight
bells, old Bracebridge 'll masthead us.  Let's heave along, my hearty!"

So saying, he leads off, Cadwallader close on his quarter--both a little
unsteady in their steps, partly from being loaded with the spoils of "El
Dorado," and partly from the effects of the _Parker House_ wines, and
punches _a la Romaine_.


CHAPTER THIRTY THREE.

HARRY BLEW HOMELESS.

While the exciting scene described as taking place in the saloon "El
Dorado" was at its height, Harry Blew went past the door.  Could the
sailor have seen through walls, he would have entered the Hell.  The
sight of His former officers would have attracted him inside; there to
remain, for more reasons than one.

Of one he had already thought.  Conjecturing that the young gentleman
might be going on a bit of spree, and knowing the dangers of such in San
Francisco, it had occurred to him to accompany, or keep close after
them--in order that he might be at hand, should they come into collision
with any of the roughs and rowdies thick upon the street.
Unfortunately, this idea, like that of asking them for a cash loan, had
come too late; and they were out of sight ere he could take any steps
towards its execution.  A glance into the gambling-saloon would have
brought both opportunities back again; and, instead of continuing to
wander hungry through the streets, he would have had a splendid supper,
and after it a bed, either in some respectable hostelry, or his old bunk
aboard the _Crusader_.

It was not to be.  While passing the "El Dorado," he could know nothing
of the friends that were so near; and thus unconscious, he leaves the
glittering saloon behind, and a half-score others lighted with like
brilliancy.

For a while longer he saunters slowly about, in the hope of yet
encountering the officers.  Several times he sees men in uniform, and
makes after them, only to find they are not English.

At length giving it up, he quickens his pace, and strikes for the office
of Silvestre, which he knows to be in the street fronting the water.

As San Francisco is not like an old seaport, where house-room is cheap
and abundant, but every foot of roof-shelter utilised by day as by
night, there is a chance the office may still be open.  In all
probability, the shipping-agent sleeps by the side of his ledger; or, if
not, likely enough one of his clerks.  In which case he, Harry Blew, may
be allowed to lie along the floor, or get a shake-down in some adjoining
shed.  He would be but too glad to stretch himself on an old sack, a
naked bench, or, for that matter, sit upright in a chair.  For he is now
fairly fagged out perambulating the unpaved streets of that inhospitable
town.

Tacking from corner to corner, now and then hitching up his trousers, to
give freer play to his feet, he at length comes out upon the street
which fronts upon the bay.  In his week's cruising about the town he has
acquired some knowledge of its topography, and knows well enough where
he is; but not the office of the shipping-agent.  It, therefore, takes
him a considerable time to find it.  Along the water's edge the houses
are irregularly placed, and numbered with like irregularity.  Besides,
there is scarce any light; the night has become dark, with a sky densely
clouded, and the street-lamps burning whale-oil are dim, and at long
distances apart.  It is with difficulty he can make out the figures upon
the doors.  However, he is at length successful, and deciphers on one
the number he is in search of--as also the name "Silvestre," painted on
a piece of tin attached to to the side-post, A survey of the house--
indeed, a single glance at it--convinces him he has come thither to no
purpose.  It is a small wooden structure, not much bigger than a
sentry-box, evidently only an office, with no capability of conversion
to a bed-chamber.  Still it has room enough to admit of a man's lying at
full length along its floor; and, as already said, he would be glad of
so disposing himself for the night.  There may be some one inside,
though the one window--in size corresponding to the shanty itself--looks
black and forbidding.

With no very sanguine hope, he lays hold of the door-handle, and gives
it a twist.  Locked, as he might have expected!

The test not satisfying him, he knocks.  At first timidly; then a little
bolder and louder; finally, giving a good round rap with his knuckles--
hard as horn.  At the same time he hails sailor-fashion:

"Ahoy, there; be there any one within?"

This in English; but, remembering that the ship-agent is a Spaniard, he
follows his first hail with another in the Spanish tongue, adding the
usual formulary:

"_Abre la puerta_!"

Neither to question, nor demand is there any response.  Only the echo of
his own voice reverberated along the line of houses, and dying away in
the distance, as it mingles with the sough of the sea.

No use speaking, or knocking again.  Undoubtedly, Silvestre's office is
closed for the night; and his clerks, if there be any, have their
sleeping-quarters elsewhere.

Forced to this conclusion, though sadly dissatisfied with it, the
ex-man-o'-war's man turns away from the door, and once more goes
cruising along the streets.  But now, having no definite point to steer
for, he makes short tacks and turns, like a ship sailing under an
unfavourable wind--or as one disregarding the guidance of the compass,
without steersman at the wheel.

After beating about for nearly another hour, he discovers himself
contiguous to the water's edge.  His instincts have conducted him
thither--as the seal, after a short inland excursion, finds its way back
to the beach.  Ah! if he could only swim like a seal!

This thought occurs to him as he stands looking over the sea in the
direction of the _Crusader_.  Were it possible to reach the frigate, all
his troubles would soon be forgotten in the cheerful companionship of
his old chums of the forepeak.

It can't be.  The man-of-war is anchored more than two miles off.
Strong swimmer though he knows himself, it is too far.  Besides, a fog
has suddenly sprung up, overspreading the bay, so that the frigate is
hidden from his sight.  Even ships lying close in shore can be but
faintly discerned through its film, and only the larger spars; the
smaller ones, with the rigging-ropes, looking like the threads of a
spider's web.

Downhearted, almost despairing, Harry Blew halts upon the beach.  What
is he to do?  Lie down on the sand, and there go to sleep?  There are
times when on the shores of San Francisco Bay this would not be much of
a hardship.  But now, it is the season of winter, when the Pacific
current, coming from latitudes farther north, rolls in through the
Golden Gate, bringing with it fogs that spread themselves over the great
estuary inside.  Although not frosty, these are cold enough to be
uncomfortable, and the haze now is accompanied by a chill drizzling
rain.

Standing under it, Harry Blew feels he is fast getting wet.  If he do
not obtain shelter, he will soon be soaked to the skin.

Looking inquiringly around, his eye rests upon a boat, which lies bottom
upward on the beach, appearing through the thick rain like the carapace
of a gigantic turtle.  It is an old ship's launch that has bilged, and
either been abandoned as useless, or upturned to receive repairs.  No
matter what its history, it offers the hospitality so scurvily refused
him at the "Sailor's Home."  If it cannot give him supper, or bed, it
will be some protection against the rain that has now commenced coming
down in big clouting drops.

This deciding him, he creeps under the capsized launch, and lays himself
at full length along the shingle.


CHAPTER THIRTY FOUR.

IN DANGEROUS PROXIMITY.

The spot upon which the ex-man-o'-war's man has stretched himself is
soft as a feather-bed.  Still he does not fall asleep.  The rain,
filtering through the sand, soon finds its way under the boat; and,
saturating his couch, makes it uncomfortable.  This, with the cold
night-air, keeps him awake.

He lies listening to the sough of the sea, and the big drops pattering
upon the planks above.

Not long before other sounds salute his ear, distinguishable as human
voices--men engaged in conversation.

As he continues to listen, the voices grow louder, those who converse
evidently drawing nearer.

In a few seconds they are by the boat's side, where they come to a
stand.  But though they have paused in their steps, they continue to
talk in excited, earnest tones.  And so loud, that he can hear every
word they say; though the speakers are invisible to him.  The capsized
boat is not so flush with the sand as to prevent him from seeing the
lower part of their legs, from the knees downward.  Of these there are
four pairs, two of them in trousers of the ordinary kind; the other two
in _calzoneras_ of velveteen, bordered at the bottoms with black stamped
leather.  But, that all four men are Californians, or Spaniards, he can
tell by the language in which they are conversing--Spanish.  A lucky
chance that he understands something of this--if not for himself, for
the friends who are dear to him.

The first intelligible speech that reaches his ear is an interrogatory:

"You're sure, Calderon, they'll come this way?"

"Quite sure, De Lara.  When I stood by them at the hotel-bar, I heard
the younger of the two tell one of the American officers that their boat
was to meet them at the wooden _muello_--the new pier, as you know.  To
reach that they must pass by here; there's no other way.  And it can't
be long before they make appearance.  They were leaving the hotel at the
time we did, and where else should they go?"

"Not knowing,"--this from the voice of a third individual.  "They may
stay to take another _copita_, or half-a-dozen.  These Inglese can drink
like fish, and don't seem to feel it."

"The more they drink the better for us," remarks a fourth.  "Our work
will be the easier."

"It may not be so easy, Don Manuel," puts in De Lara.  "Young as they
are, they're very devils both.  Besides, they're well armed, and will
battle like grizzly bears.  I tell you, _camarados_, we'll have work to
do before we get back our money."

"But do you intend killing them, De Lara?" asks he who has been called
Calderon.

"Of course.  We must, for our own sakes.  'Twould be madness not, even
if we could get the money without it.  The older, Crozier, is enormously
rich, I've heard; could afford to buy up all the law there is in San
Francisco.  If we let them escape, he'd have the police after us like
hounds upon a trail.  Even if they shouldn't recognise us now, they'd be
sure to suspect who it was, and make the place too hot to hold us.
_Caspita_!  It's not a question of choice, but a thing of necessity.
_We must kill them_!"

Harry Blew hears the cold-blooded determination, comprehending it in all
its terrible significance.  It tells him the young officers are still in
the town, and that these four men are about to waylay, rob, and murder
them.  What they mean by "getting back their money" is the only thing he
does not comprehend.  It is made clear as the conversation continues:

"I'm sure there's nothing unfair in taking back our own.  I, Frank Lara,
say so.  It was they who brought about the breaking of our bank, which
was done in a mean, dastardly way.  The Englishman had the luck, and all
the others of his kind went with him.  But for that we could have held
out.  It's no use our whining about it.  We've lost, and must make good
our losses best way we can.  We can't, and be safe ourselves, if we let
these _gringos_ go."

"_Chingara_! we'll stop their breath, and let there be no more words
about it."

The merciless verdict is in the voice of Don Manuel.

"You're all agreed, then?" asks De Lara.

"_Si, si, si_!" is the simultaneous answer of assent, Calderon alone
seeming to give it with reluctance; though he hesitates from timidity,
not mercy.

Harry Blew now knows all.  The officers have been gaming, have won
money, and the four fellows who talk so coolly of killing them are the
chief gambler and his confederates.

What is he to do?  How can he save the doomed men.  Both are armed;
Crozier has his sword, Cadwallader his dirk.  Besides, the midshipman
has a pistol, as he saw while they were talking to him at the Sailor's
Home.  But then they are to be taken unawares--shot, or struck down, in
the dark, without a chance of seeing the hand that strikes them!  Even
if warned and ready, it would be two against four.  And he is himself
altogether unarmed; for his jack-knife is gone--hypothecated to pay for
his last jorum of grog!  And the young officers have been drinking
freely, as he gathers from what the ruffians say.  They may be
inebriated, or enough so to put them off their guard.  Who would be
expecting assassination?  Who ever is, save a Mexican himself?
Altogether unlikely that they should be thinking of such a thing.  On
the contrary, disregarding danger, they will come carelessly on, to fall
like ripe corn before the sickle of the reaper.

The thought of such a fate for his friends fills the sailor with keenest
apprehension; and again he asks himself how it is to be averted.

The four conspirators are not more than as many feet from the boat.  By
stretching out his hands he could grip them by the ankles, without
altering his recumbent attitude one inch.  And by doing this, he might
give the guilty plotters such a scare as would cause them to retreat,
and so baffle their design.

The thought comes before his mind, but is instantly abandoned.  The
fellows are not of the stuff to be frightened at shadows.  By their
talk, at least two are desperadoes, and to make known his presence would
be only to add another victim to those already doomed to death.

But what is he to do?  For the third time he asks himself this question,
still unable to answer it.

While still painfully cogitating, his brain labouring to grasp some
feasible plan of defence against the threatened danger, he is warned of
a change.  Some words spoken tell of it.  It is De Lara who speaks them.

"By the way, _camarados_, we're not in a good position here.  They may
sight us too soon.  To make things sure, we must drop on them before
they can draw their weapons.  Else some of us may get dropped
ourselves."

"Where could we be better?  I don't see.  The shadow of this old boat
favours us."

"Why not crawl under it?" asks Calderon.  "There Argus himself couldn't
see us."

Harry Blew's heart beats at the double-quick.  His time seems come, and
he already fancies four pistols to his head, or the same number of
poniards pointed at his ribs.

It is a moment of vivid anxiety--a crisis dread, terrible, almost
agonising.

Fortunately it is not of long duration, ending almost on the instant.
He is relieved at hearing one of them say:

"No; that won't do.  We'd have trouble in scrambling out again.  While
about it they'd see or hear us, and take to their heels.  You must
remember, it's but a step to where their boat will be waiting them, with
some eight or ten of those big British tars in it.  If they got there
before we overtook them, the tables would be turned on us."

"You're right, Don Manuel," rejoins De Lara; "it won't do to go under
the boat, and there's no need for us to stay by it.  _Mira_! yonder's a
better place--by that wall.  In its shadow no one can see us, and the
_gringos_ must pass within twenty feet of it.  It's the very spot for
our purpose.  Have with me!"

No one objecting, the four separate from the side of the boat and glide
silently as spectres across the strip of sandy beach, their forms
gradually growing indistinct in the fog, at length altogether
disappearing beneath the sombre shadow of the wall.


CHAPTER THIRTY FIVE.

CRUSADERS, TO THE RESCUE!

"What am I to do!"

It is the ex-man-o'-war's man, still lying under the launch, who thus
interrogates himself.  He has put the question for the fourth time that
night, and now as emphatically as ever, but less despairingly.

True, the conspiring assassins have only stepped aside to a lurking
place from which they may more conveniently pounce upon their quarry,
and be surer of striking it.  But their changed position has left him
free to change his; which he at once determines upon doing.  Their talk
has told him where the man-of-war's boat will be awaiting to take the
officers back to their ship.  He knows the new wharf referred to, the
very stair at which the _Crusaders_ have been accustomed to bring to.

It may be the cutter with her full crew of ten--or it may be but the
gig.  No matter which.  There cannot be fewer than two oarsmen, and
these will be sufficient.  A brace of British tars, with himself to make
three, and the officers to tot up five--that will be more than a match
for four Spanish Californians.  Four times four, thinks Harry Blew, even
though the sailors, like himself, be unarmed, or with nothing but their
knives and boat-hooks.

He has no fear, if he can but bring it to an encounter of this kind.
The question is, can he do so?  And first, can he creep out from under
the launch, and steal away unobserved?

A glance of scrutiny towards the spot where the assassins have placed
themselves in ambuscade, satisfies him that he can.  The fog favours
him.  Through it he cannot see them; and should be himself equally
invisible.

Another circumstance will be in his favour: on the soft, sandy beach his
footsteps will make but slight noise: not enough to be heard above the
hoarse continuous surging of the surf.

All this passes in a moment, and he has made up his mind to start; but
hesitates from a new apprehension.  Will he be in time?  The stair at
which the boat should lie is not over a quarter of a mile off, and will
take but a few minutes to reach it.  Even if he succeed in eluding the
vigilance of the ambushed villains, will it be possible for him to get
to the pier, communicate with the boat's crew, and bring them back,
before the officers reach the place of ambush?

To all this the answer is doubtful, and the doubt appals him.  In his
absence, the young gentlemen may arrive at the fatal spot.  He may
return to find their bodies lying lifeless along the sand, their pockets
rifled, their murderers gone!

The thought holds him irresolute, doubting what course to take.  Should
he remain till they are heard approaching, then rush out, give them such
warning as he may, throw himself by their side, and do his best to
defend them?  Unarmed, this would not be much.  Against pistols and
poniards he would scarce count as a combatant.  It might but end in all
three being slaughtered together!  But there is also the danger of his
being discovered in his attempt to slip away from his place of
concealment.  He may be followed, and overtaken; though he has little
fear of this.  Pursued he may be, but not overtaken.  Despite his
sea-legs, he knows himself a swift runner.  Were he assured of a fair
start, he can hold his distance against anything Spanish or Californian.
In five minutes he might reach the pier--in five more be back.  If he
find the _Crusaders_ there, a word will warn them.  In all it would take
about ten minutes.  But, meanwhile, Crozier and Cadwallader may get upon
the ground, and one minute--half a minute--after all would be over.

A terrible struggle agitates the breast of the man-o'-war's man; in his
thoughts is conflict agonising.  On either side are _pros_ and _cons_,
requiring calm deliberation; and there is no time to deliberate.  He
must act.

But one more second spends he in consideration.  He has confidence in
the young officers.  Both are brave as lions, and if attacked, will make
a tough fight of it.  Crozier has also caution, on which dependence may
be placed; and at such a time of night he will not be going unguardedly.
The strife, though unequal, might last long enough for him, Harry Blew,
to bring the _Crusaders_--at least near enough to cry out--and cheer
their officers with the hope of help at hand.

All this flits through Harry Blew's brain in a tenth part of the time it
takes to tell it.  And having resolved how to act, he hastens to carry
out his resolution--to proceed in quest of the boat's crew.

Sprawling like a lizard from beneath the launch, he glides off silently
along the strand.  At first, with slow, cautious steps, and crouchingly,
but soon erect, in a rapid run, as if for the saving of his life; for it
is to save the lives of others, almost dear as his own.

The five minutes are not up, when his footsteps patter along the
planking of the hollow wooden wharf; and in ten seconds after, he stands
at the head of the sea-stairway, looking down.

Below is a boat with men in it--half-a-score of them--seated on the
thwarts, some lolling over against the gunwales asleep.  At a glance he
can tell them to be _Crusaders_.

His hail startles them into activity; one and all recognising the voice
of their old shipmate.

"Quick!" he cries; "quick, mates!  This way, and along with me!  Don't
stay to ask questions.  Enough for you to know that the lives of your
officers are in danger."

It proves enough.  The tars don't wait for a word more; but spring from
their recumbent attitude, and out of the boat.

Rushing up the pier steps, they cluster around their comrade.  They have
not needed instructions to arm themselves.  Harry's speech, with its
tone, told of some shore hostility, and they have instinctively made
ready to meet it; each laying hold of the weapon nearest to his hand;
some a knife, some an oar, others a boat-hook.

"Heave with me, lads!" cries Harry; and they "heave"--at his heels--
rushing after, as if to extinguish a fire in the forecastle.

Soon they are coursing along the strand, towards the upturned boat,
silently, and without asking explanation.  If they did, they could not
get it; for their leader is panting, breathless, almost unable to utter
a word.  But five issue from his throat, jerked out disjointedly, and in
hoarse utterance.  They are:

"Crozier--Cadwallader--waylaid--robbers--murderers!"

Enough to spur the _Crusaders_ to their best speed, if _not_ already at
it.  But they are; every man of them straining his strength to the
utmost.

As they rush on, cleaving the thick fog, Harry at their head listens
intently.  As yet he can distinguish no sound to alarm him; only the
monotonous swashing of the sea, and the murmur of distant voices in the
streets of the town.  But no cries--no shouts, nor shots; nothing to
tell of deadly strife.

"Thank the Lord!" says the brave sailor, half speaking to himself;
"we'll be in time to save them."

The words have scarce passed from his lips, when he comes in sight of
the capsized launch; and almost simultaneously sees two figures upon the
beach beyond.  They are of human shape, but through the fog looking
grand as giants.

He is not beguiled by the deception; he knows it to be the two officers,
their forms magnified by the mist.  No others are likely to be coming
that way; for he can see they are approaching; and, as can be told by
their careless, swaggering gait, unsuspicious of danger, little dreaming
of an ambuscade, that in ten seconds more may deprive them of existence!
To him, hurrying to avert this catastrophe, it is a moment of intense
apprehension--of dread chilling fear.  He sees them almost up to the
place where the assassins should spring out upon them.  In another
instant he may hear the cracking of pistols, and see flashes through the
fogs.  Expecting it even before he can speak, he nevertheless calls out:

"Avast there, Mr Crozier!  We're _Crusaders_.  Stop where you are.
Another step, and you'll be shot at.  There's four men under that wall
waiting to murder ye.  D'ye know the names, Calderon and Lara?  It's
them!"

At the first words, the young officers--for it is they--instantly come
to a stand.  The more promptly from being prepared to expect an attack,
but without the warning.  Well-timed it is; and they have not stopped a
moment too soon.

Simultaneous with the sailor's last word, the sombre space under the
wall is lit up by four flashes, followed by the report of as many
pistols, while the "tzip-tzip" of bullets, like hornets hurtle pass
their ears, leaving no doubt as to who has been fired at.

As the belief which we have of any event, encreases or diminishes
according to the number of chances or past experiments, it is to
be considered as a compounded effect, of which each part arises
from a proportionable number of chances or experiments.

Let us now join these three observations, and see what conclusion
we can draw from them. To every probability there is an opposite
possibility.

This possibility is composed of parts, that are entirely of the same
nature with those of the probability; and consequently have the same
influence on the mind and understanding. The belief, which attends the
probability, is a compounded effect, and is formed by the concurrence
of the several effects, which proceed from each part of the
probability.

Since therefore each part of the probability contributes to the
production of the belief, each part of the possibility must have the same
influence on the opposite side; the nature of these parts being
entirely the same.

The contrary belief, attending the possibility, implies a view of a certain
object, as well as the probability does an opposite view. In this
particular both these degrees of belief are alike. The only manner then,
in which the superior number of similar component parts in the one can
exert its influence, and prevail above the inferior in the other,
is by producing a stronger and more lively view of its object.

Each part presents a particular view; and all these views uniting
together produce one general view, which is fuller and more distinct
by the greater number of causes or principles, from which it is
derived.

The component parts of the probability and possibility, being alike in
their nature, must produce like effects; and the likeness of their
effects consists in this, that each of them presents a view of a particular
object. But though these parts be alike in their nature, they are very
different in their quantity and number; and this difference must appear
in the effect as well as the similarity. Now as the view they present
is in both cases full and entire, and comprehends the object in all
its parts, it is impossible that in this particular there can be any
difference; nor is there any thing but a superior vivacity in the
probability, arising from the concurrence of a superior number of
views, which can distinguish these effects.

Here is almost the same argument in a different light. All our reasonings
concerning the probability of causes are founded on the transferring of
past to future.

The transferring of any past experiment to the future is sufficient
to give us a view of the object; whether that experiment be single
or combined with others of the same kind; whether it be entire, or
opposed by others of a contrary kind.

Suppose, then, it acquires both these qualities of combination and
opposition, it loses not upon that account its former power of
presenting a view of the object, but only concurs with and opposes
other experiments, that have a like influence.

A question, therefore, may arise concerning the manner both of the
concurrence and opposition. As to the concurrence, there is only the
choice left betwixt these two hypotheses.

First, That the view of the object, occasioned by the transference
of each past experiment, preserves itself entire, and only
multiplies the number of views. Or, SECONDLY, That it runs into the
other similar and correspondent views, and gives them a superior
degree of force and vivacity. But that the first hypothesis is erroneous,
is evident from experience, which informs us, that the belief,
attending any reasoning, consists in one conclusion, not in a multitude
of similar ones, which would only distract the mind, and in many cases
would be too numerous to be comprehended distinctly by any finite
capacity. It remains, therefore, as the only reasonable opinion, that
these similar views run into each other, and unite their forces; so
as to produce a stronger and clearer view, than what arises from
any one alone.

This is the manner, in which past experiments concur, when they are
transfered to any future event. As to the manner of their opposition,
it is evident, that as the contrary views are incompatible with each
other, and it is impossible the object can at once exist conformable
to both of them, their influence becomes mutually destructive, and
the mind is determined to the superior only with that force, which
remains, after subtracting the inferior.

I am sensible how abstruse all this reasoning must appear to the generality
of readers, who not being accustomed to such profound reflections
on the intellectual faculties of the mind, will be apt to reject as
chimerical whatever strikes not in with the common received notions, and
with the easiest and most obvious principles of philosophy.

And no doubt there are some pains required to enter into these arguments;
though perhaps very little are necessary to perceive the imperfection
of every vulgar hypothesis on this subject, and the little light, which
philosophy can yet afford us in such sublime and such curious speculations.
Let men be once fully perswaded of these two principles, THAT
THERE, IS NOTHING IN ANY OBJECT, CONSIDERed IN ITSELF, WHICH CAN
AFFORD US A REASON FOR DRAWING A CONCLUSION BEYOND it; and, THAT
EVEN AFTER THE OBSERVATION OF THE FREQUENT OR CONSTANT CONJUNCTION
OF OBJECTS, WE HAVE NO REASON TO DRAW ANY INFERENCE CONCERNING ANY
OBJECT BEYOND THOSE OF WHICH WE HAVE HAD EXPERIENCE; I say, let men
be once fully convinced of these two principles, and this will throw
them so loose from all common systems, that they will make no
difficulty of receiving any, which may appear the most extraordinary.

These principles we have found to be sufficiently convincing, even with
regard to our most certain reasonings from causation: But I shall
venture to affirm, that with regard to these conjectural or probable
reasonings they still acquire a new degree of evidence.

First, It is obvious, that in reasonings of this kind, it is not the
object presented to us, which, considered in itself, affords us
any reason to draw a conclusion concerning any other object or event.
For as this latter object is supposed uncertain, and as the uncertainty
is derived from a concealed contrariety of causes in the former, were
any of the causes placed in the known qualities of that object, they
would no longer be concealed, nor would our conclusion be
uncertain.

But, secondly, it is equally obvious in this species of reasoning,
that if the transference of the past to the future were founded merely
on a conclusion of the understanding, it coued never occasion
any belief or assurance. When we transfer contrary experiments to the
future, we can only repeat these contrary experiments with their
particular proportions; which coued not produce assurance in any
single event, upon which we reason, unless the fancy melted together
all those images that concur, and extracted from them one single
idea or image, which is intense and lively in proportion to the
number of experiments from which it is derived, and their superiority
above their antagonists.

Our past experience presents no determinate object; and as our belief,
however faint, fixes itself on a determinate object, it is evident that
the belief arises not merely from the transference of past to future,
but from some operation of the fancy conjoined with it. This may lead
us to conceive the manner, in which that faculty enters into all our
reasonings.

I shall conclude this subject with two reflections, which may deserve
our attention. The FIRST may be explained after this manner. When the
mind forms a reasoning concerning any matter of fact, which is only
probable, it casts its eye backward upon past experience, and
transferring it to the future, is presented with so many contrary
views of its object, of which those that are of the same kind uniting
together, and running into one act of the mind, serve to fortify
and inliven it.

But suppose that this multitude of views or glimpses of an object proceeds
not from experience, but from. a voluntary act of the imagination; this
effect does not follow, or at least, follows not in the same degree.

For though custom and education produce belief by such a repetition,
as is not derived from experience, yet this requires a long tract of
time, along with a very frequent and undesigned repetition.

In general we may pronounce, that a person who would voluntarily repeat
any idea in his mind, though supported by one past experience,
would be no more inclined to believe the existence of its object,
than if he had contented himself with one survey of it.

Beside the effect of design; each act of the mind, being separate and
independent, has a separate influence, and joins not its force
with that of its fellows.

Not being united by any common object, producing them, they have no
relation to each other; and consequently make no transition or
union of forces.

This phaenomenon we shall understand better afterwards.

My second reflection is founded on those large probabilities, which the
mind can judge of, and the minute differences it can observe
betwixt them. When the chances or experiments on one side amount to ten
thousand, and on the other to ten thousand and one, the judgment gives
the preference to the latter, upon account of that superiority; though
it is plainly impossible for the mind to run over every particular
view, and distinguish the superior vivacity of the image arising
from the superior number, where the difference is so inconsiderable.

We have a parallel instance in the affections.

It is evident, according to the principles above-mentioned, that when
an object produces any passion in us, which varies according to the
different quantity of the object; I say, it is evident, that the
passion, properly speaking, is not a simple emotion, but a compounded
one, of a great number of weaker passions, derived from a view of
each part of the object.

For otherwise it were impossible the passion should encrease by the
encrease of these parts.

Thus a man, who desires a thousand pound, has in reality a
thousand or more desires which uniting together, seem to make only
one passion; though the composition evidently betrays itself upon
every alteration of the object, by the preference he gives to the
larger number, if superior only by an unite.

Yet nothing can be more certain, than that so small a difference
would not be discernible in the passions, nor coued render them
distinguishable from each other.

The difference, therefore, of our conduct in preferring the greater number
depends not upon our passions, but upon custom, and general rules. We
have found in a multitude of instances, that the augmenting the numbers
of any sum augments the passion, where the numbers are precise and the
difference sensible. The mind can perceive from its immediate feeling,
that three guineas produce a greater passion than two; and this it
transfers to larger numbers, because of the resemblance; and by a
general rule assigns to a thousand guineas, a stronger passion than
to nine hundred and ninety nine.

These general rules we shall explain presently.

But beside these two species of probability, which a-re derived
from an imperfect experience and from contrary causes, there is a
third arising from ANALOGY, which differs from them in some material
circumstances.

According to the hypothesis above explained all kinds of reasoning
from causes or effects are founded on two particulars, viz., the
constant conjunction of any two objects in all past experience, and
the resemblance of a present object to any one of them.

The effect of these two particulars is, that the present object invigorates
and inlivens the imagination; and the resemblance, along with the constant
union, conveys this force and vivacity to the related idea; which
we are therefore said to believe, or assent to.

If you weaken either the union or resemblance, you weaken the principle
of transition, and of consequence that belief, which arises from it.
The vivacity of the first impression cannot be fully conveyed to the
related idea, either where the conjunction of their objects is not
constant, or where the present impression does not perfectly resemble
any of those, whose union we are accustomed to observe.

In those probabilities of chance and causes above-explained, it is the
constancy of the union, which is diminished; and in the probability
derived from analogy, it is the resemblance only, which is affected.

Without some degree of resemblance, as well as union, it is impossible
there can be any reasoning: but as this resemblance admits of many
different degrees, the reasoning becomes proportionably more or less
firm and certain. An experiment loses of its force, when transferred
to instances, which are not exactly resembling; though it is evident it
may still retain as much as may be the foundation of probability, as
long as there is any resemblance remaining.

SECT. XIII. OF UNPHILOSOPHICAL PROBABILITY.

All these kinds of probability are received by philosophers, and
allowed to be reasonable foundations of belief and opinion.

But there are others, that are derived from the same principles,
though they have not had the good fortune to obtain the same
sanction.

The first probability of this kind may be accounted for thus.

The diminution of the union, and of the resemblance, as above
explained, diminishes the facility of the transition, and by that
means weakens the evidence; and we may farther observe, that the
same diminution of the evidence will follow from a diminution of
the impression, and from the shading of those colours, under which
it appears to the memory or senses.

The argument, which we found on any matter of fact we remember, is
more or less convincing according as the fact is recent or remote;
and though the difference in these degrees of evidence be not
received by philosophy as solid and legitimate; because in that
case an argument must have a different force to day, from what it
shall have a month hence; yet notwithstanding the opposition of
philosophy, it is certain, this circumstance has a considerable
influence on the understanding, and secretly changes the authority
of the same argument, according to the different times, in which
it is proposed to us.

A greater force and vivacity in the impression naturally conveys a
greater to the related idea; and it is on the degrees of force and
vivacity, that the belief depends, according to the foregoing
system.

There is a second difference, which we may frequently observe in our
degrees of belief and assurance, and which never fails to take place,
though disclaimed by philosophers.

An experiment, that is recent and fresh in the memory, affects us
more than one that is in some measure obliterated; and has a superior
influence on the judgment, as well as on the passions.

A lively impression produces more assurance than a faint one; because
it has more original force to communicate to the related idea, which
thereby acquires a greater force and vivacity. A recent observation has
a like effect; because the custom and transition is there more entire,
and preserves better the original force in the communication.

Thus a drunkard, who has seen his companion die of a debauch, is
struck with that instance for some time, and dreads a like accident
for himself: But as the memory of it decays away by degrees, his
former security returns, and the danger seems less certain and real.

I add, as a third instance of this kind, that though our reasonings
from proofs and from probabilities be considerably different from
each other, yet the former species of reasoning often degenerates
insensibly into the latter, by nothing but the multitude of connected
arguments.

It is certain, that when an inference is drawn immediately from an
object, without any intermediate cause or effect, the conviction
is much stronger, and the persuasion more lively, than when the
imagination is carryed through a long chain of connected arguments,
however infallible the connexion of each link may be esteemed.

It is from the original impression, that the vivacity of all the ideas is
derived, by means of the customary transition of the imagination;
and it is evident this vivacity must gradually decay in proportion
to the distance, and must lose somewhat in each transition.

Sometimes this distance has a greater influence than even contrary
experiments would have; and a man may receive a more lively conviction
from a probable reasoning, which is close and immediate, than from
a long chain of consequences, though just and conclusive in each
part.

Nay it is seldom such reasonings produce any conviction; and one
must have a very strong and firm imagination to preserve the evidence
to the end, where it passes through so many, stages.

But here it may not be amiss to remark a very curious phaenomenon,
which the present subject suggests to us.

It is evident there is no point of ancient history, of which we can
have any assurance, but by passing through many millions of causes
and effects, and through a chain of arguments of almost an immeasurable
length.

Before the knowledge of the fact coued come to the first historian,
it must be conveyed through many mouths; and after it is committed
to writing, each new copy is a new object, of which the connexion
with the foregoing is known only by experience and observation.

Perhaps, therefore, it may be concluded from the precedent reasoning,
that the evidence of all ancient history must now be lost; or at
least, will be lost in time, as the chain of causes encreases, and
runs on to a greater length.

But as it seems contrary to common sense to think, that if the
republic of letters, and the art of printing continue on the same
footing as at present, our posterity, even after a thousand ages,
can ever doubt if there has been such a man as JULIUS CAESAR; this
may be considered as an objection to the present system.

If belief consisted only in a certain vivacity, conveyed from an
original impression, it would decay by the length of the transition,
and must at last be utterly extinguished: And vice versa, if belief
on some occasions be not capable of such an extinction; it must be
something different from that vivacity.

Before I answer this objection I shall observe, that from this topic
there has been borrowed a very celebrated argument against the
Christian Religion; but with this difference, that the connexion
betwixt each link of the chain in human testimony has been there
supposed not to go beyond probability, and to be liable to a degree
of doubt and uncertainty.

And indeed it must be confest, that in this manner of considering the
subject, (which however is not a true one) there is no history or
tradition, but what must in the end lose all its force and evidence.

Every new probability diminishes the original conviction; and however
great that conviction may be supposed, it is impossible it can
subsist under such re-iterated diminutions.

This is true in general; though we shall find [Part IV.

Sect. 1.] afterwards, that there is one very memorable exception,
which is of vast consequence in the present subject of the
understanding.

Mean while to give a solution of the preceding objection upon the
supposition, that historical evidence amounts at first to an entire
proof; let us consider, that though the links are innumerable, that
connect any original fact with the present impression, which is the
foundation of belief; yet they are all of the same kind, and depend
on the fidelity of Printers and Copyists.

One edition passes into another, and that into a third, and so on,
till we come to that volume we peruse at present.

There is no variation in the steps.

After we know one we know all of them; and after we have made one,
we can have no scruple as to the rest.

This circumstance alone preserves the evidence of history, and will
perpetuate the memory of the present age to the latest posterity.

If all the long chain of causes and effects, which connect any past
event with any volume of history, were composed of parts different
from each other, and which it were necessary for the mind distinctly
to conceive, it is impossible we should preserve to the end any
belief or evidence.

But as most of these proofs are perfectly resembling, the mind runs
easily along them, jumps from one part to another with facility,
and forms but a confused and general notion of each link.

By this means a long chain of argument, has as little effect in diminishing
the original vivacity, as a much shorter would have, if composed
of parts, which were different from each other, and of which each
required a distinct consideration.

A fourth unphilosophical species of probability is that derived
from general rules, which we rashly form to ourselves, and which
are the source of what we properly call PREJUDICE.

An IRISHMAN cannot have wit, and a Frenchman cannot have solidity; for
which reason, though the conversation of the former in any instance
be visibly very agreeable, and of the latter very judicious, we
have entertained such a prejudice against them, that they must be
dunces or fops in spite of sense and reason.

Human nature is very subject to errors of this kind; and perhaps this
nation as much as any other.

Should it be demanded why men form general rules, and allow them
to influence their judgment, even contrary to present observation
and experience, I should reply, that in my opinion it proceeds from
those very principles, on which all judgments concerning causes and
effects depend.

Our judgments concerning cause and effect are derived from habit
and experience; and when we have been accustomed to see one object
united to another, our imagination passes from the first to the
second, by a natural transition, which precedes reflection, and
which cannot be prevented by it.

Now it is the nature of custom not only to operate with its full force,
when objects are presented, that are exactly the, same with those to
which we have been accustomed; but also to operate in an inferior
degree, when we discover such as are similar; and though the habit
loses somewhat of its force by every difference, yet it is seldom
entirely destroyed, where any considerable circumstances remain the
same.

A man, who has contracted a custom of eating fruit by the use of pears
or peaches, will satisfy himself with melons, where he cannot find his
favourite fruit; as one, who has become a drunkard by the use of red
wines, will be carried almost with the same violence to white, if
presented to him.

From this principle I have accounted for that species of probability,
derived from analogy, where we transfer our experience in past
instances to objects which are resembling, but are not exactly the
same with those concerning which we have had experience.

In proportion as the resemblance decays, the probability diminishes;
but still has some force as long as there remain any traces of the
resemblance.

This observation we may carry farther; and may remark, that though custom
be the foundation of all our judgments, yet sometimes it has an effect
on the imagination in opposition to the judgment, and produces a
contrariety in our sentiments concerning the same object. I explain
myself. In almost all kinds of causes there is a complication of
circumstances, of which some are essential, and others superfluous;
some are absolutely requisite to the production of the effect, and
others are only conjoined by accident.

Now we may observe, that when these superfluous circumstances are
numerous, and remarkable, and frequently conjoined with the essential,
they have such an influence on the imagination, that even in the
absence of the latter they carry us on to t-he conception of the
usual effect, and give to that conception a force and vivacity,
which make it superior to the mere fictions of the fancy.

We may correct this propensity by a reflection on the nature of those
circumstances: but it is still certain, that custom takes the
start, and gives a biass to the imagination.

To illustrate this by a familiar instance, let us consider the case of a
man, who, being hung out from a high tower in a cage of iron cannot
forbear trembling, when he surveys the precipice below him, though
he knows himself to be perfectly secure from falling, by his
experience of the solidity of the iron, which supports him; and
though the ideas of fall and descent, and harm and death, be derived
solely from custom and experience.

"Captain Lantanas is coming ashore," adds the agent; "I expect him in
the course of an hour.  By waiting here, you can see him, and it will
save you boat-hire."

But Harry Blew will not wait.  He remembers the old saying about
procrastination, and is determined there shall be no mishap through
negligence on his part, or niggardliness about a bit of a boat-fare.  He
has made up his mind to be the _Condor's_ first mate--if he can.

Nor is it altogether ambition that prompts him to seek the office so
earnestly.  A nobler sentiment inspires him--the knowledge that, in this
capacity, he may be of more service, and better capable of affording
protection, to the fair creatures whom Crozier has committed to his
charge.

The watermen of San Francisco do not ply their oars gratuitously.  Even
the shabbiest of shore-boats, hired for the shortest time, exacts a
stiffish fare.  It will cost Harry Blew a couple of dollars to be set
aboard the _Condor_, though she is lying scarce three cables' length
from the shore!

What cares he for that?  It is nothing now.

Hailing the nearest skiff with a waterman in it, he points to the
Chilian ship, saying:

"Heave along, lad; an' put me aboard o' yonder craft--that one as shows
the three-colour bit o' bunting wi' a single star in the blue.  The
sooner ye do your job, the better ye'll get paid for it."

A contract on such conditions is usually entered into with alacrity, and
with celerity carried out.  The boatman beaches his tiny craft, takes in
his fare, and in less than ten minutes' time Harry Blew swarms up the
man-ropes of the Chilian ship, strides over the rail, and drops down
upon her deck.

He looks around, but sees no one--at least nothing in the shape of a
sailor.  Only an old negro, with skin black as a boot, and crow-footed
all over the face, standing beside two singular creatures nearly as
human-like as himself, but covered with fox-coloured hair!

The ex-man-o'-war's man is for a time in doubt as to which of the three
he should address himself.  In point of intelligence there seems not
much to choose.  However, he with the black skin cuts short his
hesitation by stepping forward, and saying:

"Well, mass'r sailor-man, wha' you come for?  S'pose you want see de
cappen?  I'se only de cook."

"Oh, you're only the cook, are you?  Well, old caboose; you've made a
correct guess about my bizness.  It's the capten I do want to see."

"All right.  He down in de cabin.  You wait hya.  I fotch 'im up less'n
no time!"

The old darkey shuffling aft, disappears down the companion-way, leaving
Harry with the two monstrous-looking creatures, whom he has now made out
to be orang-outangs.

"Well, mates!" says the sailor, addressing them in a jocular way, "what
be your opeenyun o' things in general?  D'ye think the wind's goin' to
stay sou'-westerly, or shift roun' to the nor'-eastart?"

"Cro--cro--croak!"

"Oh, hang it, no.  I ain't o' the croakin' sort.  Ha'n't ye got nothin'
more sensible than that to say to me!"

"Kurra--kra--kra.  Cro--cro--croak!"

"No; I won't do anythink o' the kind; leastways, unless there turns out
to be short commons 'board this eer craft.  Then I'll croak, an' no
mistake.  But I say, old boys, how 'bout the grog?  Reg'lar allowance, I
hope--three tots a day?"

"Na--na--na--na--na--boof!  Ta--ta--ta--fuff!"

"No! only two, ye say!  Ah! that won't do for me.  For ye see,
shipmates--I s'pose I shall be callin' ye so--'board the old _Crusader_,
I've been 'customed to have my rum reg'lar, three times the day; an' if
it ain't same on the _Condor_, in the which I'm 'bout to ship, then,
shiver my spars! if I don't raise sich a rumpus as--"

"Kurra--kurra--cro--cro--croak!  Na--na--na--boof--ta--ta--pf--pf--
piff!"

The sailor's voice is drowned by the gibbering of the orangs, his
gesture of mock-menace, with the semi-serious look that accompanied it,
having part frightened, part infuriated them.

The fracas continues, until the darkey returns on deck followed by the
skipper; when the cook takes charge of the _quadrumana_, drawing them
off to his caboose.

Captain Lantanas, addressing himself to the sailor, asks: "_Un
marinero_?"  [A seaman.]

"_Si, capitan_."  [Yes, captain.]

"_Que negocio tienes V. commigo_?"  [What is your business with me?]

"Well, capten," responds Harry Blew, speaking the language of the
Chilian, in a tolerably intelligent _patois_, "I've come to offer my
sarvices to you.  I've brought this bit o' paper from Master Silvestre;
it'll explain things better'n I can."

The captain takes the note handed to him, and breaks open the envelope.
A smile irradiates his sallow face as he makes himself acquainted with
its contents.

"At last a sailor!" he mutters to himself; for Harry is the only one who
has yet offered.  "And a good one too," thinks Captain Lantanas, bending
his eyes on the ex-man-o'-war's man, and scanning him from head to foot.

But, besides personal inspection, he has other assurance of the good
qualities of the man before him; at a late hour on the night before he
held a communication with Don Gregorio, who has recommended him.  The
haciendado had reported what Crozier said, that Harry Blew was an able
seaman, thoroughly trustworthy, and competent to take charge of a ship,
either as first or second officer.

With Crozier's endorsement thus vicariously conveyed, the
ex-man-o'-war's man has no need to say a word for himself.  Nor does
Captain Lantanas call for it.  He only puts some professional questions,
less inquisitorially than as a matter of form.

"The Senor Silvestre advises me that you wish to serve in my ship.  Can
you take a lunar?"

"Well, capten; I hev squinted through a quadrant afores now, an' can
take a sight; tho' I arn't much up to loonars.  But if there's a good
chronometer aboard, I won't let a ship run very far out of her
reck'nin'."

"You can keep a log-book, I suppose?"

"I dare say I can.  I've larned to write, so 'st might be read; though
my fist ain't much to be bragged about."

"That will do," rejoins the skipper, contentedly.  "Now, Senor Enrique--
I see that's your name--answer me in all candour.  Do you think you are
capable of acting as _piloto_?"

"By that you mean mate, I take it?"

"Yes; it is _piloto_ in Spanish."

"Well, capten; 'tain't for me to talk big o' myself.  But I've been over
thirty year 'board a British man-o'-war--more'n one o' 'em--an' if I
wan't able to go mate in a merchanter, I ought to be condemned to be
cook's scullion for the rest o' my days.  If your honour thinks me
worthy o' bein' made first officer o' the _Condor_, I'll answer for it
she won't stray far out o' her course while my watch be on."

"_Bueno_!  Senor Enrique--B--blee.  What is it?" asks the Chilian,
re-opening the note, and vainly endeavouring to pronounce the Saxon
surname.

"Blew--Harry Blew."

"Ah, Bloo--_azul, esta_?"

"No, capten.  Not that sort o' blue.  In Spanish, my name has a
different significance.  It means, as we say o' a gale after it's blowed
past--it `blew.'  When it's been a big un, we say it `blew great guns.'
Now ye understan'?"

"Yes; perfectly.  Well, Senor Bloo, to come to an understanding about
the other matter.  I'm willing to take you as my first officer, if you
don't object to the wages I intend offering you--fifty dollars a month,
and everything found."

"I'm agreeable to the tarms."

"_Basta_!  When will it be convenient for you to enter in your duties?"

"For that matter, this minute.  I only need to go ashore to get my kit.
When that's stowed, I'll be ready to tackle on to work."

"_Muy bien_! senor; you can take my boat for it.  And if you see any
sailors who want to join, I authorise you to engage them at double the
usual wages.  I wish to get away as soon as a crew can be shipped.  But
when you come back we'll talk more about it.  Call at Senor Silvestre's
office, and tell him he needn't look for me till a later hour.  Say I've
some business that detains me aboard.  _Hasta Luego_!"

Thus courteously concluding, the Chilian skipper returns to his cabin,
leaving the newly appointed _piloto_ free to look after his own affairs.


CHAPTER THIRTY NINE.

THE "BLUE-PETER."

The ex-man-o'-war's man, now first officer of a merchant-vessel, and
provided with a boat of his own, orders off the skiff he has kept in
waiting, after tossing into it two dollars--the demanded fare.  Then
slipping down into the _Condor's_ gig, sculls himself ashore.

Leaving his boat at the pier, he first goes to the office of the
ship-agent, and delivers the message entrusted to him.

After that, contracting with a truckman, he proceeds to the "Sailor's
Home," releases his _impedimenta_, and starts back to embark them in his
boat.  But not before giving the bar-keeper, as also the Boniface, of
that establishment, a bit of his mind.

Spreading before their eyes the crisp hundred pound note, which as yet
he has not needed to break, he says tauntingly:

"Take a squint at that, ye land-lubbers!  There's British money for ye.
An' tho' it be but a bit o' paper it's worth more than your gold-dross,
dollar for dollar.  How'd ye like to lay your ugly claws on't!  Ah!
you're a pair of the most dastardly shore-sharks I've met in all my
cruzins; but ye'll never have Harry Blew in your grups again."

Saying this, he thrusts the bank-note back into his pocket; then paying
them a last reverence with mock-politeness, and giving a twitch of his
trousers, he starts after the truckman, already _en route_ with his kit.

In accordance with the wishes of Captain Lantanas, he stays a little
longer in the town, trying to pick up sailors.  There are plenty of
these sauntering along the streets and lounging at the doors of
drinking-saloons.

But even double wages will not tempt them to abandon their free-and-easy
life; and the _Condor's_ first officer is forced to the conclusion, that
he must return to the ship _solus_.

Assisted by the truckman, he gets his traps into the gig; and is about
to step in himself, when his eye chances to turn upon the _Crusader_.
There he sees something to surprise him--the _Blue-Peter_.  The frigate
has out signals for sailing! and he wonders at this; for there was no
word of it when he was aboard.  He knew, as all the others, that she was
to sail soon--it might be in a day or two.  But not as the signal
indicates,--almost immediately!

While conjecturing what may be the cause of such hasty departure, he
sees something that partly explains it.  Three or four cables' length
from the frigate is another ship, over whose taffrail floats the flag of
England.  At a glance, the ex-man-o'-war's man can tell her to be a
corvette; at the same time recalling what, the night before, he has
heard upon the frigate: that the coming of the corvette would be the
signal for the _Crusader's_ sailing.

While his heart warms to the flag thus doubly displayed in the harbour
of San Francisco, it is a little saddened to see the other signal--the
"Blue-Peter;" since it tells him he may not have an opportunity to take
a more formal leave of his friends of the frigate, which he designed
doing.  He longs to make known to Mr Crozier and the midshipman the
result of his application to the captain of the Chilian ship, and
receive the congratulations of the young officers on his success; but
now it may be impossible to communicate with them, by the _Crusader_ so
soon leaving port.

He has half a mind to put off for the frigate in the _Condor's_ gig,
into which he has got.  But Captain Lantanas might, meanwhile, be
wanting both him and the boat.

All at once, in the midst of his dilemma, he sees that which promises to
help him out of it,--a small boat putting off from the frigate's sides,
and heading right for the pier.

As it draws nearer, he can tell it to be the dingy.

There are three men in it--two rowers and a steersman.

As it approaches the pier-head, Harry recognises the one in the
stern-sheets, whose bright ruddy face is turned towards him.

"Thank the Lord for such good luck!" he mutters.  "It's Mr
Cadwallader!"

By this the dingy has drawn near enough for the midshipman to see and
identify him; which he does, exclaiming in joyful surprise:

"By Jove! it's Blew himself!  Hallo there, Harry!  You're just the man
I'm coming ashore to see.  Hold, starboard oar!  Port oar, a stroke or
two!  Way enough!"

In a few seconds, the dingy is bow on to the gig; when Harry, seizing
hold of it, brings the two boats side by side, and steadies them.

"Glad to see ye again, Master Willie.  I'd just sighted the frigate's
signal for sailin', an' despaired o' havin' the chance to say a last
word to yourself, or Mr Crozier."

"Well, old boy; it's about that I've come ashore.  Jump out; and walk
with me a bit along the wharf."

The sailor drops his oar, and springs out upon the pier, the young
officer preceding him.

When sufficiently distant from the boats to be beyond earshot of the
oarsmen, Cadwallader resumes speech:

"Harry; here's a letter from Mr Crozier.  He wants you to deliver it at
the address you'll find written upon it.  To save you the necessity of
inquiring, I can point out the place it's to go to.  Look along shore.
You see a house--yonder on the top of the hill?"

"Sartinly, I see it, Master Willie; and know who lives theer.  Two o'
the sweetest creeturs in all Californey.  I s'pose the letter be for one
o' them?"

"No, it isn't, you dog; for neither of them.  Read the superscription.
You see it's addressed to a gentleman?"

"Oh! it's for the guv'nor hisself," rejoins Harry, taking the letter,
and running his eye over the direction--Don Gregorio Montijo.  "All
right, sir.  I'll put it in the old gentleman's flippers safe an' sure.
Do you want me to go with it now, sir?"

"Well, as soon as you conveniently can; though there's no need for
helter-skelter haste, since there wouldn't be time for an answer,
anyhow.  In twenty minutes we'll weigh anchor, and be off.  I've hurried
ashore to see you, hoping to find you at the ship-agent's office.  How
fortunate my stumbling on you here!  For now I can better tell you
what's wanted.  In that letter, there's something that concerns Mr
Crozier and myself--matters of importance to us both.  When you've given
it to Don Gregorio, he'll no doubt ask you some questions about what
happened last night.  Tell him all you know; except that you needn't say
anything of Mr Crozier and myself having taken a little too much
champagne--which we did.  You understand, old boy?"

"Perfectly, Master Will."

"Good.  Now Harry; I haven't another moment to stay.  See!  The ship's
beginning to spread canvas!  If I don't get back directly, I may be left
here in California, never to rise above the rank of reefer.  Oh! by the
way, you'll be pleased to know that your friend Mr Crozier is now a
lieutenant.  His commission arrived by the corvette that came in last
night.  He told me to tell you, and I'd nearly forgotten it."

"I'm glad to hear it," rejoins the sailor, raising the hat from his
head, and giving a subdued cheer; "right gled; an', maybe, he'll be the
same, hearin' Harry Blew's been also promoted.  I'm now first mate o'
the Chili ship, Master Willie."

"Hurrah!  I congratulate you on your good luck.  I'm delighted to know
that, and so will he be.  We may hope some day to see you a full-fledged
skipper, commanding your own craft.  Now, you dear old salt, don't
forget to look well after the girls.  Again, good-bye, and God bless
you!"

A squeeze of hands, with lingers entwined, tight as a reef-knot--then
relaxed with reluctance--after which they separate.  The mid, jumping
into the dingy, is rowed back towards the _Crusader_; while Harry
re-hires the truckman; but now only to stay by, and take care of his
boat, till he can return to it, after executing the errand entrusted to
him.  Snug as his new berth promises to be, he would rather lose it than
fail to deliver that letter.

And in ten minutes after, he has passed through the suburbs of the town,
and is hastening along the shore-road, towards the house of Don Gregorio
Montijo.


CHAPTER FORTY.

DREADING A "DESAFIO."

Once more upon the _azotea_ stand Carmen Montijo and Inez Alvarez.

It is the morning of the day succeeding that made sacred by their
betrothal.  Their eyes are upon the huge warship, that holds the men who
holds their hearts, with promise of their hands--in short, every hope of
their life's happiness.

They could be happy now, but for an apprehension which oppresses them--
causing them keen anxiety.  Yesterday, with its scenes of pleasureable
excitement, had also its incidents of the opposite kind; the remembrance
of which too vividly remains, and is not to be got rid of.  The
encounter between the gamblers and their lovers cannot end with that
episode, to which they were themselves witness.  Something more will
surely come from it.

And what will this something be?  What should it?  What could it, but a
_desafio_--a duel?

However brave on yester-morn the two senoritas were, or pretended to be,
however regardless of consequences, it is different to-day.  The
circumstances have changed.  Then, their sweethearts were only suitors.
Now, they are affianced, still standing in the relationship of lovers,
but with ties more firmly, if not more tenderly, united.  For are they
not now their own.

Of the two girls, Inez is less anxious than the aunt, having less cause
to be.  With the observant intelligence of woman, she has long since
seen that Calderon is a coward, and for this reason has but little
belief he will fight.  With instinct equally keen, Carmen knows De Lara
well.  After his terrible humiliation, he is not the man to shrink away
out of sight.  Blackleg though he be, he possesses courage--perhaps the
only quality he has deserving of admiration.  Once, she herself admired
the quality, if not the man!  That remembrance itself makes her fear
what may come.

She talks in serious tone, discussing with her niece the probabilities
of what may arise.  The delirious joy of yester-eve--of that hour when
she sat in her saddle, looking over the ocean, and listening to the
sweet words of love--is to-day succeeded by depression, almost
despondency.

While conversing, she has her eyes upon the bay, watching the boats
that, at intervals, are rowed off from the warship, fearing to recognise
in one the form of him so dear.  Fearing it; for they know that her
lover is not likely to be ashore again, and his coming now could only be
on that errand she, herself, so much dreads--the duel.  Duty should
retain him on his, the young officer's, ship, but honour may require him
once more to visit the shore--perhaps never to leave it alive!

Thus gloomily reflects Carmen, imparting her fears to the less
frightened Inez; though she too is not without apprehension.  If they
but understood the "Code of Signals," all this misery would be spared
them.  Since from the frigate's main-royal masthead floats a blue flag,
with a white square in its centre, which is a portent she will soon
spread her sails, and glide off out of sight--carrying their _amantes_
beyond all danger of duels, or shore-scrapes of any kind.

They observe the "Blue-Peter," but without knowing aught of its
significance.  They do not even try to interpret, or think of it; their
thoughts, as their eyes, concentrated upon the boats that pass between
ship and shore.

One at length specially arrests their attention, and keeps it for some
time fixed.  A small craft that, leaving the ship, is steered direct for
the town.  It passes near enough for them to see there are three men in
it; two of them rowing, the other in the stern--this last in the uniform
of an officer.

Love's glance is keen, and, aided by an opera-glass, it enables Inez
Alvarez to identify the officer in the stern-sheets as Don Gulielmo.
The other two--the oarsmen--are only sailors in blue serge shirts, with
wide collars, falling far back.

For what the young officer is being rowed ashore, the ladies cannot
guess.  If for fighting, they know that another, and older, officer,
would be with him.  Where is Don Eduardo?

While still conjecturing, the boat glides on towards the town, and is
lost to their view behind some sand-hills inshore.

Their glance going back to the ship, they perceive a change in her
aspect.  Her tall tapering masts, with their network of stays and
shrouds, are half-hidden behind broad sheets of canvas.  The frigate is
unfurling sail!  They are surprised at this, not expecting it so soon.
With the help of their glasses, they observe other movements going on
aboard the war-vessel: signal-flags running up and down their haulyards,
while boats are being hoisted to the davits.

While still watching these manoeuvres, the little craft which carries
the midshipman again appears, shooting out from behind the sand-hills,
and rowed rapidly back to the ship, the young officer still in it.

On reaching the great leviathan, for a short time it shows like a tiny
spot along her water-line; but, soon after, it too is lifted aloft, and
over the bulwark rail.

Ignorant as the young ladies may be of nautical matters, they can have
no doubt as to what all this manoeuvring means.  The ship is about to
sail!

As this is an event which interests all the family, Don Gregorio,
summoned to the house-top, soon stands beside them.

"She's going off, sure enough," he says, after sighting through one of
the glasses.  "It's rather strange--so abruptly!" he adds.  "Our young
friends said nothing about it last night."

"I think they could not have known of it themselves," says Carmen.

"I'm sure they couldn't," adds Inez.

"What makes you sure, _nina_?" asked Don Gregorio.

"Well--because,"--stammers out the Andalusian, a flush starting into her
cheeks--"because they'd have told us.  They said they didn't expect to
sail for a day or two, anyhow."

"Just so; but you see they're setting sail now--evidently intending to
take departure.  However, I fancy I can explain it.  You remember they
spoke of another warship they expected to arrive.  Yonder it is!  It
came into port last night, and, in all likelihood, has brought orders
for the _Crusader_ to sail at once.  I only wish it was the _Condor_!  I
sha'n't sleep soundly till we're safe away from--"

"See!" interrupts Carmen; "is not that a sailor coming this way?"

She points to a man, moving along the shore-road in the direction of the
house.

"I think so," responds Don Gregorio, after a glance through the glass.
"He appears to be in seaman's dress."

"Would he be coming here?" inquires Carmen, naively.

"I shouldn't be surprised; probably with a message from our young
friends.  It may be the man they recommended to me."

"That's why somebody went ashore in the little boat," whispers Inez to
her aunt.  "He's bringing us _billetitas_.  I was sure they wouldn't go
away without leaving a last little word."

Inez's speech imparts no information: for Carmen has been surmising in
the same strain.

She replies by one of those proverbs, in which the Spanish tongue is so
rich:

"_Silencio! hay Moros en la costa_,"--(Silence! there are Moors on the
coast).

While this bit of by-play is being carried on, the sailor ascends the
hill, and is seen entering at the road-gate.  There can now be no
uncertainty as to his calling.  The blue jacket, broad shirt-collar,
round-ribboned hat, and bell-bottomed trousers, are all the unmistakable
toggery of a tar.

Advancing up the avenue in a rolling gait, with an occasional tack from
side to side--that almost fetches him up among the manzanitas--he at
length reaches the front of the house.  There stopping, and looking up
to the roof, he salutes those upon it by removing his hat giving a
back-scrape with his foot, and a pluck at one of his brow-locks.

"_Que guieres V., senor_?"--(What is your business, sir?), asks the
haciendado, speaking down to him.

Harry Blew--for it is he--replies by holding out a letter, at the same
time saying:

"Your honour; I've brought this for the master o' the house."

"I am he.  Go in through that door you see below.  I'll come down to
you."

Don Gregorio descends the _escalera_, and meeting the messenger in the
inner court, receives the letter addressed to him.

Breaking it open, he reads:

  "Estimable Sir,--Circumstances have arisen that take us away from San
  Francisco sooner than we expected.  The corvette that came into port
  last night brought orders for the _Crusader_ to sail at once; though
  our destination is the same as already known to you--the Sandwich
  Islands.  As the ship is about to weigh anchor, I have barely time to
  write a word for myself, and Mr Cadwallader.  We think it proper to
  make known some circumstances which will, no doubt, cause you
  surprise, as they did ourselves.  Yesterday morning we met at your
  house two gentlemen--as courtesy would then have required me to call
  them--by name Francisco de Lara and Faustino Calderon.  We encountered
  them at a later hour of the day; when an occurrence took place, which
  absolved us from either thinking of them as gentlemen, or treating
  them as such.  And still later, after leaving your hospitable roof,
  we, for the third time, came across the same two individuals, under
  circumstances showing them to be _professional gamblers_!  In fact, we
  found them to be the proprietors of a monte bank in the notorious `El
  Dorado;' one of them actually engaged in dealing the cards!  A spirit
  of fun, with perhaps a spice of mischief, led me into the play, and
  betting largely, I succeeded in breaking their bank.  After that, for
  a short while we lost sight of them.  But as we were making our way to
  the pier, where our boat was to meet us, we had a fourth interview
  with these `gentlemen;' who on this occasion appeared with two others
  in the character of _robbers_ and _assassins_!  That they did not
  succeed in either robbing or murdering us, is due to the brave fellow
  who will bear this letter to you--the sailor of whom I spoke.  He can
  give you all the particulars of the last, and latest, encounter with
  the versatile individuals, who claim acquaintance with you.  You may
  rely on his truthfulness.  I have no time to say more.

  "Hoping to see you in Cadiz, please convey parting compliments to the
  senoritas--from the Senor Cadwallader and yours faithfully, Edward
  Crozier."

The letter makes a painful impression on the mind of Don Gregorio.  Not
that he is much surprised at the information regarding De Lara and
Calderon.  He has heard sinister reports concerning them; of late so
loudly spoken, that he had determined on forbidding them further
intercourse with his family.  That very day he has been displeased on
learning of their ill-timed visit.  And now he feels chagrin at
something like a reproach conveyed by that expression in Crozier's
letter, "The versatile individuals who claim your acquaintance."  It
hurts his hidalgo pride.

Thrusting the epistle into his pocket, he questions its bearer; taking
him into his private room, as also into his confidence.

The sailor gives him a detailed account of the attempt at murder, so
accidentally frustrated; afterwards making known other matters relating
to himself, and how he has taken service on the Chilian ship--Don
Gregorio inquiring particularly about this.

Meanwhile, the young ladies have descended from the azotea, and the
ex-man-o'-war's man makes their acquaintance.

They assist in showing him hospitality, loading him with pretty
presents, and knick-knacks to be carried on board the _Condor_, to which
they know he now belongs.

As he is about to depart, they flutter around him, speaking pleasant
words, as if they expected to get something in return--those
_billetitas_.  For all, he takes departure, without leaving them a
scrap!

A pang of disappointment--almost chagrin--shoots through the soul of
Carmen, as she sees him passing out of sight.  And similarly afflicted
is Inez; both reflecting alike.

Still they have hope; there may be something enclosed for them in that
letter they saw him holding up.  It seemed large enough to contain two
separate notes.  And if not these, there should at least be a postscript
with special reference to themselves.

Daughters of Eve, they are not long before approaching the subject, and
drawing Don Gregorio.

Yes; there is something said about them in the letter.  He communicates
it:

"_Parting compliments to the senoritas_!"


CHAPTER FORTY ONE.

THE LAST LOOK.

"Up anchor!"

The order rings along the deck of the _Crusader_, and the men of the
watch stand by the windlass to execute it.

That same morning, Crozier and Cadwallader, turning out of their cots,
heard with surprise the order for sending up the "Blue-Peter," as also
that the ship was to weigh anchor by twelve o'clock noon.  Of course,
they were expecting it, but not so soon.  However, the arrival of the
corvette explains all; an officer from the latter vessel having already
come on board the _Crusader_ with despatches from the flag-ship of the
Pacific Squadron.

These contain orders for the frigate to set sail for the Sandwich
Islands without delay; the corvette to replace her on the San Francisco
station.

The despatch-bearer has also brought a mail; and the _Crusader's_ people
get letters--home-news, welcome to those who have been long away from
their native land; for she has been three years cruising in the South
Sea.

Something more than mere news several of her officers receive.  In large
envelopes, addressed to them, and bearing the British Admiralty seal,
are documents of peculiar interest--commissions giving them promotion.

Among the rest, one reaches Edward Crozier, advancing him a step in
rank.  His ability as an officer has been reported at headquarters; as
also his gallant conduct in having saved a sailor's life--rescued him
from drowning--that sailor Harry Blew.  In all probability this has
obtained him his promotion; but whatever the cause, he will leave San
Francisco a _lieutenant_.

There are few officers, naval or military, who would not feel favoured
and joyous at such an event in their lives.  And so might Edward Crozier
at any other time.  But it has not this effect now.  On the contrary, as
the white canvas is being spread above his head, there is a black shadow
upon his brow, while that of Cadwallader is alike clouded.

It is not from any regret either feels at leaving California; but
leaving it under circumstances that painfully impress them.  The
occurrences of the day before, but more those of the night, have
revealed a state of things that suggest unpleasant reflections,
especially to the new-made lieutenant.  He cannot cast out of his mind
the sinister impression made upon it by the discovery that Don Francisco
De Lara--his rival for the hand of Carmen Montijo--is no other than the
notorious "Frank Lara," the keeper of a monte table in the saloon "El
Dorado!"  Now that he knows it, the knowledge afflicts him, to the
laceration of his heart.  No wonder at the formality of that letter
which he addressed to Don Gregorio, or the insinuation conveyed by it.
Nor strange the cold compliments with which it was concluded; far
stranger had they been warm.

Among other unpleasant thoughts which the young officers have, on being
so soon summoned away, is that of leaving matters unsettled with Messrs.
De Lara and Calderon.  Not that they have any longer either design or
desire to stand before such cut-throats in a duel, nor any shame in
shunning it.  Their last encounter with the scoundrels would absolve
them from all stigma or reproach for refusing to fight them--even were
there time and opportunity.  So, they need have no fear that their
honour will suffer, or that any one will apply to them the opprobrious
epithet--_lache_.  Indeed, they have not, and their only regret is at
not being able to spend another hour in San Francisco in order that they
might look up the foiled assassins, and give them into the custody of
the police.  But then that would lead to a difficulty which had better
be avoided--the necessity of leaving their ship, and staying to
prosecute an action in courts where the guilty criminal is quite as
likely to be favoured as the innocent prosecutor.  It is not to be
thought of, and long before the frigate's anchor is lifted, they cease
thinking of it.

Crozier's last act before leaving port is to write the letter to Don
Gregorio; Cadwallader's to carry it ashore, and deliver it to Harry
Blew.  Then, in less than twenty minutes after the returned midshipman
sets foot on the frigate's deck, the order is issued for her sails to be
sheeted home, the canvas hanging crumpled from her yards is drawn taut,
the anchor hauled apeak, and the huge leviathan, obedient to her helm
held in strong hands, is brought round, with head towards the Golden
Gate.

The wind catches her spread sails, bellies them out, and in five minutes
more, with the British flag floating proudly over her taffrail, she
passes out of the harbour; leaving many a vessel behind, whose captains,
for want of crews, bewail their inability to follow her.

But there are eyes following her, from farther off--beautiful eyes, that
express sadness of a different kind, and from a different cause.  Carmen
Montijo and Inez Alvarez stand upon the house-top, glasses in hand.
Instead, there should have been kerchiefs--white kerchiefs--waving
adieu.  And there would have been, but for those chilling words:
"_Parting compliments to the senoritas_."  Strange last words for
lovers!  _Santissima_! what can it mean?

So reflect they to whom they were sent, as they stand in attentive
attitude, watching the warship, and straining their eyes upon her, till
rounding Telegraph Hill she disappears from their sight.

A sad cruel shock both have received--a blow almost breaking their
hearts.

Equally unhappy are two young officers on the departing ship.  They too
stand with glasses in hand levelled upon the house of Don Gregorio
Montijo.  They can see, as once before, two heads over the parapet, and,
as before, recognise them; but not as before, or with the same feelings,
do they regard them.  All is changed now, everything doubtful and
indefinite, where it might be supposed everything had been
satisfactorily arranged.  But it has not--especially in the thoughts of
Crozier; whose dissatisfaction is shown in a soliloquy to which he gives
utterance, as Telegraph Hill, interfering with his field of view, causes
him to take the telescope from his eye.

"Carmen Montijo!" he exclaims, crushing it to its shortest, and
returning the instrument to its case.  "To think of a `sport'--a common
gambler--even having acquaintance with her--far less presuming to make
love to her!"

"More than gamblers--both of them," adds Cadwallader by his side.
"Robbers--murderers--anything if they had but the chance."

"Ay, true, Will; everything vile and vulgar.  Don't it make you mad to
think of it?"

"No, not mad.  That isn't the feeling I have; rather fear."

"Fear!  Of what!"

"That the scoundrels may do some harm to our dear girls.  As we know
now, they're up to anything.  Since they don't stick at assassination,
they won't at abduction.  I hope your letter to Don Gregorio may open
his eyes about them, and put him on his guard.  My Inez! who's to
protect her?  I'd give all I have in the world to be sure of her getting
safely embarked in that Chilian ship.  Every one knows, there is an
indirect manner of insinuating praise or blame, which is much less
shocking than the open flattery or censure of any person.

However be may communicate his sentiments by such secret insinuations, and
make them known with equal certainty as by the open discovery of them,
it is certain that their influence is not equally strong and
powerful.

One who lashes me with concealed strokes of satire, moves not my
indignation to such a degree, as if he flatly told me I was a fool
and coxcomb; though I equally understand his meaning, as if he did.

This difference is to be attributed to the influence of general rules.

Whether a person openly, abuses me, or slyly intimates his contempt, in
neither case do I immediately perceive his sentiment or opinion; and
it is only by signs, that is, by its effects, I become sensible
of it. The only difference, then, betwixt these two cases consists
in this, that in the open discovery of his sentiments he makes use
of signs, which are general and universal; and in the secret intimation
employs such as are more singular and uncommon. The effect of this
circumstance is, that the imagination, in running from the present
impression to the absent idea, makes the transition with greater
facility, and consequently conceives the object with greater force,
where the connexion is common and universal, than where it is more
rare and particular.

Accordingly we may observe, that the open declaration of our
sentiments is called the taking off the mask, as the secret intimation
of our opinions is said to be the veiling of them.

The difference betwixt an idea produced by a general connexion, and
that arising from a particular one is here compared to the difference
betwixt an impression and an idea.

This difference in the imagination has a suitable effect on the
passions; and this effect is augmented by another circumstance.

A secret intimation of anger or contempt shews that we still have some
consideration for the person, and avoid the directly abusing him. This
makes a concealed satire less disagreeable; but still this depends on
the same principle. For if an idea were not more feeble, when only
intimated, it would never be esteemed a mark of greater respect to
proceed in this method than in the other.

Sometimes scurrility is less displeasing than delicate satire,
because it revenges us in a manner for the injury at the very time
it is committed, by affording us a just reason to blame and contemn
the person, who injures us.

But this phaenomenon likewise depends upon the same principle. For why do
we blame all gross and injurious language, unless it be, because
we esteem it contrary to good breeding and humanity?

And why is it contrary, unless it be more shocking than any delicate
satire?
The rules of good breeding condemn whatever is openly disobliging,
and gives a sensible pain and confusion to those, with whom we
converse.

  After this is once established,
  abusive language is universally blamed,
  and gives less pain upon account of its
          coarseness and incivility,
  which render the person despicable,
          that employs it.

It becomes less disagreeable, merely because originally it is more
so; and it is more disagreeable, because it affords an inference by
general and common rules, that are palpable and undeniable.

To this explication of the different influence of open and concealed
flattery or satire, I shall add the consideration of another
phenomenon, which is analogous to it.

There are many particulars in the point of honour both of men and women,
whose violations, when open and avowed, the world never excuses, but which
it is more apt to overlook, when the appearances are saved, and the
transgression is secret and concealed.

Even those, who know with equal certainty, that the fault is
committed, pardon it more easily, when the proofs seem in some measure
oblique and equivocal, than when they are direct and undeniable.
The same idea is presented in both cases, and, properly speaking, is
equally assented to by the judgment; and yet its influence is different,
because of the different manner, in which it is presented.

Now if we compare these two cases, of the open and concealed
violations of the laws of honour, we shall find, that the difference
betwixt them consists in this, that in the first ease the sign,
from which we infer the blameable action, is single, and suffices
alone to be the foundation of our reasoning and judgment; whereas
in the latter the signs are numerous, and decide little or nothing
when alone and unaccompanyed with many minute circumstances, which
are almost imperceptible.

But it is certainly true, that any reasoning is always the more
convincing, the more single and united it is to the eye, and the
less exercise it gives to the imagination to collect all its parts,
and run from them to the correlative idea, which forms the conclusion.

The labour of the thought disturbs the regular progress of the sentiments,
as we shall observe presently.[Part IV. Sect. 1.] The idea
strikes not on us with ouch vivacity; and consequently has no such
influence on the passion and imagination.

From the same principles we may account for those observations of the
CARDINAL DE RETZ, that there are many things, in which the world
wishes to be deceived; and that it more easily excuses a person in
acting than in talking contrary to the decorum of his profession
and character.

A fault in words is commonly more open and distinct than one in actions,
which admit of many palliating excuses, and decide not so clearly concerning
the intention and views of the actor.

Thus it appears upon the whole, that every kind of opinion or judgment,
which amounts not to knowledge, is derived entirely from the force
and vivacity of the perception, and that these qualities constitute
in the mind, what we call the BELIEF Of the existence of any object.

This force and this vivacity are most conspicuous in the memory; and
therefore our confidence in the veracity of that faculty is the
greatest imaginable, and equals in many respects the assurance of
a demonstration.

The next degree of these qualities is that derived from the relation
of cause and effect; and this too is very great, especially when
the conjunction is found by experience to be perfectly constant, and
when the object, which is present to us, exactly resembles those, of
which we have had experience. But below this degree of evidence there
are many others, which have an influence on the passions and imagination,
proportioned to that degree of force and vivacity, which they communicate
to the ideas.

It is by habit we make the transition from cause to effect; and it is
from some present impression we borrow that vivacity, which we diffuse
over the correlative idea. But when we have not observed a
sufficient number of instances, to produce a strong habit; or when
these instances are contrary to each other; or when the resemblance is
not exact; or the present impression is faint and obscure; or the
experience in some measure obliterated from the memory; or the
connexion dependent on a long chain of objects; or the inference
derived from general rules, and yet not conformable to them: In all
these cases the evidence diminishes by the diminution of the force
and intenseness of the idea.

This therefore is the nature of the judgment and probability.

What principally gives authority to this system is, beside the undoubted
arguments, upon which each part is founded, the agreement of these parts,
and the necessity of one to explain another. The belief, which
attends our memory, is of the same nature with that, which is derived
from our judgments: Nor is there any difference betwixt that judgment,
which is derived from a constant and uniform connexion of causes
and effects, and that which depends upon an interrupted and uncertain.

It is indeed evident, that in all determinations, where the mind decides
from contrary experiments, it is first divided within itself, and
has an inclination to either side in proportion to the number of
experiments we have seen and remember. This contest is at last determined
to the advantage of that side, where we observe a superior number
of these experiments; but still with a diminution of force in the
evidence correspondent to the number of the opposite experiments.

Each possibility, of which the probability is composed, operates separately
upon the imagination; and it is the larger collection of possibilities,
which at last prevails, and that with a force proportionable to its
superiority. All these phenomena lead directly to the precedent
system; nor will it ever be possible upon any other principles to
give a satisfactory and consistent explication of them.

Without considering these judgments as the effects of custom on the
imagination, we shall lose ourselves in perpetual contradiction and
absurdity.

SECT. XIV. OF THE IDEA OF NECESSARY CONNEXION.

Having thus explained the manner, in which we reason beyond our immediate
impressions, and conclude that such particular causes must have
such particular effects; we must now return upon our footsteps to
examine that question, which [Sect. 2.] first occured to us, and
which we dropt in our way, viz.

What is our idea of necessity, when we say that two objects are
necessarily connected together.

Upon this head I repeat what I have often had occasion to observe,
that as we have no idea, that is not derived from an impression,
we must find some impression, that gives rise to this idea of
necessity, if we assert we have really such an idea.

In order to this I consider, in what objects necessity is commonly
supposed to lie; and finding that it is always ascribed to causes
and effects, I turn my eye to two objects supposed to be placed in
that relation; and examine them in all the situations, of which
they are susceptible.

I immediately perceive, that they are contiguous in time and place,
and that the object we call cause precedes the other we call effect.

In no one instance can I go any farther, nor is it possible for me to
discover any third relation betwixt these objects. I therefore enlarge
my view to comprehend several instances; where I find like objects
always existing in like relations of contiguity and succession.

At first sight this seems to serve but little to my purpose.

The reflection on several instances only repeats the same objects;
and therefore can never give rise to a new idea.

But upon farther enquiry I find, that the repetition is not in every
particular the same, but produces a new impression, and by that
means the idea, which I at present examine.

For after a frequent repetition, I find, that upon the appearance of one
of the objects, the mind is determined by custom to consider its
usual attendant, and to consider it in a stronger light upon account
of its relation to the first object.

It is this impression, then, or determination, which affords me the
idea of necessity.

I doubt not but these consequences will at first sight be received
without difficulty, as being evident deductions from principles,
which we have already established, and which we have often employed
in our reasonings.

This evidence both in the first principles, and in the deductions, may
seduce us unwarily into the conclusion, and make us imagine it
contains nothing extraordinary, nor worthy of our curiosity.

But though such an inadvertence may facilitate the reception of
this reasoning, it will make it be the more easily forgot; for which
reason I think it proper to give warning, that I have just now examined
one of the most sublime questions in philosophy, viz. that concerning
the power and efficacy of causes; where all the sciences seem so
much interested.

Such a warning will naturally rouze up the attention of the reader, and
make him desire a more full account of my doctrine, as well as of the
arguments, on which it is founded.

This request is so reasonable, that I cannot refuse complying with it;
especially as I am hopeful that these principles, the more they are
examined, will acquire the more force and evidence.

There is no question, which on account of its importance, as well as
difficulty, has caused more disputes both among antient and modern
philosophers, than this concerning the efficacy of causes, or that
quality which makes them be followed by their effects. But before they
entered upon these disputes, methinks it would not have been
improper to have examined what idea we have of that efficacy, which
is the subject of the controversy.

This is what I find principally wanting in their reasonings, and what I
shall here endeavour to supply.

I begin with observing that the terms of EFFICACY, AGENCY, POWER,
FORCE, ENERGY, NECESSITY, CONNEXION, and PRODUCTIVE QUALITY, are
all nearly synonymous; and therefore it is an absurdity to employ
any of them in defining the rest.

By this observation we reject at once all the vulgar definitions,
which philosophers have given of power and efficacy; and instead
of searching for the idea in these definitions, must look for it
in the impressions, from which it is originally derived.

If it be a compound idea, it must arise from compound impressions.

If simple, from simple impressions.

I believe the most general and most popular explication of this
matter, is to say [See Mr.

Locke, chapter of power.], that finding from experience, that there
are several new productions in matter, such as the motions and
variations of body, and concluding that there must somewhere be a
power capable of producing them, we arrive at last by this reasoning
at the idea of power and efficacy.

But to be convinced that this explication is more popular than
philosophical, we need but reflect on two very obvious principles.

First, That reason alone can never give rise to any original idea, and
secondly, that reason, as distinguished from experience, can never
make us conclude, that a cause or productive quality is absolutely
requisite to every beginning of existence.

Both these considerations have been sufficiently explained: and therefore
shall not at present be any farther insisted on.

I shall only infer from them, that since reason can never give rise
to the idea of efficacy, that idea must be derived from experience,
and from some particular instances of this efficacy, which make
their passage into the mind by the common channels of sensation or
reflection.

Ideas always represent their objects or impressions; and vice versa,
there are some objects necessary to give rise to every idea.

If we pretend, therefore, to have any just idea of this efficacy, we must
produce some instance, wherein the efficacy is plainly discoverable
to the mind, and its operations obvious to our consciousness or
sensation.

By the refusal of this, we acknowledge, that the idea is impossible and
imaginary, since the principle of innate ideas, which alone can save
us from this dilemma, has been already refuted, and is now almost
universally rejected in the learned world.

Our present business, then, must be to find some natural production,
where the operation and efficacy of a cause can be clearly conceived
and comprehended by the mind, without any danger of obscurity or
mistake.

In this research we meet with very little encouragement from that
prodigious diversity, which is found in the opinions of those
philosophers, who have pretended to explain the secret force and
energy of causes.

[See Father Malbranche, Book vi.

Part 2, chap. 3. And the illustrations upon it.] There are some, who
maintain, that bodies operate by their substantial form; others, by
their accidents or qualities; several, by their matter and form; some,
by their form and accidents; others, by certain virtues and faculties
distinct from all this.

All these sentiments again are mixed and varyed in a thousand
different ways; and form a strong presumption, that none of them
have any solidity or evidence, and that the supposition of an
efficacy in any of the known qualities of matter is entirely without
foundation.

This presumption must encrease upon us, when we consider, that these
principles of substantial forms, and accidents, and faculties, are
not in reality any of the known properties of bodies, but are
perfectly unintelligible and inexplicable.

For it is evident philosophers would never have had recourse to
such obscure and uncertain principles, had they met with any
satisfaction in such as are clear and intelligible; especially in
such an affair as this, which must be an object of the simplest
understanding, if not of the senses.

Upon the whole, we may conclude, that it is impossible in any one
instance to shew the principle, in which the force and agency of
a cause is placed; and that the most refined and most vulgar
understandings are equally at a loss in this particular.

If any one think proper to refute this assertion, he need not put
himself to the trouble of inventing any long reasonings: but may
at once shew us an instance of a cause, where we discover the power
or operating principle.

"At least," he adds, "none that will do us any harm.
The fog's sure to be on before midnight; at this time of year, it always
is.  To-morrow night will be like the last--black as a pot of pitch."

"True," says De Lara, as a man with some experience of the sea, also
having meteorological knowledge.  "No doubt, 'twill be as you say,
Rocas.  In that case we'll have nothing to fear.  We can get the job
done, and be back here before morning.  Ah, then seated round the table,
we'll not be like we are now--poor as rats; but every one with his pile
before him--sixty thousand _pesos_."

"_Carramba_!" exclaims Diaz, in a mocking tone, "while saying vespers
to-night, let's put in a special prayer for to-morrow night to be what
Rocas says it will--black as a pot of pitch."

The profane suggestion is hailed with a burst of ribald laughter; after
which they set about preparing the _mascaras_, and other disguises, to
be used in their nefarious enterprise.


CHAPTER FORTY FOUR.

"AMBRE LA PUERTA!"

Another sun has shone upon San Francisco Bay, and again gone down in red
gleam over the far-spreading Pacific, leaving the sky of a leaden
colour, moonless and starless.

As the hour of midnight approaches it assumes the hue predicted by
Rocas, and desired by Diaz.  For the ocean fog has again rolled
shoreward across the peninsula, and shrouds San Francisco as with a
pall.  The adjacent country is covered with its funereal curtain,
embracing within its folds the house of Don Gregorio Montijo.

The inmates seem all asleep, as at this hour they should.  No light is
seen through the windows, nor any sound heard within the walls.  Not
even the baying of a watch-dog, the bellow of a stalled ox, or the
stamping of a horse in the stables.  Inside, as without, all is silence.

The profound silence seems strange, though favourable, to four men not
far from the place, and gradually, but with slow steps, drawing nearer
to it.  For they are approaching by stealth, as can be told by their
attitudes and gestures.  They advance crouchingly, now and then stopping
to take a survey of the _terrain_ in front, as they do so exchanging
whispered words with one another.

Through the hazy atmosphere their figures show weird-like--all the more
from their grotesque gesticulations.  Even if scrutinised closely, and
in clearest light, they would present this appearance; for although in
human shape, and wearing the garb of men, their faces more resemble
those of demons.  They are human countenances, nevertheless, but
_en-mascaradas_.

Nothing more is needed to tell who, and what they are, with their
purpose in thus approaching Don Gregorio's house.  They are burglars,
designing to break into it.

It needs not the removal of their masks to identify them as the four
conspirators left plotting in the rancho of Rafael Rocas.

They are now _en route_ for putting their scheme into execution.

It would look as if Don Gregorio were never to get his gold to Panama--
much less have it transported to Spain.

And his daughter!  What of her, with Francisco de Lara drawing nigh as
one of the nocturnal ravagers?  His grand-daughter, too, Faustino
Calderon being another?

One cognisant of the existing relations, and spectator of what is
passing now--seeing the craped robbers as they steal on towards the
house--would suppose it in danger of being doubly despoiled, and that
its owner is to suffer desolation, not only in fortune, but in that far
dearer to him--his family.

The burglars are approaching from the front, up the avenue, though not
on it.  They keep along its edge among the manzanita bushes.  These,
with the fog, afford sufficient screen to prevent their being observed
from the house--even though sentinels were set upon its azotea.  But
there appears to be none; no eye to see, no voice to give warning, not
even the bark of a watch, dog to wake those unconsciously slumbering
within.

As already said, there is something strange in this.  On a large grazing
estate it is rare for the Molossian to be silent.  More usually his
sonorous voice is heard throughout the night, or at brief intervals.

Though anything but desirous to hear the barking of dogs, the burglars
are themselves puzzled at the universal silence, so long continued.  For
before entering the enclosure they have been lying concealed in a
thicket outside, their horses tied to trees, where they have now left
them, and during all the time not a sound had reached their ears; no
voice either of man or animal!  They are now within sight of the house,
its massive front looming large and dark through the mist--still no stir
outside, and within the stillness of death itself!

Along with astonishment, a sense of awe is felt by one of the four
criminals--Calderon, who has still some lingering reluctance as to the
deed about to be done--or it may be but fear.  The other three are too
strong in courage, and too hardened in crime, for scruples of any kind.

Arriving at the end of the avenue, and within a short distance of the
dwelling, they stop for a final consultation, still under cover of the
manzanitas.

All silent as ever; no one stirring; no light from any window; the
shutters closed behind the _rejas_--the great _puerta_ as well!

"Now, about getting inside," says De Lara; "what will be our best way?"

"In my opinion," answers Diaz, "we'll do best by climbing up to the
_azotea_, and over it into the _patio_."

"Where's your ladder?" asks Rocas, in his gruff, blunt way.

"We must find one, or something that'll serve instead.  There should be
loose timber lying about the _corrals_--enough to provide us with a
climbing-pole."

"And while searching for it, wake up some of the _vaqueros_.  That won't
do."

"Then what do you propose, Rafael?" interrogates the chief conspirator.

The seal-hunter, from a presumed acquaintance with housebreaking, is
listened to with attention.

"Walk straight up to the door," he answers; "knock, and ask to be
admitted."

"Ay; and have a blunderbuss fired at us, with a shower of bullets big as
billiard balls.  _Carrai_!"

It is Calderon who speaks thus apprehensively.

"Not the least danger of that," rejoins Rocas.  "Take my word, we'll be
let in."

"Why do you think so?"

"Why?  Because we have a claim on the hospitality of the house."

"I don't understand you, Rocas," says De Lara.

"Haven't we a good story to tell--simple, and to the purpose?"

"Still I don't understand.  Explain yourself, Rafael."

"Don't we come as messengers from the man-o'-war--from those officers
you've been telling me about?"

"Ah! now I perceive your drift."

"One can so announce himself, while the others keep out of sight.  He
can say he's been sent by the young gentlemen on an errand to Don
Gregorio, or the senoritas, if you like.  Something of importance
affecting their departure.  True, by this they'll know the ship's
weighed anchor.  No matter; the story of a message will stand good all
the same."

"Rafael Rocas!" exclaims De Lara, "you're a born genius.  Instead of
being forced to do a little smuggling now and then, you ought to be made
_administrator-general of customs_.  We shall act as you advise.  No
doubt the door will be opened.  When it is, one can take charge of the
janitor.  He's a sexagenarian, and won't be hard to hold.  If he
struggle, let him be silenced.  The rest of us can go ransacking.  You,
Calderon, are acquainted with the interior, and, as you say, know the
room where Don Gregorio is most likely to keep his chest.  You must lead
us straight for that."

"But, Francisco," whispers Calderon in the ear of his confederate, after
drawing him a little apart from the other two; "about the _ninas_?  You
don't intend anything with them?"

"Certainly not--not to-night; nor in this fashion.  I hope being able to
approach _them_ in gentler guise, and more becoming time.  When they're
without a _peso_ in the world, they'll be less proud; and may be
contented to stay a little longer in California.  To-night we've enough
on our hands without thinking of women.  One thing at a time--their
money first--themselves afterwards."

"But suppose they should recognise us?"

"They can't.  Disguised as we are, I defy a man's mother to know him.
If they did, then--"

"Then what?"

"No use reflecting what.  Don't be so scared, man!  If I'd anticipated
any chance of its coming to extremes of the kind you're pondering upon,
I wouldn't be here prepared for only half measures.  Perhaps we sha'n't
even wake the ladies up; and if we do, there's not the slightest danger
of our being known.  So make your mind easy, and let's get through with
it.  See!  Diaz and Rocas are getting impatient!  We must rejoin them,
and proceed to business at once."

The four housebreakers again set their heads together; and after a few
whispered words, to settle all particulars about their plan of
proceeding, advance towards the door.

Once up to it, they stand close in, concealed by its o'ershadowing arch.

With the butt of his pistol, De Lara knocks.

Diaz, unknown to the family, and therefore without fear of his voice
being recognised, is to do the talking.

No one answers the knock; and it is repeated.  Louder, and still louder.

The sexagenarian janitor sleeps soundly to-night, thinks De Lara,
deeming it strange.

Another "rat-at-tat" with the pistol-butt, followed by the usual
formulary:

"_Ambre la puerta_!"

At length comes a response from within; but not the customary "_Quen
es_?" nor anything in Spanish.  On the contrary, the speech which
salutes the ears of those seeking admission is in a different tongue,
and tone altogether unlike that of a native Californian.

"Who the old scratch are ye?" asks a voice from inside, while a heavy
footstep is heard coming along the _saguan_.  Before the startled
burglars can shape a reply, the voice continues:

"Damn ye!  What d'ye want anyhow--wakin' a fellur out o' his sleep at
this time o' the night?  'Twould sarve ye right if I sent a bullet
through the door at ye.  Take care what you're about.  I've got my
shootin'-iron handy; a Colt's revolver--biggest size at thet."

"_Por Dios_! what does this mean?" mutters De Lara.

"Tell him, Diaz," he adds, in _sotto-voce_ to the cockfighter--"tell him
we're from the British man-o'-war with--_Carrai_!  I forgot, you don't
speak English.  I must do it myself.  _He_ won't know who it is."  Then
raising his voice: "We want to see Don Gregorio Montijo.  We bring a
message from the British man-o'-war--from the two officers."

"Consarn the British man-o'-war!" interrupts the surly speaker inside;
"an' yur message, an' yur two officers, I know nothin' 'bout them.  As
for Don Gregorio, if ye want to get sight on him, ye're a preeshus way
wide o' the mark.  He ain't here any more.  He's gin up the house, an'
tuk everything o' hisn out o't this mornin'.  I'm only hyar in charge o'
the place.  Guess you'll find both the Don an' his darters at the
_Parker_--the most likeliest place to tree thet lot."

Don Gregorio gone!--his gold--his girls!  Only an empty house, in charge
of a caretaker, who carries a Colt's repeating pistol, biggest size, and
would use it on the smallest provocation!

No good their going inside now, but a deal of danger.  Anything but
pleasant medicine would be a pill from that six-shooter.

"_Carramba!  Caraio!  Chingara!  Maldita_!"

Such are the wild exclamations that issue from the lips of the
disappointed housebreakers, as they turn away from the dismantled
dwelling, and hasten to regain their horses.


CHAPTER FORTY FIVE.

A SCRATCH CREW.

It was a fortunate inspiration that led the ex-haciendado to have his
gold secretly carried on board the Chilian ship; another, that
influenced him to transfer his family, and household gods, to an hotel
in the town.

It was all done in a day--that same day.  Every hour, after the sailing
of the _Crusader_, had he become more anxious; for every hour brought
intelligence of some new act of outlawry in the neighbourhood,
impressing him with the insecurity, not only of his Penates, but the
lives of himself and his ladies.  So long as the British ship lay in
port, it seemed a protection to him; and although this may have been but
fancy, it served somewhat to tranquillise his fears.  Soon as she was
gone, he gave way to them, summoned Silvestre, with a numerous retinue
of _cargadores_, and swept the house clean of everything he intended
taking--the furniture alone being left, as part of the purchased
effects.

He has indeed reason to congratulate himself on his rapid removal, as he
finds on the following day, when visiting his old home for some trifling
purpose, and there hearing what had happened during the night.

The man in charge--a stalwart American, armed to the teeth--gives him a
full account of the nocturnal visitors.  There were four, he says--
having counted them through the keyhole--inquiring for him, Don
Gregorio.  They appeared greatly disappointed at not getting an
interview with him; and went off uttering adjurations in Spanish, though
having held their parley in English.

A message from the British man-of-war!  And brought by men who swore in
Spanish!  Strange all that, thinks Don Gregorio, knowing the _Crusader_
should then be at least a hundred leagues off at sea.

Besides, the messengers have not presented themselves at the _Parker
House_, to which the caretaker had directed them.

"What can it mean?" asks the ex-haciendado of himself.

Perhaps the sailor who is now first officer of the Chilian ship may know
something of it; and he will question him next time he goes aboard.

He has, however, little hope of being enlightened in that quarter; his
suspicions turning elsewhere.  He cannot help connecting Messrs. De Lara
and Calderon with the occurrence.  Crozier's letter, coupled with the
further information received from the bearer of it, has thrown such a
light on the character of these two _enhalleros_, he can believe them
capable of anything.  After their attempt to rob the young officers, and
murder them as well, they would not hesitate to serve others the same;
and the demand for admission to his house may have been made by these
very men, with a couple of confederates--their design to plunder it, if
not do something worse.

Thus reflecting, he is thankful for having so unconsciously foiled
them--indeed, deeming it a Providence.

Still is he all the more solicitous to leave a land beset with such
dangers.  Even in the town he does not feel safe.  Robbers and murderers
walk boldly abroad through the streets; not alone, but in the company of
judges who have tried without condemning them; while lesser criminals
stand by drinking-bars, hobnobbing with the constables who either hold
them in charge, or have just released them, after a mock-hearing before
some magistrate, with eyes blind as those of Justice herself--blinded by
the gold-dust of California!

Notwithstanding all this, Don Gregorio need have no fear for his ladies.
Their sojourn at the hotel may be somewhat irksome, and uncongenial;
still they are safe.  Rough-looking and boisterous as are some of their
fellow-guests, they are yet in no way rude.  The most refined or
sensitive lady need not fear moving in their midst.  A word or gesture
of insult to her would call forth instant chastisement.

It is not on their account he continues anxious, but because of his
unprotected treasure.  Though secreted aboard the _Condor_, it is still
unsafe.  Should its whereabouts get whispered abroad, there are robbers
bold enough, not only to take it from the Chilian skipper, but set fire
to his ship, himself in her, and cover their crime by burning everything
up.

Aware of all this, the ex-haciendado, with the help of friendly
Silvestre, has half-a-dozen trusty men placed aboard of her--there to
stay till a crew can be engaged.  It is a costly matter, but money may
save money, and now is not the time to cavil at expenses.

As yet, not a sailor has presented himself.  None seem caring to ship
"for Valparaiso and intermediate ports," even at the double wages
offered in the _Diario_.  The _Condor's_ forecastle remains untenanted,
except by the six longshore men, who temporarily occupy it, without
exactly knowing why they are there; but contented to make no inquiry, so
long as they are receiving their ten dollars a day.  Of crew, there is
only the captain himself, his first officer, and the cook.  The orangs
do not count.

Day by day, Don Gregorio grows more impatient, and is in constant
communication with Silvestre.

"Offer higher wages," he says.  "Engage sailors at any price."

The shipping-agent yields assent; inserts a second _aviso_ in the
Spanish paper, addressed to _marineros_ of all nations.  Triple wages to
those who will take service on a well-appointed ship.  In addition, all
the usual allowances, the best of grub and grog.  Surely this should get
the _Condor_ a crew.

And at length it does.  Within twenty-four hours after the advertisement
has appeared, sailors begin to show on her decks.  They come singly, or
in twos and threes; and keep coming till as many as half-a-score have
presented themselves.  They belong to different nationalities, speaking
several tongues--among them English, French, and Danish.  But the
majority appear to be Spaniards, or Spanish-Americans--as might have
been expected from the _Condor_ being a Chilian ship.

Among them is the usual variety of facial expression; though, in one
respect, a wonderful uniformity.  Scarce a man of them whose countenance
is not in some way unprepossessing--either naturally of sinister cast,
or brought to it by a career of sinful dissipation.  Several of them
show signs of having been recently drinking--with eyes bleary and
bloodshot.  Of strife, too, its souvenirs visible in other eyes that are
blackened, and scars upon cheeks not yet cicatrised.  Some are still in
a state of inebriety, and stagger as they stray about the decks.

Under any other circumstances, such sailors would stand no chance of
getting shipped.  As it is, they are accepted--not one refused.  Captain
Lantanas has no choice, and knows it.  Without them he is helpless, and
it would be hopeless for him to think of putting to sea.  If he do not
take them, the _Candour_ may swing idly at her anchor for weeks, it
might be months.

Quick as they came aboard, he enters their names on the ship's books,
while Harry Blew assigns them their separate bunks in the forepeak.
One, a Spaniard, by name Padilla, shows credentials from some former
ship, which procure him the berth of _piloto-segundo_ (second mate).

After the ten had been taken, no more present themselves.  Even the big
bounty offered does not tempt another tar from the saloons of San
Francisco.  In any other seaport, it would empty every sailors'
boarding-house, to its last lodger.

And ten hands are not enough to work the good ship _Condor_.

Her captain knows it, and waits another day, hoping he may get a few
more to complete her complement; but hopes in vain, the supply seems
exhausted.

Becoming convinced of this, he determines to set sail with such crew as
he has secured.  But little more remains to be done; some stores to be
shipped, provisions for the voyage, the best and freshest San Francisco
can afford.  For he who authorises their inlay cares not for the cost--
only that things may be made comfortable.  Don Gregorio gives
_carte-blanche_ for providing the vessel; and it is done according to
his directions.

At length everything is ready, and the _Condor_ only awaits her
passengers.  Her cabin has been handsomely furnished; its best
state-room decorated to receive two ladies, fair as ever set foot on
board ship.


CHAPTER FORTY SIX.

"ADIOS CALIFORNIA!"

A bright sun rises over San Francisco, in all likelihood the last Don
Gregorio Montijo will ever witness in California.  For just as the orb
of day shows its disc above the dome-shaped _silhouette_ of Monte
Diablo, flinging its golden shimmer across the bay, a boat leaves the
town-pier, bearing him and his towards the Chilian vessel, whose signals
for sailing are out.

Others are in the boat; a large party of ladies and gentlemen, who
accompany them to do a last handshaking on board.  For, in quitting
California, the ex-haciendado leaves many friends behind; among them,
some who will pass sleepless hours thinking of Carmen Montijo; and
others whose hearts will be sore as their thoughts turn to Inez Alvarez.

It may be that none of those are present now; and better for them if
not; since the most painful of all partings is that where the lover sees
his sweetheart sail away, with the knowledge she cares neither to stay,
nor come back.

The young ladies going off show but little sign of regret at leaving.
They are hindered by remembrance of the last words spoken at another
parting, now painfully recalled: "_Hasta Cadiz_!"  The thought of that
takes the sting out of this.

The boat reaches the ship, and swinging around, lies alongside.

Captain Lantanas stands by the gangway to receive his passengers, with
their friends; while his first officer helps them up the man-ropes.

Among the ladies, Harry Blew distinguishes the two he is to have charge
of, and with them is specially careful.  As their soft-gloved fingers
rest in his rough horny hand, he mentally registers a vow that it shall
never fail them in the hour of need--if such there ever be.

On the cabin-table is spread a refection of the best; and around it the
leave-takers assemble, the Chilian skipper doing the honours of his
ship.  And gracefully, for he is a gentleman.

Half-an-hour of merry-making, light chatter, enlivened by the popping of
corks, and clinking of glasses; then ten minutes of converse more
serious; after which hurried graspings of the hand and a general
scattering towards the shore-boat, which soon after moves off amid
exclamations of "_Adios_!" and "_Bueno viage_!" accompanied by the
waving of hands, and white slender fingers saluting with tremulous
motion--like the quiver of a kestrel's wing--the fashion of the
Spanish-american fair.

While the boat is being rowed back to the shore, the _Condor_ puts out
her canvas, and stands away towards the Golden Gate.

She is soon out of sight of the port; having entered the strait which
gives access to the great land-locked estuary.  But a wind blowing in
from the west hinders her; and she is all the day tacking through the
eight miles of narrow water which connects San Francisco Bay with the
Pacific.

The sun is nigh set as she passes the old Spanish fort and opens view of
the outside ocean.  But the heavenly orb that rose over Mont Diablo like
a globe of gold goes down beyond `Los Farrallones' more resembling a
ball of fire about to be quenched hissing in the sea.

It is still only half-immersed behind the blue expanse, when, gliding
out from the portals of the Golden Gate, the _Condor_ rounds Seal Rock,
and stands on her course West-South-West.

The wind shifts, the evening breeze begins to blow steadily from the
land.  This is favourable; and after tacks have been set, and sails
sheeted home, there is but little work to be done.

It is the hour of the second dog-watch, and the sailors are all on deck,
grouped about the fore hatch, and gleefully conversing.  Here and there
an odd individual stands by the side, with eyes turned shoreward, taking
a last look at the land.  Not as if he regretted leaving it, but is
rather glad to get away.  More than one of that crew have reason to feel
thankful that the Chilian craft is carrying them from a country, where,
had they stayed much longer, it would have been to find lodgment in a
jail.  Out at sea, their faces seem no better favoured than when they
first stepped aboard.  Scarce recovered from their shore carousing, they
show swollen cheeks, and eyes inflamed with alcohol; countenances from
which the breeze of the Pacific, however pure, cannot remove that
sinister cast.

At sight of them, and the two fair creatures sailing in the same ship, a
thought about the incongruity--as also the insecurity of such
companionship--cannot help coming uppermost.  It is like two beautiful
birds of Paradise shut up in the same cage with wolves, tigers, and
hyenas.

But the birds of Paradise are not troubling themselves about this, or
anything else in the ship.  Lingering abaft the binnacle, with their
hands resting on the taffrail, they look back at the land, their eyes
fixed upon the summit of a hill, ere long to become lost to their view
by the setting of the sun.  They have been standing so for some time in
silence, when Inez says:

"I can tell what you're thinking of, _tia_."

"Indeed, can you?  Well, let me hear it."

"You're saying to yourself: `What a beautiful hill that is yonder; and
how I should like to be once more upon its top--not alone, but with
somebody beside me.'  Now, tell the truth, isn't that it?"

"Those are your own thoughts, _sobrina_."

"I admit it, and also that they are pleasant.  So are yours; are they
not?"

"Only in part.  I have others, which I suppose you can share with me."

"What others?"

"Reflections not at all agreeable, but quite the contrary."

"Again distressing yourself about that!  It don't give me the slightest
concern; and didn't from the first."

"No?"

"No!"

"Well; I must say you take things easily--which I don't.  A lover--
engaged, too--to go away in that _sans facon_ way!  Not so much as a
note, nor even a verbal message.  _Santissima_! it was something more
than rude--it was cruel; and I can't help thinking so."

"But there was a message in the letter to grandpapa, for both of us.
What more would you wish?"

"Pff! who cares for parting compliments?  A _lepero_ would send better
to his sweetheart in sleeveless _camisa_.  That's not the message for
me."

"How can you tell there wasn't some other which has miscarried?  I'm
almost sure there has been; else why should somebody have knocked at the
door an' said so.  The Americano left in charge of the house has told
grandpa something about four men having come there the night after we
left it.  One may have been this messenger we've missed--the others
going with him for company.  And through his neglect we've not got
letters intended for us.  Or, if they haven't written, it's because they
were pressed for time.  However, we shall know when we meet them at
Cadiz."

"Ah! when we meet them there, I'll demand an explanation from Eduardo.
That shall I, and get it--or know the reason why."

"He will have a good one, I warrant.  There's been a miscarriage,
somehow.  For hasn't there been mystery all round?  Luckily, no
fighting, as we feared, and have reason to rejoice.  Neither anything
seen or heard of your California!! chivalry!  That's the strangest thing
of all."

"It is indeed strange," rejoins Carmen, showing emotion; "I wonder what
became of them.  Nobody that we know has met either after that day; nor
yet heard word of them."

"Carmen, I believe one _has_ heard of them."

"Who?"

"Your father."

"What makes you think so, Inez!"

"Some words I overheard, while he was conversing with the English sailor
who's now in the ship with us.  I'm almost certain there was something
in Mr Crozier's letter relating to De Lara and Calderon.  What it was,
grandpa seems desirous of keeping to himself; else he would have told
us.  We must endeavour to find it out from the sailor."

"You're a cunning schemer, _sobrina_.  I should never have thought of
that.  We shall try.  Now I remember, Eduardo once saved this man's
life.  Wasn't it a noble, daring deed?  For all, I'm very angry with
him, leaving me as he has done; and sha'n't be pacified until I see him
on his knees, and he apologise for it.  That he shall do at Cadiz!"

"To confess the truth, _tia_, I was a little spited myself at first.  On
reflection, I feel sure there's been some mischance, and we've been
wronging them both.  I sha'n't blame my darling till I see him again.
Then if he can't clear himself, oh, won't I!"

"You forgive too easily.  I can't."

"Yes, you can.  Look at yonder hill.  Recall the pleasant hour passed
upon it, and you will be lenient, as I am."

Carmen obeys, and again turns her glance toward the spot consecrated by
sweetest remembrances.

As she continues to gaze at it, the cloud lifts from her brow, replaced
by a smile, and promises easy pardon to him who has offended her.

In silence the two stand, straining their eyes upon the far summit, till
shore and sea become one--both blending into the purple of twilight.

"_Adios, California_!"

Land no longer in sight.  The ship is _au large_ on the ocean.


CHAPTER FORTY SEVEN.

A TATTOO THAT NEEDS RETOUCHING.

The great Pacific current in many respects resembles the Gulf Stream of
the Atlantic.  Passing eastward under the Aleutian Archipelago, it
impinges upon the American continent by Vancouver's Island; thence
setting southward, along the Californian coast, curves round horseshoe
shape, and sets back for the central part of the South Sea, sweeping on
past the Sandwich Isles.

By this disposition, a ship bound from San Francisco for Honolulu has
the flow in her favour; and if the wind be also favourable, she will
make fast way.

As chance has it, both are propitious to the _Crusader_, and the warship
standing for the Sandwich Islands will likely reach them after an
incredibly short voyage.

There are two individuals on board of her who wish it to be so; counting
every day, almost every hour, of her course.  Not that they have any
desire to visit the dominions of King Kamehameha, or expect pleasure
there.  On the contrary, if left to themselves, the frigate's stay in
the harbour of Honolulu would not last longer than necessary to procure
a boat-load of bananas, and replenish her hen-coops with fat Kanaka
fowls.

Defence, becoming always less and less effective against attack, which is
always more and more a matter of the laboratory, finally succumbs
before _Holsten's_ discovery of "Carolinum" and its final disastrous
application in the "atomic bombs." Romancing on a theme out of
Soddy's _Interpretation of Radium_, Mr. Wells, with those deft strokes
of allusive and imaginative realism--so convincing is he that realism
is the only apt word for his daring constructions of the future--depicts
the shattering of the headquarters of the War Control in Paris, followed
by a swift counterstroke against the Central European Control in Berlin
by the aviation corps, the destruction of capital after capital,
and the final great battle in the air, with the bombing of the Dutch
sea walls.

Thereafter comes the attempt at reconstruction by the Council of
Brissago, a convention of the governing folk of the world--the dream
and deed of the Frenchman _Leblanc_, "a little bald, spectacled man," a
peacemonger whom, till that day of ruin, everyone had thought an amiable
fool.

One monarch, "The Slavic Fox," sees in the assembly a chance to
strike for world sovereignty, and the failure of his bomb-fraught
planes and his final undoing in the secret arsenal are breathless pieces
of description.

A subject for wonder is the astonishing advance in the author's
technique. _The World Set Free_ is on an altogether different plane
from _The War of the Worlds_ and those other gorgeous pot-boilers.
It combines the alert philosophy and adroit criticism of the _Tono
Bungay_ phase with the luminous vision of _Anticipations_ and the
romantic interest of his eccentric books of adventure.

The seer in Mr. Wells comes uppermost, and I almost think that when
the history of the latter half of the twentieth century comes
to be written it will be found not merely that he has prophesied surely,
but that his visions have actually tended to shape the course of
events.

Short of _Holsten's_ "atomic bombs" (which may or may not be developed)
Mr. Wells makes a fair foreshadowing of the uprush of subliminal sanity
which may very well be timed to appear before 1999. I can't take my hat
off to Mr. Wells because I've had it in my hand out of respect for him
these last few years. So I touch my forelock.

* * * * *

_Roding Rectory_ (Stanley Paul) is in many respects the best novel Mr.
Archibald Marshall has written.
It has become known to
the _Crusader's_ crew that the frigate is to make but short stay there--
will not even enter the harbour of Honolulu.  The commission entrusted
to her captain is of no very important nature.  He is simply to leave an
official despatch, with some commands for the British consul: after
which head round again, and straight for Panama.

"Good news; isn't it, Ned?" says Cadwallader to his senior, as the two
on watch together stand conversing.  "With the quick time we've made
from 'Frisco, as the Yankees call it, and no delay to speak of in the
Sandwiches, we ought to get to the Isthmus nearly as soon as the Chilian
ship."

"True; but it will a good deal depend on the time the Chilian ship
leaves San Francisco.  No doubt she'd have great difficulty in getting a
sufficient number of hands.  Blew told you there was but the captain and
himself!"

"Only they; and the cook, an old darkey--a runaway slave, he said.
Besides a brace of great red baboons--orangs.  That was the whole of her
crew, by last report!  Well; in one way we ought to be glad she's so
short," continues the midshipman.  "It may give us the chance of
reaching Panama soon as she, if not before her; and, as the frigate's
destined to put into that port, we may meet the dear girls again, sooner
than we expected."

"I hope and trust we shall.  I'd give a thousand pounds to be sure of
it.  It would lift a load off my mind--the heaviest I've ever had on
it."

"Off mine, too.  But even if we don't reach Panama soon as the Chilian
craft, we'll hear whether she's passed through there.  If she have,
that'll set things right enough.  We'll then know they're safe, and will
be so--`_Hasta Cadiz_'."

"It seems a good omen," says Crozier, reflectingly, "that we are not to
be delayed at the Islands."

"It does," rejoins Cadwallader; "though, but for the other thing, I'd
like it better if we had to stay there--only for a day or two."

"For what reason?"

"There!" says the midshipman, pulling up his shirtsleeve, and laying
bare his arm to the elbow.  "Look at that, lieutenant!"

The lieutenant looks, and sees upon the skin, white as alabaster, a bit
of tattooing.  It is the figure of a young girl, somewhat scantily
robed, with long streaming tresses: hair, contour, countenance,
everything done in the deepest indigo.

"Some old sweetheart?" suggests Crozier.

"It is."

"But _she_ can't be a Sandwich Island belle.  You've never been there?"

"No, she isn't.  She's a little Chilena, whose acquaintance I made last
spring, while we lay at Valparaiso.  Grummet, the cutter's coxswain, did
the tattoo for me, as we came up the Pacific.  He hadn't quite time to
finish it as you see.  There was to be a picture of the Chilian flag
over her head, and underneath the girl's name, or initials.  The rights
of the distillers were recognised by the home government, and their
unsettled claims, to the amount of £7,431, were paid in 1843.

The duty of a member of the government to support, at all events,
the measures of his chief, was asserted by the secretary of state.

If his conscience would not permit his acquiescence, he was expected
to resign.
Thus, while his oath bound him to advise, as a legislator, according
to his convictions, his interest, as a public officer, compelled
him to submit to the impulses of another.

From this condition the chief justice was excepted,--a condition hard to
an honorable man and unfair to the colony. However plausible the
reasons for distinguishing between an official duty and a conscientious
belief, public morality abhors them; and Mr.

"Yes; Inez.  Now you understand why I'd like to spend a day or two among
the South Sea Islanders.  If I can't get the thing rubbed out, I'll be
in a pretty mess about it.  I know Inez would be indulgent in a good
many ways; but when she sees that blue image on my arm, she'll look
black enough.  And what am I to say to her?  I told her, she was the
first sweetheart I ever had; as you know, Ned, a little bit of a fib.
Only a white one; for the Chilena was but a mere fancy, gone out of my
mind long ago; as, no doubt, I am out of hers.  The question is, how's
her picture to be got out of my skin?  I'd give something to know."

"If that's all your trouble, you needn't be at any expense--except what
you may tip old Grummet.  You say he has not completed the portrait of
your Chilena.  That's plain enough, looking at the shortness of her
skirts.  Now let him go on, and lengthen them a little.  Then finish by
putting a Spanish flag over her head, instead of the Chilian, as you
intended, and underneath the initials `I.A.'  With that on your arm, you
may safely show it to Inez."

"A splendid idea!  The very thing!  The only difficulty is, that this
picture of the Chilian girl isn't anything like as good-looking as Inez.
Besides, it would never pass for her portrait."

"Let me see.  I'm not so sure about that.  I think, with a few more
touches, it will stand well enough for your Andalusian.  Grummet's given
her all the wealth of hair you're so constantly bragging about.  The
only poverty's in that petticoat.  But if you get the skirt stretched a
bit, that will remedy it.  You want sleeves, too, to make her a lady.
Then set a tall tortoise-shell comb upon her crown, with a spread of
lace over it, hanging down below the shoulders--the mantilla--and you'll
make almost as good an Andalusian of her as is Inez herself."

"By Jove! you're right; it can be done.  The bit added to the skirt will
look like a flounced border; the Spanish ladies have such on their
dresses.  I've seen them.  And a fan--they have that too.  She must have
one."

"By all means, give her a fan.  And as you're doubtful about the
likeness, let it be done so as to cover her face--at least the lower
half of it; that will be just as they carry it.  You can hide that nose,
which is a trifle too snub for your _fiancee_.  The eyes appear good
enough."

"The Chilena had splendid eyes!"

"Of course, or she wouldn't have her portrait on your arm.  But how did
the artist know that?  Has he ever seen the original?"

"No; I described her to him; and he's well acquainted with the costume
the Chilian girls wear.  He's seen plenty of such.  I told him to make
the face a nice oval, with a small mouth, and pretty pouting lips; then
to give her great big eyes.  You see he's done all that."

"He has, certainly."

"About the feet?  They'll do, won't they?  They're small enough, I
should say."

"Quite small enough; and those ankles are perfection.  They ought to
satisfy your Andalusian--almost flatter her."

"Flatter her!  I should think not.  They might your Biscayan, with her
big feet; but not Inez; who's got the tiniest little understandings I
ever saw under the skirt of a petticoat--tall as she is."

"Stuff!" scornfully retorts Crozier; "that's a grand mistake people make
about small feet.  It's not the size, but the shape, that's to be
admired.  They should be in proportion to the rest of the body;
otherwise they're a monstrosity--as among the Chinese, for instance.
And as for small feet in men, about which the French pride, and pinch
themselves, why every tailor's got that."

"Ha, ha ha!" laughs the young Welshman.  "A treatise on Orthopoedia, or
whatever it's called.  Well, I shall let the Chilena's feet stand, with
the ankles too, and get Grummet to add on the toggery."

"What if your _Chilena_ should chance to set eyes on the improved
portrait?  Remember we're to call at Valparaiso!"

"By Jove!  I never thought of that."

"If you should meet her, you'll do well to keep your shirt-sleeves down,
or you may get the picture scratched--your cheeks along with it."

"Bah! there's no danger of that.  I don't expect ever to see that girl
again--don't intend to.  It wouldn't be fair, after giving that
engagement ring to Inez.  If we do put into Valparaiso, I'll stay aboard
all the time the frigate's in port.  That will insure against any--"

"_Land ho_!"

Their dialogue is interrupted.  The lookout on the masthead has sighted
Mauna-Loa.


CHAPTER FORTY EIGHT.

A CREW THAT MEANS MUTINY.

A Ship sailing down the Pacific, on the line of longitude 125 degrees
West.  Technically speaking, not a _ship_, but a _barque_, as may be
told by her mizzen-sails, set fore and aft.

Of all craft encountered on the ocean, there is none so symmetrically
beautiful as the _barque_.  Just as the name looks well on the page of
poetry and romance, so is the reality itself on the surface of the sea.
The sight is simply perfection.

And about the vessel in question another graceful peculiarity is
observable: her masts are of the special kind called _polacca_--in one
piece from step to truck.

Such vessels are _common enough_ in the Mediterranean, and not rare in
Spanish-American ports.  They may be seen at Monte Video, Buenos Ayres,
and Valparaiso--to which last this barque belongs.  For she is Chilian
built; her tall tapering masts made of trees from the ancient forests of
Araucania.  Painted upon the stern is the name _El Condor_; and she is
the craft commanded by Captain Antonio Lantanas.

This may seem strange.  In the harbour of San Francisco the _Condor_ was
a ship.  How can she now be a barque?

The answer is easy, as has been the transformation; and a word will
explain it.  For the working of her sails, a barque requires fewer hands
than a ship.  Finding himself with a short crew, Captain Lantanas has
resorted to a stratagem, common in such cases, and converted his vessel
accordingly.  The conversion was effected on the day before leaving San
Francisco; so that the _Condor_, entering the Golden Gate a ship, stood
out of it a barque.  As such she is now on the ocean, sailing southward
along the line of longitude 125 degrees West.  In the usual track taken
by sailing-vessels between Upper California and the Isthmus, she has
westered, to get well clear of the coast, and catch the regular winds,
that, centuries ago, wafted the spice-laden Spanish galleons from the
Philippines to Acapulco.  A steamer would hug the shore, keeping the
brown barren mountains of Lower California in view.  Instead, the
_Condor_ has sheered wide from the land; and, in all probability, will
not again sight it till she's bearing up to Panama Bay.

It is the middle watch of the night--the first after leaving San
Francisco.  Eight bells have sounded, and the chief mate is in charge,
the second having turned in, along with the division of crew allotted to
him.  The sea is tranquil, the breeze light, blowing from the desired
quarter, so that there is nothing to call for any unusual vigilance.

True, the night is dark, but without portent of storm.  It is, as Harry
Blew knows, only a thick rain-cloud, such as often shadows this part of
the Pacific.

But the darkness need not be dreaded.  They are in too low a latitude to
encounter icebergs; and upon the wide waters of the South Sea there is
not much danger of collision with ships.

Notwithstanding these reasons for feeling secure, the chief officer of
the _Condor_ paces her decks with a brow clouded, as the heavens over
his head; while the glance of his eye betrays anxiety of no ordinary
kind.  It cannot be from any apprehension about the weather.  He does
not regard the sky, nor the sea, nor the sails.  On the contrary, he
moves about, not with bold, manlike step, as one having command of a
vessel, but stealthily, now and then stopping and standing in crouched
attitude, within the deeper shadow thrown upon the decks by masts,
bulwarks, and boats.  He seems less to occupy himself about the ropes,
spars, and sails, than the behaviour of those who work them.  Not while
they are working them either, but more when they are straying idly along
the gangways, or clustered in some corner, and conversing.  In short, he
appears to be playing spy on them.

For this he has his reasons.  And for all good ones.  Before leaving
port he had discovered the incapacity of the crew, so hastily scraped
together.  A bad lot, he could see at first sight--rough, ribald, and
drunken.  In all there are eleven of them, the second mate included; the
last, as already stated, a Spaniard, by name Padilla.  There are three
others of the same race--Spaniards, or Spanish-Americans--Gil Gomez,
Jose Hernandez, and Jacinto Velarde; two Englishmen, Jack Striker and
Bill Davis; a Frenchman, by name La Crosse; a Dutchman, and a Dane; the
remaining two being men whose nationality is difficult to determine, and
scarce known to themselves--such as may be met on almost every ship that
sails the sea.

The chief officer of the _Condor_, accustomed to a man-o'-war, with its
rigid discipline, is already disgusted with what is going on aboard the
merchantman.  He was so before leaving San Francisco, having also some
anxiety about the navigation of the vessel.  With a crew so incapable,
he anticipated difficulty, if not danger.  But now that he is out upon
the open ocean, he is sure of the first, and keenly apprehensive of the
last.  For, in less than a single day's sailing, he has discovered that
the sailors, besides counting short, are otherwise untrustworthy.
Several of them are not sailors at all, but "longshore" men; one or two
mere "land-lubbers," who never laid hand upon a ship's rope before
clutching those of the _Condor_.  With such, what chance will there be
for working the ship in a storm?  But there is a danger he dreads far
more than the mismanagement of ropes and sails--insubordination.  Even
thus early, it has shown itself among the men, and may at any moment
break out into open mutiny.  All the more likely from the character of
Captain Lantanas, with which he has become well acquainted.

The Chilian skipper is an easy-going man, given to reading books of
natural history, and collecting curiosities--as evinced by his brace of
Bornean apes, and other specimens picked up during his trading trip to
the Indian Archipelago.  A man in every way amiable, but just on this
account the most unfitted to control a crew, such as that he has shipped
for the voyage to Valparaiso.

Absorbed in his studies, he takes little notice of them, leaving them in
the hands, and to the control, of his _piloto_, Harry Blew.

But the ex-man-o'-war's man, though a typical British sailor, is not one
of the happy-go-lucky kind.  He has been entrusted with something more
than the navigation of the Chilian ship--with the charge of two fair
ladies in her cabin; and although these have not shown themselves on
deck, he knows they are safe, and well waited on by the black cook; who
is also steward, and who, under his rough sable skin, has a kindly,
gentle heart.

It is when thinking of his cabin passengers, that the _Condor's_ first
officer feels apprehensive, and then not from the incapacity of her
sailors, but their bold, indeed almost insolent, behaviour.  Their
having shown something of this at first might have been excusable, or at
all events, capable of explanation.  They had not yet sobered down.
Fresh from the streets of San Francisco, so lawless and licentious, it
could not be expected.  But most of them have been now some days
aboard--no drink allowed them save the regular ration, with plenty of
everything else.  Kind treatment from captain and mate, and still they
appear scowling and discontented, as if the slightest slur--an angry
word, even a look--would make mutiny among them.

What can it mean?  What do the men want?

A score of times has Harry Blew thus interrogated himself, without
receiving satisfactory answer.  It is to obtain this, he is now gliding
silently about the decks, and here and there concealing himself in
shadow, with the hope of overhearing some speech that will give him
explanation of the conspiracy--if conspiracy it be.

And in this hope he is not deceived or disappointed, but successful
beyond his most sanguine expectations.  For he at length obtains a clue,
not _only_ to the insubordination of the sailors, but all else that has
been puzzling him.

And a strange problem it is, its solution appalling.

He gets the latter while standing under a piece of sailcloth, spread
from the rail to the top of the round-house--rigged up by the carpenter
as a sun screen, while doing some work during the heat of the day, and
so left.  The sky being now starless and pitch-black, with this
additional obstruction to light, Harry Blew stands in obscurity
impenetrable to the eye.  A man passing, so close as almost to touch,
could not possibly see him.

Nor is he seen by two men, who, like himself, sauntering about, have
come to a stop under the spread canvas.  Unlike him, however, they are
not silent, but engaged in conversation, in a low tone, still loud
enough for him to hear every word said.  And to every one he listens
with interest so engrossing, that his breath is well nigh suspended.

He understands what is said; all the easier from their talk being
carried on in English--his own tongue.  For they who converse are Jack
Striker and Bill Davis.

And long before their dialogue comes to a close, he has not only
obtained intelligence of what has hitherto perplexed him, but gets a
glimpse of something beyond--that which sets his hair on end, almost
causing the blood to curdle in his veins.


CHAPTER FORTY NINE.

TWO "SYDNEY DUCKS."

Jack Striker and Bill Davis are "Sydney Ducks," who have seen service in
the chain-gangs of Australia.  They have also served as sailors, this
being their original calling.  But since a certain voyage to the Swan
River settlement--in which they were but passengers, sent out at the
expense of Her Britannic Majesty's Government--they have had aversion to
the sea, and only take to it intermittently--when under the necessity of
working passage from port to port for other purposes.  Escaping from a
colonisation forced upon them, and quite uncongenial, they had thus made
their way into California; and, after a run up the Sacramento, and a
spell at gold-seeking, with but indifferent success, had returned to San
Francisco; in the Queen City of the Pacific--finding ways of life they
liked better than the hard labour of pick, pan, and cradle.  Loitering
among its low sailor-haunts, they encountered a pleasant surprise, by
meeting a man who offered them five thousand dollars each to ship in a
merchant-vessel, for the "short trip" to Panama!  A wage so
disproportioned to the service asked for, of course called for
explanation; which the princely contractor gave, after having secured
their confidence.  It proved satisfactory to the Sydney Ducks, who,
without further questioning, entered into the contract.  The result was
their getting conducted aboard the _Condor_--she being the vessel bound
for the port of Panama.

He who had given them this handsome engagement was not the owner of the
ship; no more was he her captain or supercargo; but a gentleman
representing himself authorised to accept their services, for a somewhat
different purpose than the mere working of her sails; and who promised
to pay them in a peculiar manner--under certain contingencies, even more
than the sum stipulated, notwithstanding its magnificence.

The conditions were partially made known to them before setting foot on
the ship; and though an honest sailor would scornfully have rejected
them--even in the face of such tempting reward--Jack Striker and Bill
Davis have accepted them without scruple or cavil.  For they are not
honest sailors; but ex-convicts, criminals still unreformed, and capable
of any misdeed--piracy, or murder--if only money can be made thereby.

Since coming aboard the _Condor_, and mixing with her crew, they have
had additional insight into the character of their contract, and the
services required of them.  They find that several other men have been
engaged in a somewhat similar way; and at a like bounteous wage--for a
while wondering at it--till after a mutual comparison of notes, and
putting together their respective scraps of intelligence, with surmises
added, they have arrived at a pretty accurate understanding of how the
land lies, and why their _entrepreneur_--who is no other than the second
mate, Padilla--has been so liberal.

Striker, who has seen more of the world, and is the elder of the two
"ducks," has been the first to obtain this added information; and it is
for the purpose of communicating it to his old chum of the chain-gang,
he has asked the latter to step aside with him.  For chancing to be cast
together in the middle watch, an opportunity offers, which the older
convict has all that day been looking out for.

Davis, of more talkative habit, is the first to break silence; which he
does on the instant of their ducking under the sailcloth.

"Well, old pal! what d'ye think of our present employ?  Better than
breakin' stone for them Swan River roads, with twenty pound of iron
chain clinkin' at a fellow's ankles.  An't it?"

"Better'n that, yes; but not's good as it might be."

"Tut, man, you're always grumblin'.  Five thousand dollars for a trip
that isn't like to run up to a month--not more than a fortnight or three
weeks, I should say!  If that don't content you, I'd like to know what
would."

"Well, mate; I'll tell'ee what wud.  _Thirty_ thousand for the trip.
An' Jack Striker an't like to be satisfied wi' anythin' much short o'
that sum."

"You're joking, Jack?"

"No, I an't, Bill.  As you knows, I'm not o' the jokin' sort; an' now
mean what I say, sartin as I ever meant anythin' in my life.  Both me
an' you oughter get thirty thousand apiece o' this yellow stuff--that at
the werry least."

"Why, there wouldn't be enough to go round the lot that's in."

"Yes, thar wud, an' will.  Old as I am, I hain't yit quite lost hearin'.
My yeers are as sharp as they iver wor, an' jist as reliable.  Larst
night I heerd a whisper pass atween Padilla an' another o' them Spanish
chaps, that's put me up to somethink."

"What did you hear?"

"That the swag'll tot up to the total o' three hundred thousand
dollars."

"The deuce it will!  Why, they said it wasn't half that much.  Padilla
himself told me so."

"No matter what he's told you.  I tell ye now, it's all o' the six
figures I've sayed.  In coorse, it's their interest to make it out small
as they possibly can; seein' as our share's to be a percentage.  I know
better now; an' knowin' it, an't agoin' to stan' none o' theer nonsense.
Neyther shud you, Bill.  We both o' us are 'bout to risk the same as
any o' the t'others."

"That's true enough."

"In coorse it is.  An' bein' so, we oughter share same as them; can, an'
will, if we stick well thegither.  It's jest as eezy one way as
t'other."

"There's something in what you say, mate."

"Theer's every thin' in it, an' nothin' more than our rights.  As I've
sayed, we all risk the same, an' that's gettin' our necks streetched.
For if we make a mucker o' the job, it'll be a hangin' matter sure.  An'
I dar say theer's got to be blood spilt afore it's finished."

"What would you advise our doing?  You know, Jack, I'll stand by you,
whatever you go in for."

"Well; I want it to be a fair divide, all round; detarmined it shell be.
Why shud the four Spanish fellas get a dollar more'n us others?  As
I've obsarved, two of them, Gomez an' Hernandez, have set theer eyes on
the weemen folks.  It's eezy to see that's part o' theer game.  Beside,
I heerd them talkin' o't.  Gomez be arter the light girl, an' Hernandez
the dark un.  'Bout that, they may do as they like for ought's I care.
But it's all the more reezun why they oughtent be so greedy 'bout the
shinin' stuff.  As for Mister Gomez, it's plain he's the head man o' the
lot; an' the second mate, who engaged us, is only same's the others, an'
'pears to be controlled by him.  'Twar 'tween them two I overheerd the
confab; Gomez sayin' to Padilla that the dust lyin' snug in the
cabin-lockers was full valley for three hundred thousan'.  An' as
theer's eleven o' us to share, that 'ud be nigh on thirty thousan'
apiece, if my 'rithmetic an't out o' recknin'.  Bill Davis; I say, we
oughter stan' up for our rights."

"Certainly we should.  But there'll be difficulty in getting them, I
fear."

"Not a bit--not a morsel, if we stick out for 'em.  The four Spanyards
means to go snacks 'mong themselves.  But theer be seven o' us
outsiders; an' when I tell the others what I've tolt you, they'll be all
on our side--if they an't the foolishest o' fools."

"They won't be that, I take it.  A difference of twenty thousand dollars
or so in their favour, will make them sensible enough.  But what's to be
the upshot, or, as they call it in the theatre play-bills, what's the
programme!"

"Well, mate, so far as I've been put up to it, we're to run on till we
get to the coast, somewheer near the Issmus o' Panyma.  Theer we'll
sight land, and soon's we do, the ship's to be scuttled--we first
securin' the swag,' an' takin' it ashore in one o' the boats.  We're to
land on some part o' the coast that's known to Gomez, he says.  Then
we're to make for some town, when we've got things straight for puttin'
in appearance in a explainable way.  Otherways, we might get pulled up,
an' all our trouble 'ud be for nowt.  Worse, every man-Jack on us 'ud
have a good chance to swing for it."

"And the young ladies?"

"They're to go along wi' Gomez an' Hernandez.  How they mean to manage
it, I can't tell ye.  They'll be a trouble, no doubt, as allers is wi'
weemen, an' it be a pity we're hampered wi' 'em; mor'n that, it's
reg'lar dangersome.  They may get the hul kit o' us into a scrape.
Howsever, we'll hev to take our chances, since theer's no help for it.
The two chaps 'pear to be reg'lar struck with 'em.  Well, let 'em carry
off the gurls an' welcome.  But, as I've sayed, thet oughter make 'em
less objectin' to a fair divide o' the dust."

"What's to be done with the others--the old Spaniard and skipper, with
the black cook and first mate?"

"They're to go down wi' the ship.  The intenshun is, to knock all o' 'em
on the head, soon's we come in sight o' land."

"Well, Jack, for the first three I don't care a brass farthing.  They're
foreigners and blacks; therefore, nothing to us.  But, as Blew chances
to be a countryman of ours, I'd rather it didn't go so hard with him."

"Balderdash, Bill Davis!  What have you or me to do wi' feelins o' that
sort?  Countryman, indeed!  A fine country, as starves ten millions o'
the like o' us two; an' if we try to take what by nateral right's our
own, sends us out o' it wi' handcuffs round our wrists, an' iron
jewellery on our ankles!  All stuff an' psalm-singin' that 'bout one's
own country, an' fella-countryman.  If we let him off, we might meet him
somewhere, when we an't a-wantin' to.  He'll have to be sarved same as
the t'other three.  There be no help for't, if we don't want to have
hemp roun' our thrapples."

"I suppose you're right, Striker; though it does seem a pity too.  But
what reason have the Spaniards for keepin' the thing back?  Why should
they wait till we get down by Panama?  As the yellow stuff's lyin'
ready, sure it might be grabbed at once, an' then we'd have more time to
talk of how it's to be divided?  What's the difficulty about our taking
it now?"

"'Tant the takin' o' it.  That'll be eezy work; an' when the time comes,
we'll have it all our own way.  We could toss the four overboard in the
skippin' o' a flea.  But then, how's the ship to be navvygated without
the skipper an' first mate?"

"Surely we can do without them?"

"That's jest what we can't.  O' all our crew, theer's only them two as
hev the knowledge o' charts an' chronometers, an' the like; for him as
is actin' second confesses he don't know nothin' 'bout sich.  Adderley,
amounting to a censure on the minister. Both Lord John Russell and Earl
Grey promised to remove the grievance, and the _Neptune_ was ordered
to sail for Van Diemen's Land (November 3, 1849). The inhabitants gave
money to be distributed to the prisoners at their destination (February,
1850). This done, they joined in illuminations, public thanksgivings,
and congratulatory addresses to the governor, who reproved their zeal,
but rejoiced at their success. A prosecution of Mr. Fairbairn, for
conspiracy to compel an unlawful act, was begun, but fell to
the ground.

A settler who supplied the government was honored with knighthood: an
example was offered to the empire of passive but victorious resistance.

The despatch of Earl Grey repudiating his own stipulation excited
the rage of New South Wales. Mr.

Charles Cowper carried resolutions rejecting transportation in any form
whatever through the legislative council without opposition.

On the arrival of the _Hashemy_, a convict vessel, the inhabitants of
Sydney to the number of some thousands assembled (June 11, 1849), and
by a deputation to Sir Charles Fitz Roy, demanded that the prisoners
should be sent away, if necessary at the colonial cost.

Sir Charles was alarmed and increased his guards; he refused
admittance to the deputation, and represented their constituents
as a factious and feeble minority.

The _Randolph_ on a similar errand entered Port Phillip; the people
resolved to oppose the landing. They applied to Sir Charles Fitz Roy,
then on a visit to their district, to prevent their invasion. They
were sustained by the forcible remonstrance of Mr. Latrobe, and the vessel
was sent to another part of the territory.

No single cause will fully account for the intense and universal
opposition to the plans of Earl Grey.

The vacillation of his lordship in reference to the emigrant clause,
produced feelings of exasperation and distrust, but the sad experience
of Van Diemen's Land was accepted as a warning by other portions
of the empire.

A pamphlet, recording the proceedings of the Tasmanian colonists, was
everywhere scattered. It minutely examined the penal policy of the crown,
and recorded the various demonstrations against convictism (June,
1847).

A large package of this pamphlet was forwarded by the Launceston
Association to the Cape of Good Hope, and arrived a few weeks before
the _Neptune_.

Thus foreign fuel was added to the local fire--the testimony of men
who had practically known the system, and by whom it was abhorred.

The committee appointed by the Lords (1847), by the witnesses they
examined, authenticated the evidence against it.

The fate of Van Diemen's Land did not command peculiar interest amidst
the wreck of thrones and the overthrow of empires; but the supposed
connection between the criminals and insurgents of France alarmed the
aristocracy, and disposed them to cling to transportation.

The Bishop of Tasmania bore testimony to its colonial mischief.
Lord Brougham endeavored to draw admissions favorable to his views with
professional acuteness; but he was foiled, and the bishop pronounced
the solemn warning that those who cast a prisoner, especially a
woman, into a community where criminal principles prevail, pronounce
a sentence for both worlds.

The Tasmanian colonists were soon instructed by the press that the theory
of dispersion was exploded. They were astonished to find fresh
convict vessels hovering on their shores; but more still were they amazed
to learn that Earl Grey seriously professed that by sending all the
convicts to Van Diemen's Land he substantially realised dispersion.

He indeed promised to provide an equal amount of emigration, but they
knew that these projects were illusive. They had before them the
addition of convict ticket holders, by hundreds, to thousands and
tens of thousands already in the colony; there to struggle with
their predecessors for bread.

Such was the prospect of 1848.

SECTION IV.

"I hope," said Lord John Russell, "that when the house does come
seriously to consider any bill having the question of transportation
directly in view, it will consider the benefit of the colonies as well
as of the mother country. I own I think it has been too much the
custom both to pass acts imposing the penalty of transportation with a
view rather to the convenience of this country than to the reformation
of persons known to be of vicious habits, or to the interest of the
colonies to which they were sent.

We are bound to consider those interests likewise. We are bound when we
are planting provinces, perhaps what may in future time be empires,
to endeavour that they should not be merely seats of malefactors and
of convicts, but communities fitted to set an example of virtue
and happiness, and not to make plantations, as Lord Bacon says, of
the scum of the land" (June, 1847).

Such were the sentiments of the prime minister on penal colonisation.
The secretary of the home department and the secretary for the
colonies had been equally explicit.

Could they really believe their own doctrine, when their practice was
exactly opposite to its plainest dictates?

The revolution in the policy of the crown everywhere excited astonishment
and indignation. The minister, who denounced penal colonisation as a
national crime--who had pleaded the cause of the colony and pledged the
redress of its grievances--who, in short, had professed himself a
disciple of Archbishop Whately--continued to pour convicts by
thousands where for every free man there were two in bond.
Destitute of legislative and physical power, the colonists could do
nothing but deprecate. Every principal town and public body renewed
their entreaties. To give them in full would be but to repeat
statements of similar import. However variously expressed, they could
scarcely deepen the unavoidable convictions of the world.

In their numerous petitions the colonists referred to the public joy which
had greeted an offer of abolition,--accepted not less as a signal
interference of providence than as a proof of the equity of the
British government.

They slightly censured Sir William Denison who had called for
four thousand convicts annually, against the petitions of 5,320 colonists,
624 parents and guardians, representing 3,355 souls; against the memorials
of the clergy of every sect, the oldest magistrates, and most opulent
settlers, and public meetings everywhere decisive, and they entreated
deliverance from an experiment more hopeless than its predecessors.
They reminded the government of Great Britain that the colony was
now entitled to abolition, not only as a measure politic in itself, but
as guaranteed by the deliberate and solemn promise of the minister,
promulgated by the representative of the crown.

A massive volume would be insufficient to contain the petitions,
letters, and despatches produced in this controversy.

Colonists well qualified to maintain the popular cause devoted to
this question the best years of life.

Sir William Denison, although opposed to one form of transportation,
maintained its substance with a pertinacity which never wavered.
He stood almost alone. He adopted the opinion that the supply of labor
to the colonies of this hemisphere was within the special province of
his government. The tendency of high wages to demoralise the workman
and retard the prosperity of employers, are prominent topics in
all his discourses and writings.

Thus the masses of the people inferred that his schemes were hostile to
their welfare, and that the depression of the working classes was
a primary object of his policy.

The opulent settlers had abandoned these considerations under the
influence of higher aims.
They were resolved to trust to the experience of other colonies
where--with a demand for labor--a rapid enlargement of capital and
diminished crime seemed to prove that the moral and material interests
of the wealthy and industrial classes were not incompatible.

The social recovery of the colony could only be effected by the influx
of families, and a comfortable subsistence was indispensable to attract
them. The arguments of the governor, addressed to momentary interests,
were overpowered by a desire to stand on a level with free peoples.
The disputants on both sides were in possession of facts favorable to
their respective opinions. Whatever evils were proved against
transportation, the labor it afforded had been long employed. Habit
had reconciled the minds of many to its inferiority; and the means
of supplying its place were confessedly contingent and remote.

A new society, having no disabilities to remove, no moral stain to
obliterate, and formed of elements in natural proportion, could not
hesitate a moment. Economical experience would dictate the rejection
of slaves. But to clear away the refuse of a long-existing social
state, and to build anew, was a formidable undertaking, however
certain of reward. Many landholders and masters foresaw the trials
attending the transition, but were willing to encounter them to attain
an object beyond all price.

"We wish it," said one of their manifestos, "to go forth to
England, and to England's Queen, that we are not expecting solicitation
or waiting for bribes; but knowing what we do, and prizing as man must
ever prize the sources of gain, our resolution is taken,--relying on
the sympathy of mankind, we cast ourselves on the goodness of
Almighty God, and dare all hazards, _that our children may be
virtuous, and their country free_."

The expression of colonial feeling was accepted by most respectable
dissentients as decisive. The settlers least averse to transportation
were disgusted with the ever-changing views of the ministers. In the
preceding ten years they had never known an hour's repose. In '38,
the parliamentary committee condemned assignment.

In '40, Lord John Russell stopped transportation. In '41, Captain
Maconochie's mark system was in the ascendant. In '42, Lord Stanley's
probation scheme sprang up.

In '45, Mr.

Gladstone projected the North Australian colony for ticket-holders. In
'46, Earl Grey propounded the Tasmanian convict village scheme.

In '47, he announced total abolition.

In '48, another complete revolution took place, and all convicts
were to be sent to Van Diemen's Land.

This extravagance of upstart theory and fitful experiment without end,
all tended to check colonial enterprise and destroy the public
tranquillity.

In whatever sense Earl Grey announced abolition in '47, it was clear that
free emigration was essential to his plan when he proposed to resume
it in '48.

The funds he assigned for this purpose were sums,--the cost of their
exile--to be exacted from ticket-holders as the price of freedom. But
these funds were wholly prospective. Insuperable difficulties opposed
their collection. Nor was the principle just. The sickly and unskilful
would have stood at a greater distance from liberation than the clever
and robust. The successful thief could purchase his freedom, and leave
behind his more honest shipmates.

The criminal being confounded with the debtor, a penal sentence
would have ended in a civil process. Earl Grey proposed to add to the
free population by the expenditure of £10,000, granted by the
parliament, but it was found that the families of convicts were to
be the chief participants.

Thus resumption cut off all hope of free emigration. Nor was it even
desirable while the laboring classes were in poverty. The settlers had
the example of New South Wales before them; where even the sudden
stoppage of transportation had been followed by rapid recovery.

They were willing to combat their difficulties alone. "Such," said they,
"will at no distant period be the condition of this country
should the government prove just.

And then, with its fertile valleys, clothed with abundance and filled
with life, and its pure salubrious atmosphere giving length of days,
it will need no other attractions than nature has conferred--no
other commerce than the commerce of freedom--no patronage save the
enterprise of its children.

From the crown we ask nothing except to spare us from further wrong, and
to accept our grateful loyalty in return for the uplifting of a burden
too heavy to bear."
The governor himself was adverse to the ticket system.

The control exercised over the holders was limited to the most ineffectual
and distant surveillance.

They were free in reference to the colonists, and were subject to the
same laws for the regulation of service.
Restrictions were imposed on their locomotion, but without much
practical restraint.

Sir William Denison now recommended to the secretary of state to
send all convicts to New South Wales, where wages were high and
labor scarce, until the colonies being equal, the market of Van
Diemen's Land might again share in absorbing them.

To this plan the colony would have been disposed to assent at this stage
of the struggle. By most persons it was thought reasonable, on national
grounds, that the theory of dispersion should be tried, wherever
it might inflict no peculiar caste or moral stain.

Mr. Sharland, a strenuous abolitionist, prepared a series of resolutions
against the new form of convictism. The governor promised to
support them in the nominee council, and they passed unanimously (October,
1848).

The first totally objected to the ticket system, as in the highest
degree injurious to the convicts and the colony, and without advantage
to Great Britain.

The second recommended the dispersion of convicts throughout the
colonies, accompanied by well-selected emigrants. The commentary of the
governor explained these resolutions as a compromise between persons
of adverse views. A large number of non-official magistrates--117 out
of 140--signed the condemnatory clause only. They declined to countenance
the revival of transportation, or, by discussing theories of secondary
punishment, to weaken the moral claim held in the pledge of Earl
Grey.

The increasing numbers of ticket-holders confirmed these objections.

They were landed, and forwarded in considerable bodies to seek employment
in the interior. Their decent apparel and quiet demeanour made them
less objects of aversion than pity. Unacquainted with colonial labor,
they were often unable to procure employment. Amongst men of this class
many, of course, were disorderly and reckless, and when they were
not readily relieved, they were insolent and threatening.

They could, indeed, throw up their tickets, and claim food of the government,
but only by a process which exposed them to censure and punishment.
"Unfortunate men," said the London Agency Association, "unacquainted with
useful labor, wander from farm to farm, asking for a night's shelter or
a morsel of bread.

The relief of these men by the settlers is prompted alike by their humanity
and their fears."[257] These statements were disputed by the governor,
but they were sustained by numerous certificates, and, in a form more
qualified, by several police magistrates.
"Puttin' it in gold, as much as you can carry; ay, enough to make you
stagger under it."

"An' you ask if I'm good for a job like that?  Funny question to ask--it
are; 'specially puttin' it to ole Jack Striker.  He's good for't--wi'
the gallows starin' him full in the face.  Danged if he an't!"

"Well; I thought you wouldn't be the one to show basket-faced 'bout it.
It's a big thing I hev on hand, an' there'll be a fortin' for all who go
in for it."

"Show Jack Striker the chance o' goin' in, an' he'll show you a man as
knows no backin' out."

"Enough, shipmate.  The chance is close to hand; aboard o' this ship.
Below, in her cabin-lockers, there's stowed somethin' like half a ton o'
glitterin' gold-dust.  It belongs to the old Spaniard that's passenger.
What's to hinder us to lay hands on it?  If we can only get enough o'
the crew to say _yes_, there needs be no difficulty.  Them as won't 'll
have to stan' aside.  Though, from what I see o' them, it's like they'll
all come in.  Divided square round, there'd be atween twenty an' thirty
thousand dollars apiece.  Do that tempt ye.  Striker?"

"Rayther.  Wi' thirty thousand dollars I'd ne'er do another stroke o'
work."

"You needn't then.  You can have all o' that, by joinin' in, an' helpin'
me to bring round the rest.  Do you know any o' them ye could speak to
'bout the bizness--wi' safety, I mean?"

"I do.  Two or three.  One sartin'; my ole chum, Bill Davis.  He can be
trusted wi' a secret o' throat-cuttin', let alone a trifle such as you
speak o'.  An' now, Master Blew, since you've seen fit to confide in me,
I'm goin' to gi'e ye a bit o' my confidince.  It's but fair 'tween two
men as hev got to understan' one the tother.  I may as well tell ye that
I know all about the stuff in the cabin-lockers--hev knowed it iver
since settin' fut in the _Condor's_ forc's'l.  Me an' Bill war talkin'
o't jist afore I coomed to the wheel.  You an't the only one as hez set
theer hearts on hevin' it.  Them Spanish chaps hez got it all arranged
arready--an' had afore they shipped 'board this barque.  Thar's the four
o' 'em, as I take it, all standin' in equal; while the rest o' the crew
war only to get so much o' a fixed sum."

"Striker, ye 'stonish me!"

"Well, I'm only tellin' ye what be true, an' what I knows to be so.  I'm
gled you're agreeable to go in wi' us; the which 'll save trouble, an'
yer own life as well.  For I may as well tell ye, Master Blew, that
they'd made up thar minds to send ye to the bottom o' the briny, 'long
wi' skipper an' the ole Spaniard, wi' the black throwed into the
bargain."

"That's a nice bit o' news to hear, by jingo!  Well, Jack, I'm thankful
to ye for communicatin' it.  Lord! it's lucky for me we've this night
chanced to get talkin' thegether."

"Thar may be luck in't all roun'.  Bill an' me'd made up our minds to
stan' out for a equal divide o' the dust--like shares to ivery man.
Shud there be any dispute 'bout that bein' fair, wi' you on our side,
we'll eezy settle it our way, 'spite o' them Spanyards.  If they refuse
to agree, an' it coomes to fightin', then Jack Striker's good for any
two on 'em."

"An' Harry Blew for any other two.  No fear but we can fix that.  How
many do you think will be with us?"

"Most all, I shud say, 'ceptin' the Spanyards themselves.  It consarns
the rest same's it do us.  At all events, we're bound to ha' the
majority."

"When do you propose we should begin broachin' it to them?"

"Straight away, if you say the word.  I'll try some o' 'em soon as I've
goed off from heer.  Thar be several on the watch as 'll be takin' a
drop o' grog thegether, 'fore we turns in.  No better time nor now."

"True.  So set at 'em at once, Striker.  But mind ye, mate, be cautious
how ye talk to them, an' don't commit ayther of us too far, till you've
larnt their temper.  I'll meet ye in the first dog-watch the morrow.
Then you can tell me how the land's likely to lie."

"All right.  I'll see to it in the smooth way.  Ye can trust Jack
Striker for that."

"Take another suck o' the Santa Cruz.  If this trip proves prosp'rous in
the way we're plannin' it, neyther you nor me 'll need to go without the
best o' good liquor for the rest o' our lives."

Again Striker clutches at the proffered bottle, and holds it to his
head--this time till he has drained it dry.

Returned to him empty, Harry Blew tosses it overboard.  Then parting
from the steersman, he commences moving forward, as with the design to
look after other duties.

As he steps out from under the shadow of the spanker, the moon gleaming
athwart his face, shows on it an expression which neither pencil nor pen
could depict.  Difficult indeed to interpret it.  The most skilled
physiognomist would be puzzled to say, whether it is the reproach of
conscious guilt, or innocence driven to desperation.


CHAPTER FIFTY TWO.

SHARE AND SHARE ALIKE.

In the _Condor's_ forecastle.

It is her third night since leaving San Francisco, and the second watch
is on deck; the men on the first having gone down below.  That on duty
is Padilla's; in it Gomez, Hernandez, Velarde, and the two sailors of
nationality unknown.

The off-watch consists of Striker, Davis, the Frenchman, who is called
La Crosse, with the Dutchman and Dane.

All these five are in the forepeak, the chief mate, as they suppose,
having retired to rest.

They have been below for some time, and it is now near eleven o'clock of
the night.  All have finished their suppers, and are seated, some on the
sides of their bunks, some on sea-chests.  A large one of the latter,
cleated in the centre of the floor, does service as a table.  Upon it is
a black bottle containing rum--the sailor's orthodox drink.  In his
hand, each holds his pannikin, while in every mouth there is a pipe, and
the forecastle is full of smoke.  A pack of playing-cards lies on the
lid of the chest; greasy and begrimed, as if they had seen long service;
though not any on this particular night, are in the hands of those
sitting around, who show no inclination to touch them.  They may have
been used by the men of the watch now on deck; this, probably enough,
since the cards are Spanish, as told by their picturing.

Those occupying the forecastle now have something on their minds more
important than card-playing: a question of money; but not money to be
made in that way.  What they are thinking about, and talking of, is the
gold-dust in the cabin-lockers; not how it is to be got out of them, but
how it shall be distributed after it is out.

This is not the first time the subject has been before them.  There has
been talk of it all that day; though only between them in twos, and
informally.  Since finding out how things stood, and especially after
his confab with the first mate, Striker, as promised, has been sounding
his shipmates, one after another.  He has communicated his purpose to
all, and had their approval of it--the four Spaniards excepted.  These
he has not yet approached; but this night intends doing so--as the
others insist that an immediate understanding be arrived at, and the
thing definitely settled.

The five are now waiting till those on the watch, not required for
deck-duty, come below.  All of them have had intimation they will be
wanted in the forecastle; and as the night is fine, with no occasion for
changing sails or other occupation, only the helmsman need absent
himself from a muster, whose summons to most of the second watch has
appeared a little strange.

They obey it, notwithstanding; and after a while the two sailors come
down--the nondescripts without name; though one goes by the sobriquet of
"Old Tarry," the other having had bestowed upon him the equally
distinctive, but less honourable, appellation of "Slush."

Shortly after, the second mate, Padilla, makes his appearance, along
with him Velarde; the former a man who has seen some forty winters,
rugged in frame, with bronzed complexion, and features forbidding, as
any that ever belonged to freebooters; the latter in this respect not so
unlike him, only younger, of a more slender frame, and less rude in
speech, as in manner.

Soon as setting foot on the forecastle's floor, Padilla, as an officer
of the ship, speaking in tone of authority, demands to know why they
have been summoned thither.

Striker, putting himself forward as the spokesman of the off-watch,
replies:

"Hadn't ye better sit down, master mate?  The subjeck we're goin' to
discuss may take a start o' time an' it's as cheap sittin' as standin'.
Maybe ye won't mind joinin' us in a drink?"

Saying this, the ex-convict clutches at the bottle pours some rum into
his pannikin, and offers it to Padilla.

The Spaniard accepting, drinks; and passing the cup to Velarde, sits
down.

The latter imitating him as to the drink, takes seat by his side; Old
Tarry and Slush having already disposed of themselves.

"Now," pursues the second mate, "let's hear what it's all about."

"Theer be two not yit among us," says Striker.  "In coorse, one's at the
wheel."

"Yes; Gomez is there," responds Padilla.

"Where be Hernandez?"

"I don't know.  Likely, along with him."

"Don't much matter," puts in Davis.  "I dar' say we can settle the thing
without either.  You begin, Jack; tell Mr Padilla, and the rest, what
we've been talking about."

"'Twon't take a very long time to tell it," responds Striker.  "Theer be
no great need for wastin' words.  All I've got to say are, that the
_swag shud be eekilly divided_."

Padilla starts, Velarde doing the same.

"What do you mean?" asks the former, putting on an air of innocence.

"I means what I've saved--that the swag shud be eekilly divided."

"And yet I don't understand you."

"Yis, ye do.  Come, Master Padilla, 'tain't no use shammin' ignorance--
not wi' Jack Striker, at all events.  He be too old a bird to get
cheated wi' chaff.  If ye want to throw dust into my eyes, it must be o'
the sort that's stowed aft in the cuddy.  Now, d'ye understan' me?"
Padilla looks grave, so does Velarde.  Old Tarry and Slush show no sign
of feeling; both being already prepared for the demand Striker intended
to make, and having given their promise to back it.

"Well," says the second mate, "you appear to be talking of some
gold-dust.  And, I suppose, you know all about it!"

"That we do," responds Striker.

"Well, what then?" asks Padilla.

"Only what I've sayed," rejoins the Sydney Duck.  "If you weesh, I can
say it over 'gain.  That theer yellow stuff shud be measured out to the
crew o' this craft share and share alike, even hands all roun' without
respectin' o' parsons.  An', by God! it shall be so deevided--shall,
will, an' must."

"Yes!" endorses Davis, with like emphatic affirmation.

"It shall, and it must!"

"_Pe gar_, most it!" adds the Frenchman; followed in the same strain by
Stronden the Dane, and Van Houton the Dutchman, chorused by Old Tarry
and Slush.

"It an't no use your stannin' out, masters," continues Striker,
addressing himself to the two Spaniards.  "Ye see the majority's against
ye; an' in all cases o' the kind, wheresomever I've seed 'em, the
majority means the right.  Besides, in this partickler case we're askin'
no moren' what's right--refarrin' to the job afore us.  I'm willin' to
conceed, that you Spanish chaps hev hed most to do wi' the first
plannin' o' the thing; as alser, that ye brought the rest o' us into it.
But what signify the bringin' in compared wi' the gettin' out?  In sich
scrapes, 'taint the beginnin' but the eend as is dangersome.  An' we've
all got to unnergo that danger; the which I needn't particklarly speak
o', as every man o' ye must feel it 'bout the nape o' his neck, seein'
the risk he'll hev to run o' gettin' that streetched.  It's eequil all
roun', and tharfor the reward for runnin' it shed be eequil too.  So say
Jack Striker."

"So I, and I, and I," echo the others; all save Padilla and Velarde, who
remain silent and scowling.

"Yis," continues Striker, "an' theer be one who 'ant present among us,
as oughter have his share too.  I don't mean either Mr Gomez or
Hernandez.  Them two shud be contented, seein' as they're more after the
weemen than the money, an' nobody as I know o' carin' to cut 'em out
there.  It's true him I refer to hez come into the thing at the 'leventh
hour, as ye may say--after 'twar all planned.  But he mote a gied us
trouble by stannin' apart.  Tharfore, I say, let's take him in on shares
wi' the rest."

"Whom are you speaking of?" demands Padilla.

"I needn't tell ye," responds the senior of the Sydney Ducks!  "If I
an't mistook, that's him a comin' down, an' he can speak for hisself."

At the words, a footstep is heard upon the forecastle stair.  A pair of
legs is seen descending; after them a body--the body of Harry Blew!

Padilla looks scared; Velarde the same.  Both fancy their conspiracy
discovered, their scheme blown; and that Striker, with all his talk, has
been misleading them.  They almost believe they are to be set upon and
put in irons; and that for this very purpose the first officer is
entering the forecastle.

They are soon undeceived, however, on hearing what he has to say.
Striker draws it out, repeating the conversation passed, and the demand
he has been making.

Thus Harry Blew gives rejoinder:

"I'm with ye, shipmates, to the end, be that sweet or bitter.  Striker
talks straight, an' his seems the only fair way of settlin' the
question.  The majority must decide.  There's two not here, an' they've
got to be consulted.  They're both by the wheel.  Tharfore, let's go
aft, an' talk the thing there.  There's no fear for our bein'
interrupted.  The skipper's asleep, an' we've got the ship to
ourselves."

So saying, he leads up the ladder, the rest rising from their seats, and
crowding after.

Once on deck, they cluster around the forehatch, and there stop; the
first mate having something to say to them before proceeding farther.

The second does not take part in this conference; but stealing past
unseen, glides on towards the after-part of the ship.

Soon the others saunter in the same direction, in twos and threes,
straggling along the waist, but again gathering into a group around the
capstan.  There the moonlight, falling full upon their faces, betrays
the expression of men in mutiny; but mutiny unopposed.  For on the
quarterdeck no one meets them.  The traitorous first officer has spoken
truly: the captain is asleep; they have the ship to themselves!


CHAPTER FIFTY THREE.

"CASTLES IN SPAIN."

Gomez is still at the wheel; his "trick" having commenced at the change
of the watches.  As known, he is not alone, but with Hernandez beside
him.

Both are youngish men, neither above thirty; and both of swarthy
complexion, though with beards of different colours; that of Gomez
black, the other reddish-brown.  Besides having heavy moustaches, their
whiskers stand well forward on their jaws, and around their throats;
growing so luxuriantly as to conceal the greater portion of their faces;
the expression upon which it is difficult to determine.  Equally to tell
aught of their figures, draped as these are in rough sailor toggery, cut
wide and hanging loosely about their bodies.  Both, however, appear of
about medium height, Gomez a little the taller, and more strongly built.
On their heads are the orthodox "sou'-wester" hats; that of Gomez drawn
slouching over eyes that almost continually glow with a sullen lurid
light, as if he were always either angry or on the point of becoming so.
At the same time he habitually keeps his glance averted, as though
wishing to conceal either his thoughts or his features; it may be both.

Acting in the capacity of a common sailor, he has nevertheless hitherto
appeared to control the second mate, as most others of the crew, and
more especially the Spaniards.

This, alleged by Striker, has been observed by Harry Blew himself; so
that of the conspirators Gomez is unquestionably chief.  Though Padilla
engaged the hands, the instructions must have proceeded from him, and
all were shipped on conditions similar to those accepted by the Sydney
Ducks.

Five thousand dollars, for less than a month's service, would be wages
too unprecedentedly large to be offered without creating suspicion of
some sinister intent.  Nor did he, who offered it, leave this point
untouched.  While promising such big bounty, he exacted a promise in
return: that each recipient of it was to bear a hand in _whatever he
might be called on to do_.

The men so indefinitely engaged, and on such latitudinarian terms, were
not the ones to stick at trifles; and most of them stepped aboard the
Chilian ship prepared to assist in the perpetrating of any known crime
in the calendar.  Since becoming better acquainted with the particulars
of what they have been shipped for, not one of them has shown
disposition to back out of it.  They are still ready to do the deed;
but, as seen, under changed conditions.

Gomez is not yet aware of the strike that has taken place; though during
the day he has heard some whisperings, and is half expecting trouble
with his confederates.  Hernandez also, though it is not of this they
are now conversing as they stand together at the wheel.

The theme which engages them is altogether different; beauty, not booty,
being the subject of their discourse, which is carried on in a low tone,
though loud enough to be heard by anyone standing near.

But they are not afraid.  _No_ one is within earshot.  Their comrades of
the watch are away in the forward part of the vessel, while those of the
off-watch are below in her forepeak--the skipper asleep in his cabin--
the passengers in theirs.

It is about two of these last they are talking; and in terms, that, for
common sailors, might seem strange--rough ribald men bandying free
speech, and making familiar remarks, about such delicate high-born dames
as Carmen Montijo and Inez Alvarez!

But not strange to one acquainted with Gil Gomez and Jose Hernandez--and
too intelligible if knowing their intention towards these ladies.  It
may be learnt by listening to their conversation; Hernandez, who has
introduced the subject, asking:

"About the _muchachas_?  What are we to do with them after getting
ashore?"

"Marry them, of course," promptly answers the other.  "That's what I
mean doing with the beautiful Dona Carmen.  Don't you intend the same
with Dona Inez?"

"Of course--if I can."

"Can!  There need be no difficulty about it, _camarado_."

"I hope not; though I think there will, and a good deal.  There's
certain to be some."

"In what way?"

"Suppose they don't give their consent!"

"A fig for their consent!  We shall force it!  Don't be letting that
scare you.  Whether they're agreeable or not, we'll have a marriage
ceremony, or the form of one--all the same.  I can fix that, or I'm much
mistaken about the place we're going to, and the sort of men we may
expect to meet there.  When I last looked on Santiago De Veragua--
bidding adieu to a place that was rather pleasant--I left behind a few
old familiars, who are not likely to have forgotten me, though long
years have rolled by since.  Some there, who will still be willing, and
ready, to do me a service, I doubt not; especially now I have the means
to pay for it, and handsomely.  If the Padre Padierna be yet alive,
he'll marry me to Carmen Montijo without asking _her_ any questions; or,
if he did, caring what answers she might give to them.  It's now nine
years since I saw the worthy Father, and he may have kicked up his heels
long ago; though that's not likely.  He was a tough old sinner, and knew
how to take care of himself.  However, it won't matter much.  If he's
under ground, I've got another string to my bow, in the young _extra_,
Gonzaga; who, in my time, had charge of souls in a _parrochia_, nearer
the place where I hope we shall be able to make shore.  He may by this
have risen to be grand church dignitary.  Whether or not, I've but
little fear of his having forgotten old times, when he and I used to go
shares in certain little adventures of the amorous kind.  So you
perceive, _mio amigo_, we're not drifting towards a desert coast,
inhabited only by savages; but one where we'll find all the means and
appliances of civilisation--among them a priest, to do the little bit of
ecclesiastical service we may stand in need of, and without asking
awkward questions, or caring a _claco_ for consequences.  Neither of the
two I've spoken of will trouble their consciences on that score, so long
as it's _me_.  More especially after I've shown them the colour of the
stuff with which our pockets will be so plentifully lined.  And if
neither of my old acquaintances turn up, there are no end of others,
who'll be willing to tie the knot that's to make us happy for life.  I
tell you, _hombre_, we're steering straight towards an earthly paradise.
You'll find Santiago all that."

"I hope it may be, as you say."

"You may rest sure of it.  Once in the old Veraguan town, with these
women as our wives--and they no longer able to question our calling them
so--we can enter society without fear of showing our faces.  And with
this big _bonanza_ at our backs, we may lead a luxurious life there; or
go anywhere else it pleases us.  As for returning to your dear
California, as you call it, you won't care for that when you've become a
Benedict."

"You've made up your mind, then, that we marry them?"

"Of course I have, and for certain reasons.  Otherwise, I shouldn't so
much care, now that they're in our power, and we can dictate terms to
them.  You can do as you please respecting marriage, though you have the
same reasons as myself, for changing your senorita into a senora."

"What do you allude to?"

"To the fact that both these damsels have large properties in Spain, as
a worthy friend in San Francisco made me aware just before leaving.  The
Dona Carmen will inherit handsomely at her father's death, which is the
same as if said and done now.  I don't refer to his gold-dust, but a
large landed property the old gentleman is soon coming into in Biscay;
and which, please God, I shall some day look up and take possession of.
While the other has no end of acres in Andalusia, with whole streets of
houses in Cadiz.  To get all that, these women must be our wives;
otherwise, we should have no claim to it, nor yet be able to show our
faces in Spain."

"Of course I'm glad to hear about all that," rejoins Hernandez; "but, if
you believe me, it's not altogether the money that's been tempting me
throughout this whole affair.  I'm mad in love with Inez Alvarez;--so
mad, that if she hadn't a _claco_ in the world I'm willing to be her
husband."

"Say, rather, her master; as I intend to be of Carmen Montijo.  Ah! once
we get ashore, I'll teach her submission.  The haughty dame will learn
what it is to be a wife.  And if not an obedient one, _por Dios_! she
shall have a divorce, that is, after I've squeezed out of her the
Biscayan estate.  Then she can go free, if it so please her."

On pronouncing this speech, the expression on the speaker's countenance
is truly satanic.  It seems to foreshadow a sad fate for Carmen Montijo.

For some seconds there is silence between the plotters.  Again breaking
it, Hernandez says:

"I don't like the idea of our putting the old gentleman to death.  Is
there no other way we could dispose of him?"

"Pah, _hombre_!  You're always harping on the strings of humanity;
striking discordant sounds too.  There's no other way by which we can be
ourselves safe.  If we let him live, he'd be sure to turn up somewhere,
and tell a tale that would get both our throats grappled by the
_garrota_.  The women might do the same, if we didn't make wives of
them.  Once that, and we can make exhibit of our marriage certificates,
their words will go for nought.  Besides, having full marital powers, we
can take precautions against any scandal.  Don Gregorio has got to die;
the skipper too; and that rough fellow, the first mate--with the old
blackamoor _cocinero_."

"_Maldita_!  I don't feel up to all that.  It will be rank wholesale
murder."

"Nothing of the sort--only drowning.  And we needn't do that either.
They can be tied before we scuttle the ship, and left to go down along
with her.  By the time she sinks, we'll be a long way off; and you, my
sensitive and sentimental friend, neither see nor hear anything to give
your tender heart a horror."

"The thought of it's enough."

"But how is it to be helped?  If they're allowed to live, we'd never be
out of danger.  Maybe, you'd like to abandon the business altogether,
and resign thought of ever having the pretty Inez for a wife?"

"There you mistake, _amigo_.  Sooner than that, I'll do the killing
myself.  Ay, kill _her_, rather than she shall get away from me."

"Now you're talking sense.  But see!  What's up yonder?"

The interrogatory is from seeing a group of men assembled on the
fore-deck, alongside the hatch.  The sky cloudless, with a full moon
overhead, shows it to be composed of nearly, if not all, the _Condor's_
crew.  The light also displays them in earnest gesticulation, while
their voices, borne aft, tell of some subject seriously debated.

What can it be?  They of the last dog-watch, long since relieved, should
be asleep in their bunks.  Why are they now on deck?  Their presence
there, gives surprise to the two at the wheel.

And while engaged in expressing it, and interrogating one another, they
perceive the second mate coming aft--as also, that he makes approach in
hurried, yet stealthy manner.

"What is it?" asks Gomez.

"A strike," answers Padilla.  "A mutiny among the men we engaged to
assist us."

"On what grounds?"

"They've got to know all about the gold-dust--even to the exact quantity
there is of it."

"Indeed!  And what's their demand?"

"That we shall share it with them.  They say they'll have it so."

"The devil they do!"

"The old _ladrone_, Striker, began it.  But what will astonish you still
more; the first mate knows all our plans, and's agreed to go in along
with us.  He's at the head of the mutineers, too, and insists on the
same thing.  They swear, if we don't divide equally, the strongest will
take what they can.  I've hastened hither to ask you what we'd best do."

"They're determined, are they?"

"To the death--they all say so."

"In that case," mutters Gomez, after a moment or two spent in
reflection, "I suppose we'll have to yield to their demands.  I see no
help for it.  Go straight back, and say something to pacify them.  Try
to put things off, till we have time to consider.  _Maldita_! this is an
unexpected difficulty--ugly as sin itself!"

Padilla is about to return to his discontented shipmates on the
forward-deck; but is saved the journey, seeing them come aft.  Nor do
they hesitate to invade the sacred precincts of the quarter; for they
have no fear of being forbidden.  There they pause for a few seconds,
and then continue on.

Soon they mount to the poop-deck, and cluster around the wheel; the
whole crew now present--mates as men--all save the captain and cook.
And all take part in the colloquy that succeeds, either in speech or by
gesture.

The debate is short, and the question in dispute soon decided.  Harry
Blew and Jack Striker are the chief spokesmen; and both talk
determinedly; the others, with interests identical, backing them up by
gestures, and exclamations of encouragement.

"Shipmates!" says the first officer, "this thing we're all after should
be equally divided between us."

"Must be," adds Striker, with an oath.  "Share and share alike.  That's
the only fair way.  An' the only one we'll gie in to."

"Stick to that, Striker!" cries Davis: "we'll stand by ye."

"_Pe gar! certainement_," endorses the Frenchman, "Vat for no?  _Sacre
bleu_! ve vill.  I am for _les droits de matelot_--_le vrai chose
democratique_.  Vive le fair play!"

Dane and Dutchman, with Tarry and Slush, speak in the same strain.

The scene is as short, as violent.  The Spaniards perceiving themselves
in a minority, and a position that threatens unpleasant consequences,
soon yield, declaring their consent to an equal distribution of the
"dust."

After which, the men belonging to the off-watch retire to the
forecastle, and there betake themselves to their bunks; while the others
scatter about the decks.

Gil Gomez remains at the wheel, his time not yet being up; Hernandez
beside him.  For some moments, the two are silent, their brows shadowed
with gloom.  It is not pleasant to lose fifty thousand dollars apiece;
and something like this have they lost within the last ten minutes.
Still there is a reflection upon which they can fall back well
calculated to soothe them--other bright skies ahead.

Gomez first returning to think of this, says:

"Never mind, _amigo_.  There will be money enough to serve our present
purposes all the same.  And for the future we can both build on a good
sure foundation."

"On what?"

"On our `Castles in Spain!'"


CHAPTER FIFTY FOUR.

COLDLY RECEIVED.

The _mal de mer_ is no respecter of persons.  Voyagers of every age, and
either sex, must pay toll to it; the which it indiscriminately, if not
equally, exacts from the strong robust youth, and the frail delicate
maiden.  Even beauty must submit to this merciless malady; at whose
touch red lips turn pale, and rose-tinted cheeks show wan and wasted.
Afflicting, on first acquaintance with it, it is always more or less
disagreeable, and ever ready at offering its hand to those who go down
to the sea in ships--that hand whose very touch is palsy.

The voyage Carmen Montijo and Inez Alvarez are now making is not their
first.  Both have been at sea before--in the passage out from Spain.
But this does not exempt them from the terrible infliction, and both
suffer from it.

Stricken down by it, they are for several days confined to the cabin;
most of the time to their state-room; and, as ill-luck would have it,
without any one of their own sex to wait upon them--a want due to
circumstances partially accidental, but wholly unexpected.  The Chilian
skipper, not accustomed to have a stewardess on his ship, had never
thought of such a thing; his whole attention being taken up in
collecting that crew, so difficult to obtain; while their own
waiting-maid, who was to have accompanied the young ladies on their
voyage, failed them at the eleventh hour; having preferred undertaking a
journey of a different kind--not to Spain, but the altar of Hymen.  At
the last moment of embarkation, she was missing; her Californian
_amante_ having persuaded her to remain behind.

Withal, the lady voyagers have not been so badly attended.  The old
negro cook--acting also as steward, comes up to the occasion; for he has
a tender heart under his rough sable skin, and waits upon them with
delicate assiduity.

And Captain Lantanas is equally assiduous in his attentions, placing
most of his time at their disposal, with whatever else he can think of
likely to alleviate their suffering.

In due course they recover; Carmen first, from being of more robust
habit and stronger constitution.  But both are at length able to show
themselves out of their state-room, and after a day or two waiting for
fine weather, they venture upon deck.

During this sojourn below, they have had no communication with any one,
save Don Gregorio--who has been like themselves, invalided--and of
course the captain and cook.  But not any of the officers, or sailors,
of the ship.  Indeed, on these they have never set eyes, excepting on
that day when they sailed out through the Golden Gate.  But, then, their
thoughts were otherwise occupied--too much engrossed with certain
personages absent, to care for any that were present; least of all the
sailors of the ship--these scarce getting a glance from them.

Still there is one they have a strong desire to see, and also speak
with.  Not a common sailor, but the _piloto_, or first officer, of the
vessel--for they are aware the English seaman has been promoted to this
responsible post.

During their forced confinement in the state-room, they have often held
discourse about him; this connected with a subject that gives them the
greatest concern, and no little pain.  There is still rankling in their
breasts that matter unexplained; no letters left by their lovers at
their abrupt departure, save the one for Don Gregorio, with salutation
to themselves, so coldly, ceremoniously formal.  It is to inquire about
that, they are so anxious for an interview with Harry Blew, hoping,
almost believing him to have been entrusted with some verbal message he
has not yet delivered.

From the terms in which Crozier spoke of him while giving account of how
he had saved his life, it is natural to suppose, that between preserved
and preserver there should be confidence of a very intimate kind.
Therefore Carmen still more than half believes the sailor has a word for
herself--kept back for the want of opportunity.  She recalls certain
things he said jocularly, on the day he brought Crozier's letter to the
house, and while she was herself showing him hospitality.  These went so
far as to show, that the ex-man-o'-war's man was not altogether ignorant
of the relations existing between her and his old officer.  And now she
longs to renew conversation with him, hoping to hear more of those same
pleasant words--perhaps get explanation of the others not so pleasant--
in the letter.  Inez is affected with a like longing, for she too feels
the slight they conveyed--if not so much as her aunt, still enough to
wish for their true interpretation.

Both thus basing their hopes on Harry Blew, they have been for some time
on the lookout for him, though as yet unsuccessfully.  Several times
have they ascended to the deck; but without seeing him, or only afar
off, and, to all appearance, busily engaged with his duties about the
ship.

Of course they do not expect him to come to them; and, with the secret
purpose they have conceived, dislike summoning him; while he on his part
appears to keep aloof, or, at all events, does not draw near--perhaps
not desiring to be deemed intrusive.  For, although first officer of the
vessel, he is still only a rough sailor, and may think himself ill
qualified for the company of ladies.

Whatever the reason, they have been several times above, without finding
an opportunity to speak with him; and for this they wait with irksome
impatience.

At length, however, it seems to have arrived.  They have come out on the
quarter, in front of the round-house door, and are seated on chairs
which the considerate skipper brought up for them.  He is himself by
their side, endeavouring to entertain them by pointing out the various
objects on his vessel, and explaining their uses.

They give but little heed to the technical dissertations of the
well-meaning man, and only a passing glance at the objects indicated.
Even the two gigantic apes, that go gambolling about the decks--
exhibiting uncouth gestures, and uttering hoarse cries--fail to fix
their attention; though Captain Lantanas tells them many curious tales
of these creatures--_myas_ monkeys, he calls them, which he has brought
with him from Borneo.  Too simple-minded to observe the inattention of
his listeners, he is proceeding still farther to illustrate the habits
of the orangs, when his lecture on natural history is interrupted, by
the necessity for his taking an observation of the sun.  It is a few
minutes before mid-day, and he must needs determine his latitude.  So
making apology to the ladies, he hurries down to the cabin to get his
quadrant.

His leaving them is a relief, for they see the first mate moving about,
and have hopes of being able to accost, and enter into conversation with
him.  True, he seems busy as ever; but it is nigh the hour when the men
of the forecastle go down to their dinners, and then they may have the
opportunity while he is disengaged.

For some time they sit watching, and waiting.  He is in the waist with
several of the sailors around him, occupied about one of the boats,
there slung upon its davits.

While regarding him and his movements, the ladies cannot avoid also
observing those of the men, nor help being struck by them.  Not so much
their movements, as their appearance, and the expression seen on some of
their countenances.  On no one of them is it pleasant, but on the
contrary scowling and savage.  Never before have they seen so many faces
wearing such disagreeable looks, that is, gathered in one group--and
they have passed through the streets of San Francisco, where the worst
types may be met.  Many of them--indeed nearly all--are not only
unprepossessing, but positively forbidding; and the young girls, not
desiring to encounter certain glances, sent towards them, with an
impudent effrontery, turn their eyes away.

Just then, Harry Blew, separating from the sailors, is seen coming aft.
Upon the whole, I conclude, that the idea of all infinite number of parts
is individually the same idea with that of an infinite extension; that
no finite extension is capable of containing an infinite number
of parts; and consequently that no finite extension is infinitely
divisible [Footnote 3.].

[Footnote 3. It has been objected to me, that infinite divisibility
supposes only an infinite number of PROPORTIONAL not of ALIQIOT parts,
and that an infinite number of proportional parts does not form
an infinite extension.

But this distinction is entirely frivolous. Whether these parts be calld
ALIQUOT or PROPORTIONAL, they cannot be inferior to those minute
parts we conceive; and therefore cannot form a less extension by
their conjunction.]

I may subjoin another argument proposed by a noted author [Mons.
MALEZIEU], which seems to me very strong and beautiful. It is evident,
that existence in itself belongs only to unity, and is never applicable
to number, but on account of the unites, of which the number is
composed.

Twenty men may be said to exist; but it is only because one, two, three,
four, &c. are existent, and if you deny the existence of the latter,
that of the former falls of course. It is therefore utterly
absurd to suppose any number to exist, and yet deny the existence of
unites; and as extension is always a number, according to the
common sentiment of metaphysicians, and never resolves itself into
any unite or indivisible quantity, it follows, that extension can
never at all exist.

It is in vain to reply, that any determinate quantity of extension is an
unite; but such-a-one as admits of an infinite number of fractions, and
is inexhaustible in its sub-divisions. For by the same rule these twenty
men may be considered as a unit. The whole globe of the earth, nay the
whole universe, may be considered as a unit. That term of unity
is merely a fictitious denomination, which the mind may apply to
any quantity of objects it collects together; nor can such an unity
any more exist alone than number can, as being in reality a true
number.

But the unity, which can exist alone, and whose existence is necessary
to that of all number, is of another kind, and must be perfectly indivisible,
and incapable of being resolved into any lesser unity.

All this reasoning takes place with regard to time; along with an
additional argument, which it may be proper to take notice of. It is a
property inseparable from time, and which in a manner constitutes
its essence, that each of its parts succeeds another, and that none
of them, however contiguous, can ever be co-existent.

For the same reason, that the year 1737 cannot concur with the present
year 1738 every moment must be distinct from, and posterior or antecedent
to another. It is certain then, that time, as it exists, must be composed
of indivisible moments.
For if in time we could never arrive at an end of division, and if each
moment, as it succeeds another, were not perfectly single and indivisible,
there would be an infinite number of co-existent moments, or parts of
time; which I believe will be allowed to be an arrant contradiction.

The infinite divisibility of space implies that of time, as is
evident from the nature of motion.

If the latter, therefore, be impossible, the former must be equally
so.

I doubt not but, it will readily be allowed by the most obstinate
defender of the doctrine of infinite divisibility, that these
arguments are difficulties, and that it is impossible to give any
answer to them which will be perfectly clear and satisfactory.

But here we may observe, that nothing can be more absurd, than this
custom of calling a difficulty what pretends to be a demonstration, and
endeavouring by that means to elude its force and evidence.

It is not in demonstrations as in probabilities, that difficulties can
take place, and one argument counter-ballance another, and diminish
its authority.

A demonstration, if just, admits of no opposite difficulty; and if not
just, it is a mere sophism, and consequently can never be a difficulty.
It is either irresistible, or has no manner of force. To talk therefore
of objections and replies, and ballancing of arguments in such a
question as this, is to confess, either that human reason is nothing
but a play of words, or that the person himself, who talks so, has
not a Capacity equal to such subjects.

Demonstrations may be difficult to be comprehended, because of
abstractedness of the subject; but can never have such difficulties
as will weaken their authority, when once they are comprehended.

It is true, mathematicians are wont to say, that there are here
equally strong arguments on the other side of the question, and
that the doctrine of indivisible points is also liable to unanswerable
objections.

Before I examine these arguments and objections in detail, I will
here take them in a body, and endeavour by a short and decisive
reason to prove at once, that it is utterly impossible they can
have any just foundation.

It is an established maxim in metaphysics, That whatever the mind clearly
conceives, includes the idea of possible existence, or in other
words, that nothing we imagine is absolutely impossible.

We can form the idea of a golden mountain, and from thence conclude that
such a mountain may actually exist. We can form no idea of a mountain
without a valley, and therefore regard it as impossible.

Now it is certain we have an idea of extension; for otherwise why
do we talk and reason concerning it?

It is likewise certain that this idea, as conceived by the imagination,
though divisible into parts or inferior ideas, is not infinitely divisible,
nor consists of an infinite number of parts: For that exceeds the
comprehension of our limited capacities. Here then is an idea
of extension, which consists of parts or inferior ideas, that are
perfectly, indivisible: consequently this idea implies no
contradiction: consequently it is possible for extension really to
exist conformable to it: and consequently all the arguments employed
against the possibility of mathematical points are mere scholastick
quibbles, and unworthy of our attention.

These consequences we may carry one step farther, and conclude that
all the pretended demonstrations for the infinite divisibility of
extension are equally sophistical; since it is certain these
demonstrations cannot be just without proving the impossibility of
mathematical points; which it is an evident absurdity to pretend
to.

SECT. III. OF THE OTHER QUALITIES OF OUR IDEA OF SPACE AND TIME.

No discovery coued have been made more happily for deciding all
controversies concerning ideas, than that abovementioned, that
impressions always take the precedency of them, and that every idea,
with which the imagination is furnished, first makes its appearance
in a correspondent impression.

These latter perceptions are all so clear and evident, that they admit
of no controversy; though many of our ideas are so obscure, that it
is almost impossible even for the mind, which forms them, to tell exactly
their nature and composition. Let us apply this principle, in order
to discover farther the nature of our ideas of space and time.

Upon opening my eyes, and turning them to the surrounding objects, I
perceive many visible bodies; and upon shutting them again, and
considering the distance betwixt these bodies, I acquire the idea of
extension.

As every idea is derived from some impression, which is exactly similar
to it, the impressions similar to this idea of extension, must either
be some sensations derived from the sight, or some internal impressions
arising from these sensations.

Our internal impressions are our passions, emotions, desires and aversions;
none of which, I believe, will ever be asserted to be the model, from
which the idea of space is derived. There remains therefore nothing
but the senses, which can convey to us this original impression.

Now what impression do oar senses here convey to us? This is the principal
question, and decides without appeal concerning the nature of the
idea.

The table before me is alone sufficient by its view to give me the idea
of extension. This idea, then, is borrowed from, and represents some
impression, which this moment appears to the senses. But my senses
convey to me only the impressions of coloured points, disposed in a,
certain manner. If the eye is sensible of any thing farther, I desire
it may be pointed out to me.

But if it be impossible to shew any thing farther, we may conclude
with certainty, that the idea of extension is nothing but a copy of
these coloured points, and of the manner of their appearance.

Suppose that in the extended object, or composition of coloured
points, from which we first received the idea of extension, the
points were of a purple colour; it follows, that in every repetition
of that idea we would not only place the points in the same order
with respect to each other, but also bestow on them that precise
colour, with which alone we are acquainted.

But afterwards having experience of the other colours of violet,
green, red, white, black, and of all the different compositions
of these, and finding a resemblance in the disposition of coloured
points, of which they are composed, we omit the peculiarities of
colour, as far as possible, and found an abstract idea merely on
that disposition of points, or manner of appearance, in which they
agree.

Nay even when the resemblance is carryed beyond the objects of one sense,
and the impressions of touch are found to be Similar to those of sight
in the disposition of their parts; this does not hinder the abstract
idea from representing both, upon account of their resemblance. All
abstract ideas are really nothing but particular ones, considered in
a certain light; but being annexed to general terms, they are able
to represent a vast variety, and to comprehend objects, which, as
they are alike in some particulars, are in others vastly wide of
each other.

The idea of time, being derived from the succession of our perceptions
of every kind, ideas as well as impressions, and impressions of reflection
as well as of sensations will afford us an instance of an abstract
idea, which comprehends a still greater variety than that of space, and
yet is represented in the fancy by some particular individual idea of a
determinate quantity and quality.

As it is from the disposition of visible and tangible objects we receive
the idea of space, so from the succession of ideas and impressions we
form the idea of time, nor is it possible for time alone ever to make
its appearance, or be taken notice of by the mind. A man in a sound
sleep, or strongly occupyed with one thought, is insensible of
time; and according as his perceptions succeed each other with
greater or less rapidity, the same duration appears longer or shorter
to his imagination.

It has been remarked by a great philosopher, that our perceptions have
certain bounds in this particular, which are fixed by the original
nature and constitution of the mind, and beyond which no influence
of external objects on the senses is ever able to hasten or retard
our thought.

If you wheel about a burning coal with rapidity, it will present to
the senses an image of a circle of fire; nor will there seem to
be any interval of time betwixt its revolutions; meerly because it
is impossible for our perceptions to succeed each other with the
same rapidity, that motion may be communicated to external objects.

Wherever we have no successive perceptions, we have no notion of time,
even though there be a real succession in the objects. From these
phenomena, as well as from many others, we may conclude, that time cannot
make its appearance to the mind, either alone, or attended with a
steady unchangeable object, but is always discovered some PERCEIVABLE
succession of changeable objects.

To confirm this we may add the following argument, which to me seems
perfectly decisive and convincing. It is evident, that time or
duration consists of different parts: For otherwise we coued not conceive
a longer or shorter duration. It is also evident, that these parts
are not co-existent: For that quality of the co-existence of parts
belongs to extension, and is what distinguishes it from duration.

Now as time is composed of parts, that are not coexistent: an unchangeable
object, since it produces none but coexistent impressions, produces none
that can give us the idea of time; and consequently that idea must
be derived from a succession of changeable objects, and time in its
first appearance can never be severed from such a succession.

Having therefore found, that time in its first appearance to the
mind is always conjoined with a succession of changeable objects,
and that otherwise it can never fall under our notice, we must now
examine whether it can be conceived without our conceiving any
succession of objects, and whether it can alone form a distinct
idea in the imagination.

In order to know whether any objects, which are joined in impression,
be inseparable in idea, we need only consider, if they be different
from each other; in which case, it is plain they may be conceived
apart.

Every thing, that is different is distinguishable: and everything, that
is distinguishable, may be separated, according to the maxims above-explained.
If on the contrary they be not different, they are not distinguishable:
and if they be not distinguishable, they cannot be separated. But this
is precisely the case with respect to time, compared with our
successive perceptions. The idea of time is not derived from a particular
impression mixed up with others, and plainly distinguishable from
them; but arises altogether from the manner, in which impressions
appear to the mind, without making one of the number.

Five notes played on a flute give us the impression and idea of time;
though time be not a sixth impression, which presents itself to the hearing
or any other of the senses. Nor is it a sixth impression, which
the mind by reflection finds in itself. These five sounds making their
appearance in this particular manner, excite no emotion in the mind, nor
produce an affection of any kind, which being observed by it can
give rise to a new idea.

For that is necessary to produce a new idea of reflection, nor can the
mind, by revolving over a thousand times all its ideas of sensation,
ever extract from them any new original idea, unless nature has so
framed its faculties, that it feels some new original impression arise
from such a contemplation. But here it only takes notice of the manner,
in which the different sounds make their appearance; and that it
may afterwards consider without considering these particular sounds,
but may conjoin it with any other objects.

The ideas of some objects it certainly must have, nor is it possible
for it without these ideas ever to arrive at any conception of
time; which since it, appears not as any primary distinct impression,
can plainly be nothing but different ideas, or impressions, or
objects disposed in a certain manner, that is, succeeding each
other.

I know there are some who pretend, that the idea of duration is
applicable in a proper sense to objects, which are perfectly
unchangeable; and this I take to be the common opinion of philosophers
as well as of the vulgar.

But to be convinced of its falsehood we need but reflect on the
foregoing conclusion, that the idea of duration is always derived
from a succession of changeable objects, and can never be conveyed
to the mind by any thing stedfast and unchangeable.

For it inevitably follows from thence, that since the idea of duration
cannot be derived from such an object, it can never-in any propriety or
exactness be applied to it, nor can any thing unchangeable be ever
said to have duration.

Ideas always represent the Objects or impressions, from which they are
derived, and can never without a fiction represent or be applied to any
other.

By what fiction we apply the idea of time, even to what is unchangeable,
and suppose, as is common, that duration is a measure of rest as well as
of motion, we shall consider [Sect 5.] afterwards.

There is another very decisive argument, which establishes the
present doctrine concerning our ideas of space and time, and is founded
only on that simple principle, that our ideas of them are compounded
of parts, which are indivisible. This argument may be worth the
examining.

Every idea, that is distinguishable, being also separable, let us take
one of those simple indivisible ideas, of which the compound one
of extension is formed, and separating it from all others, and
considering it apart, let us form a judgment of its nature and
qualities.

It is plain it is not the idea of extension. For the idea of extension
consists of parts; and this idea, according to t-he supposition,
is perfectly simple and indivisible.

Is it therefore nothing? That is absolutely impossible. For as the
compound idea of extension, which is real, is composed of such ideas;
were these so many non-entities, there would be a real existence
composed of non-entities; which is absurd.

Here therefore I must ask, What is our idea of a simple and indivisible
point? No wonder if my answer appear somewhat new, since the question
itself has scarce ever yet been thought of. We are wont to dispute
concerning the nature of mathematical points, but seldom concerning
the nature of their ideas.

The idea of space is conveyed to the. mind by two senses, the sight
and touch; nor does anything ever appear extended, that is not
either visible or tangible.

That compound impression, which represents extension, consists of
several lesser impressions, that are indivisible to the eye or
feeling, and may be called impressions of atoms or corpuscles endowed
with colour and solidity.

But this is not all. It is not only requisite, that these atoms should
be coloured or tangible, in order to discover themselves to our senses;
it is also necessary we should preserve the idea of their colour
or tangibility in order to comprehend them by our imagination.

There is nothing but the idea of their colour or tangibility, which can
render them conceivable by the mind.

Upon the removal of the ideas of these sensible qualities, they are
utterly annihilated to the thought or imagination.

Now such as the parts are, such is the whole.

If a point be not considered as coloured or tangible, it can convey to us
no idea; and consequently the idea of extension, which is composed
of the ideas of these points, can never possibly exist.

But if the idea of extension really can exist, as we are conscious it does,
its parts must also exist; and in order to that, must be considered
as coloured or tangible.

We have therefore no idea of space or extension, but when we regard
it as an object either of our sight or feeling.

The same reasoning will prove, that the indivisible moments of time
must be filled with some real object or existence, whose succession
forms the duration, and makes it be conceivable by the mind.

SECT. IV. OBJECTIONS ANSWERED.

Our system concerning space and time consists of two parts, which are
intimately connected together. The first depends on this chain of
reasoning. The capacity of the mind is not infinite; consequently no
idea of extension or duration consists of an infinite number of
parts or inferior ideas, but of a finite number, and these simple
and indivisible:
It is therefore possible for space and time to exist conformable
to this idea: And if it be possible, it is certain they actually
do exist conformable to it; since their infinite divisibility is
utterly impossible and contradictory.

The other part of our system is a consequence of this. The parts, into
which the ideas of space and time resolve themselves, become at last
indivisible; and these indivisible parts, being nothing in themselves,
are inconceivable when not filled with something real and existent.

The ideas of space and time are therefore no separate or distinct ideas,
but merely those of the manner or order, in which objects exist:
Or in other words, it is impossible to conceive either a vacuum
and extension without matter, or a time, when there was no succession
or change in any real existence.

The intimate connexion betwixt these parts of our system is the reason
why we shall examine together the objections, which have been urged
against both of them, beginning with those against the finite divisibility
of extension.

I.

The first of these objections, which I shall take notice of, is
more proper to prove this connexion and dependence of the one part
upon the other, than to destroy either of them. It has often been
maintained in the schools, that extension must be divisible, in
infinitum, because the system of mathematical points is absurd; and
that system is absurd, because a mathematical point is a non-entity,
and consequently can never by its conjunction with others form a
real existence.

This would be perfectly decisive, were there no medium betwixt the
infinite divisibility of matter, and the non-entity of mathematical
points.

But there is evidently a medium, viz. the bestowing a colour or
solidity on these points; and the absurdity of both the extremes
is a demonstration of the truth and reality of this medium.

The system of physical points, which is another medium, is too absurd to
need a refutation. A real extension, such as a physical point is supposed
to be, can never exist without parts, different from each other; and
wherever objects are different, they are distinguishable and
separable by the imagination.

II. The second objection is derived from the necessity there would be of
PENETRATION, if extension consisted of mathematical points. A simple
and indivisible atom, that touches another, must necessarily penetrate
it; for it is impossible it can touch it by its external parts, from the
very supposition of its perfect simplicity, which excludes all
parts.

It must therefore touch it intimately, and in its whole essence,
SECUNDUM SE, TOTA, ET TOTALITER; which is the very definition of
penetration. But penetration is impossible: Mathematical points are of
consequence equally impossible.

I answer this objection by substituting a juster idea of penetration.
Suppose two bodies containing no void within their circumference,
to approach each other, and to unite in such a manner that the body,
which results from their union, is no more extended than either of
them; it is this we must mean when we talk of penetration.

But it is evident this penetration is nothing but the annihilation of one
of these bodies, and the preservation of the other, without our being
able to distinguish particularly which is preserved and which annihilated.
Before the approach we have the idea of two bodies.

After it we have the idea only of one. It is impossible for the mind to
preserve any notion of difference betwixt two bodies of the same nature
existing in the same place at the same time.

Taking then penetration in this sense, for the annihilation of one
body upon its approach to another, I ask any one, if he sees a
necessity, that a coloured or tangible point should be annihilated
upon the approach of another coloured or tangible point?

On the contrary, does he not evidently perceive, that from the union of
these points there results an object, which is compounded and divisible,
and may be distinguished into two parts, of which each preserves its
existence distinct and separate, notwithstanding its contiguity
to the other?

Let him aid his fancy by conceiving these points to be of different colours,
the better to prevent their coalition and confusion. A blue and a
red point may surely lie contiguous without any penetration or
annihilation.

For if they cannot, what possibly can become of them? Whether shall the
red or the blue be annihilated? Or if these colours unite into one,
what new colour will they produce by their union?

What chiefly gives rise to these objections, and at the same time renders
it so difficult to give a satisfactory answer to them, is the natural
infirmity and unsteadiness both of our imagination and senses,
when employed on such minute objects.

Put a spot of ink upon paper, and retire to such a distance, that the
spot becomes altogether invisible; you will find, that upon your
return and nearer approach the spot first becomes visible by short
intervals; and afterwards becomes always visible; and afterwards
acquires only a new force in its colouring without augmenting its
bulk; and afterwards, when it has encreased to such a degree as to
be really extended, it is still difficult for the imagination to
break it into its component parts, because of the uneasiness it
finds in the conception of such a minute object as a single point.

CHAPTER FIFTY SEVEN.

A CHEERFUL CUDDY.

The _Condor's_ cabin is a snug little saloon, such as are often found on
trading-vessels, not necessarily for passengers, but where the skipper
has an eye to his own comforts, with tastes that require gratification.

Those of Captain Lantanas are refined, beyond the common run of men who
follow his profession--usually rough sea dogs--caring little for aught
else save their grub and grog.

That the Chilian skipper is not of this class is proved by the
appearance of his "cuddy," which is neatly, if not luxuriously,
furnished, and prettily decorated.  In addition to the instruments that
appertain to his calling--telescope, aneroid barometer, sextant, and
compass, all placed conspicuously in racks--there is a bookcase of
ornamental wood, filled with well-bound volumes; and several squares of
looking-glass inlaid between the doors that lead to the four little
staterooms--two on each side.  There are two settees, with hair-cloth
cushions, and lockers underneath the same, in which Don Gregorio's
gold-dust is stowed.

Centrally stands a table, eight by six, mahogany, with massive carved
legs, and feet firmly fixed to the floor.  It is set lengthwise, fore
and aft, a stout hair-cloth chair at top, another at bottom, and one at
each side--all, like the table, stanchioned to the timbers of the
half-deck.

Above a rack, with its array of decanters and glasses; and in the
centre, overhead, a swing-lamp, lacquered brass--so constructed as to
throw a brilliant glare on the surface of the table, while giving light
more subdued to all other parts of the little cabin.

To-night its rays are reflected with more than ordinary sparkle.  For
the table beneath is spread with the best plate and glassware Captain
Lantanas can set forth.  And in the dishes now on it are the most
savoury viands the _Condor's_ cook can produce.  While in bottles and
decanters are wines of best _bouquet_ and choicest vintage.

Around are seated the four guests; the Captain, as host, at the head;
Don Gregorio, his _vis-a-vis_, at the foot; the ladies at opposite
sides--right and left.

As the barque is going before a gentle breeze, without the slightest
roll, or pitch, there is no need for guards upon the table.  It shows
only the spread of snow-white damask, the shining silver plate, the
steel of Sheffield, the ware of Sevres or Worcester, with the usual
array of cut-glasses and decanters.  In the centre an epergne,
containing fruits, and some flowers, which, despite exposure to the
saline breeze, Captain Lantanas has nursed into blooming.  But the
fruits seem flowers of themselves, having come from California, famed
for the products of Pomona.  There are peaches, the native growth of San
Franciscan gardens, with plums and nectarines; melons and grapes from
Los Angelos, further south; with the oranges, plantains, and pine-apples
of San Diego.  And, alongside these productions of the tropical and
sub-tropical clime, are Newtown pippins, that have been imported into
California from the far Eastern States, mellowed by a sea voyage of
several thousand miles, around the stormy headland of Cape Horn.

The savoury meats tasted, eaten, and removed, the dessert, with its
adjuncts, has been brought upon the table--this including wines of
varied sorts.  Although not greatly given to drink, the Chilian skipper
enjoys his glass; and on this occasion takes half-a-dozen--it may be
more.  He is desirous of doing honour to his distinguished guests, and
making the entertainment a merry one.

And his amiable effort has success.

In addition to having seen much of the world, he is by birth and
education a gentleman.  Although nothing more than the skipper of a
merchant-ship--a South Sea trader at that--as already known, he is not
one of the rude swaggering sort; but a gentle, kind-hearted creature, as
well, if not better, befitted for the boudoir of a lady, than to stir
about among tarred ropes, or face conflicting storm.

So kind and good has he shown himself, that his two fair passengers, in
the short companionship of less than a month, have grown to regard him
with affection; while Don Gregorio looks upon him in the light of a
faithful friend.  All three feel sorry they are so soon to part company
with him.  It is the only regret that casts a shadow over their spirits,
as they sit conversing around the table so richly furnished for their
gratification.

Eating fragrant fruits, and sipping sweet wines, for the moment they
forget all about the hour of parting; the easier, as they listen to the
tales which he tells to entertain them.  He relates strange adventures
he has had, on and around the shores of the great South Sea.

He has had encounters with the fierce Figian; the savage New Caledonian;
both addicted to the horrid habit of anthropophagy.  He has been a
spectator to the voluptuous dances of Samoa, and looked upon the
daughters of Otaheite, Owyhee, whose whole life is love.

With stories of the two extremes--symbols of man's supreme happiness,
and his most abject misery--grim cannibals and gay odalisques--he amuses
his guests, long detaining them at the table.

Enthralled by his narration--naive, truthful, in correspondence with the
character of the man--all three listen attentively.  The senoritas are
charmed, and, strange to say, more with his accounts of Figi and New
Caledonia, than those relating to Otaheite and Hawaii.  For to the
last-named group of islands have gone Edward Crozier and Willie
Cadwallader.  There these may meet some of the brown-skinned _bayaderes_
Captain Lantanas so enthusiastically describes--meet, dance with, and
admire them!

But the jealous fancies thus conjured up are fleeting in the shadows of
summer clouds; and, soon passing, give place to pleasanter thoughts.
Now that land is near, and a seaport soon to be reached, the young
ladies are this night unusually elated; and, listening to the vivid
description of South Sea scenes, they reflect less sadly and less
bitterly on the supposed slight received at the hands of their lovers.

In return, Don Gregorio imparts to the Chilian skipper some confidences
hitherto withheld.  He is even so far admitted into the family intimacy
as to be told how both the senoritas are soon to become brides.  To
which is added an invitation, that should he ever carry the _Condor_ to
Cadiz, he will not only visit them, but make their house his home.

Several hours are passed in this pleasant way; interspersed with song
and music--for both Carmen and Inez can sing well, and accompany their
singing with the guitar.

At length the ladies retire to their state-room, not to stay, but to
robe themselves, with the design of taking a turn in the open air.  The
smooth motion of the ship, with the soft moonlight streaming through the
cabin windows, tempts them to spend half-an-hour on deck, before going
to rest for the night; and on deck go they.

Lantanas and the ex-haciendado remain seated at the table.  Warmed by
the wine--of which both have partaken pretty freely--the Chilian
continues to pour his experiences into the ears of his passenger; while
the latter listens with unflagging interest.

Supping choice _canario_, his favourite tipple, the former takes no note
of aught passing around, nor thinks of what may be doing on the
_Condor's_ deck.  All through the evening he has either forgotten or
neglected the duties appertaining to him as her commanding officer.  So
much, that he fails to notice a rotatory motion of the cabin, with the
table on which the decanters stand; or, if observing, attributes it to
the wine having disturbed the equilibrium of his brain.

But the cabin _does_ revolve, the table with it, to the extent of a
three-quarter circle.  Gradually is the movement being made--gently,
from the sea being calm--silently--with no voice raised in command--no
piping of boatswain's whistle--no song of sailors as they brace round
the yards, or board tacks and sheets!--not a sign to tell Captain
Lantanas has been set upon a course, astray, and likely to lead to her
destruction.


CHAPTER FIFTY EIGHT.

KILL OR DROWN?

Having set the _Condor's_ course, with Slush still in charge at the
helm, the second mate returns to the fore-deck, where by the
manger-board the others are again in deliberation; Gomez counselling, or
rather dictating what they are next to do.

The programme he places before them is in part what has been arranged
already--to run along coast till they discover a gap in the line of
coral reef; for it is this which causes the breakers.  Further, they are
told that, when such gap be found, they will lower a boat; and having
first scuttled the barque, abandon her; then row themselves ashore.

The night is so far favourable to the execution of the scheme.  It is a
clear moonlight; and running parallel to the trend of the shore, as they
are now doing, they can see the breakers distinctly, their white crests
in contrast with the dark _facade_ of cliff, which extends continuously
along the horizon's edge; here and there rising into hills, one of which
looming up on the starboard bow has the dimensions of a mountain.

The barque is now about a league's distance from land; and half-way
between are the breakers, their roar sounding ominously through the calm
quiet of the night.  As they were making but little way--scarce three
knots an hour--one proposes that the boat be lowered at once, and such
traps as they intend taking put into her.  In such a tranquil sea it
will tow alongside in safety.

As this will be some trouble taken off their hands in advance, the plan
is approved of, and the pinnace being selected, as the most suitable
boat for beaching.

Clustering around it, they commence operations.  Two leap lightly
inside; insert the plug, ship the rudder, secure the oars and
boat-hooks, clear the life-lines, and cast off the lanyards of the
gripes; the others holding the fall-tackle in hand, to see that they
were clear for running.  Then taking a proper turn they lower away.

And, soon as the boat's bottom touches water, with the two men in it,
the painter, whose loose end has been left aboard, is hauled fast,
bringing the boat abeam, where it is made fast under a set of man-ropes,
already dropped over the side.

Other movements succeed; the pirates passing to and from the forecastle,
carrying canvas bags, and bundles of clothing, with such other of their
belongings as they deem necessary for a debarkation like that intended.
A barrel of pork, another of biscuit, and a beaker of water are turned
out, and handed down into the boat; not forgetting a keg containing rum,
and several bottles of wine they have purloined, or rather taken at
will, from Captain Lantanas' locker bins.

The miscellaneous supply is not meant for a voyage, only a stock to
serve for that night, which they must needs spend upon the beach--as
also to provision them for the land journey, to be commenced in the
morning.

In silence, but with no great show of caution or stealth, are these
movements made.  They who make them have but little fear of being
detected, some scarce caring if they be.  Indeed, there is no one to
observe them, save those taking part.  For the negro cook, after
dressing the dinner, and serving it, has gone out of the galley for
good; and, now acting as table waiter, keeps below in the cabin.

Soon everything is stowed in the pinnace, except that which is to form
its most precious freight; and again the piratical crew bring their
heads together, to deliberate about the final step; the time for taking
which is fast drawing nigh.

A thing so serious calls for calm consideration, or, at all events,
there must be a thorough understanding among them.  For it is the
disposal of those they have destined as victims.  How this is to be
done, nothing definite has yet been said.  Even the most hardened among
them shrinks from putting it in words.  Still it is tacitly understood.
The ladies are to be taken along, the others to be dealt with in a
different way.  But how? that is the question, yet unasked by any, but
as well understood by all, as if it had been spoken in loudest voice.

For a time they stand silent, waiting for some one who can command the
courage to speak.

And one does this--a ruffian of unmitigated type, whose breast is not
stirred by the slightest throb of humanity.  It is the second mate,
Padilla.  Breaking silence, he says:

"Let us cut their throats, and have done with it!"

The horrible proposition, more so from its very laconism, despite the
auditory to whom it is addressed, does not find favourable response.
Several speak in opposition to it; Harry Blew first and loudest.  Though
broken his word, and forfeited his faith, the British sailor is not so
abandoned as to contemplate murder in such cool, deliberate manner.
Some of those around him have no doubt committed it; but he does not
feel up to it.  Opposing Padilla's counsel, he says:

"What need for our killin' them?  For my part, I don't see any."

"And for your part, what would you do?" sneeringly retorts the second
mate.

"Give the poor devils a chance for their lives."

"How?" promptly asks Padilla.

"Why; if we set the barque's head out to sea, as the wind's off-shore,
she'd soon carry them beyond sight o' land, and we'd niver hear another
word o' 'em."

"No, no! that won't do," protest several in the same breath.  "They
might get picked up, and then we'd be sure of hearing of them--may be
something more than words."

"_Carrai_!" exclaims Padilla scornfully; "that _would_ be a wise way.
Just the one to get our throats in the _garrota_.  You forget that Don
Gregorio Montijo is a man of the big grandee kind.  And should he ever
set foot ashore, after what we'd done to him, he'd have influence enough
to make most places--ay, the whole of the habitable globe--a trifle too
hot for us.  There's an old saw, about dead men telling no tales.  No
doubt most of you have heard it, and some have reason to know it true.
Take my advice, _camarados_, and let us act up to it.  What's your
opinion, Senor Gomez?"

"Since you ask for it," responds Gomez, speaking for the first time on
this special matter, "my opinion is, that there's no need for any
difference among us.  Mr Blew's against the spilling of blood, and so
would I, if it could be avoided.  But it can't, with safety to
ourselves; at least not in the way he has suggested.  To act as he
advises would be madness on our part--nay more, it might be suicide.
Still, there don't seem any necessity for a cold cutting of throats,
which has an ugly sound about it.  The same with knocking on the head;
they're both too brutal.  I think I know a way that will save us from
resorting to either, and, at the same time, ensure our own safety."

"What way?" demanded several voices.  "Tell us!"

"One simple enough; so simple, I wonder you haven't all thought of it,
same as myself.  Of course, we intend sending this craft to the bottom
of the sea.  But she's not likely to go down all of a sudden; nor till
we're a good way off out of sight.  We can leave the gentlemen aboard,
and let them slip quietly down along with her!"

"Why, that's just what Blew proposes," say several.

"True," returns Gomez; "but not exactly as I mean it.  He'd leave them
free to go about the ship--perhaps get out of her before she sinks, on a
sofa, or hencoop, or something."

"How would _you_ do with them?" asks one, impatiently.

"Tie, before taking leave of them."

"Bah!" exclaims Padilla, a monster to whom spilling blood seems
congenial.  "What's the use of being at all that bother?  It's sure to
bring some.  The skipper will resist, and so'll the old Don.  What then?
We'll be compelled to knock them on the head all the same, or toss them
overboard.  For my part, I don't see the object of making such a worry
about it; and still say, let's stop their wind at once!"

"Dash it, man!" cries Striker, hitherto only a listener, but a backer of
Harry Blew; "you 'pear to 'a been practisin' a queery plan in jobs o'
this sort.  Mr Gomez hev got a better way o't, same as I've myself seed
in the Australian bush, wheres they an't so bloodthirsty.  When they
stick up a chap theer, so long's he don't cut up nasty, they settle
things by splicin' him to a tree, an' leavin' him to his meditashuns.
Why can't we do the same wi' the skipper, an' the Don, an' the darkey--
supposin' any o' 'em to show reefractry?"

"That's it!" exclaims Davis, strengthening the proposal thus endorsed by
his chum, Striker.  "My old pal's got the correct idea of sich things."

"Besides," continues the older of the ex-convicts, "this job seems to me
simple enuf.  We want the swag, an' some may want the weemen.  Well, we
can git both 'ithout the needcessity o' doin' murder!"

Striker's remonstrance sounds strange--under the circumstances,
serio-comical.

"What might you call murder?" mockingly asks Padilla.  "Is there any
difference between their getting their breath stopped by drowning, or
the cutting of their throats?  Not much to them, I take it; and no more
to us.  If there's a distinction, it's so nice I can't see it.
_Carramba_! no!"

"Whether you see it or not," interposes Harry Blew, "there be much; and
for myself, as I've said, I object to spillin' blood, where the thing
an't absolute needcessary.  True, by leavin them aboard an' tied, as Mr
Gomez suggests, they'll get drowned, for sartin; but it'll at least keep
our hands clear o' blood murder!"

"That's true!" cried several in assent.  "Let's take the Australian way
of it, and tie them up!"

The assenting voices are nearly unanimous; and the eccentric compromise
is carried.

So far everything is fixed, and it but remains to arrange about the
action, and apportion to every one his part.

For this very few words suffice, the apportionment being, that the first
officer, assisted by Davis, who has some knowledge of ship-carpentry, is
to see to the scuttling of the vessel; Gomez and Hernandez to take
charge of the girls, and get them into the boat; Slush to look after the
steering; Padilla to head the party entrusted with the seizure of the
gold; while Striker, assisted by Tarry and the Frenchman, is to secure
the unfortunate men by fast binding, or, as he calls it, "sticking them
up."

The atrocious plan is complete, in all its revolting details--the hour
of execution at hand.


CHAPTER FIFTY NINE.

THE TINTORERAS.

With all sail set, the barque glides silently on to her doom.

Gomez now "cons" Slush the steering, he alone having any knowledge of
the coast.  They are but a half-league from land, shaving close along
the outer edge of the breakers.  The breeze blowing off-shore makes it
easy to keep clear of them.

There is high land on the starboard bow, gradually drawing to the beam.
Gomez remembers it; for in the clear moonlight is disclosed the outline
of a hill, which, once seen, could not easily be forgotten; a _cerro_
with two summits, and a _col_ or saddle-like depression between.

Still, though a conspicuous landmark, it does not indicate any
anchorage; only that they are entering a great gulf which indents the
Veraguan coast.

As the barque glides on, he observes a reach of clear water opening
inland; to all appearance a bay, its mouth miles in width.

He would run her into it, but is forbidden by the breakers, whose
froth-crested belt extends across the entrance from cape to cape.

Running past, he again closes in upon the land, and soon has the
two-headed hill abeam, its singular silhouette conspicuous against the
moonlit sky.  All the more from the moon being directly beyond it, and
low down, showing between the twin summits like a great globe-shaped
lamp there suspended.

When nearly opposite, Gomez notes an open space in the line of breakers,
easily told by its dark tranquil surface, which contrasts with the white
horse-tails lashing up on each side of it.

Soon as sighting it, the improvised pilot leaves the helm, after giving
Slush some final instructions about the steering.  Then forsaking the
poop, he proceeds towards the ship's waist, where he finds all the
others ready for action.  Striker and La Crosse with pieces of rope for
making fast the ill-fated men; Padilla and his party armed with axes and
crowbars--the keys with which they intend to open the locker-doors.

Near the mainmast stands the first mate, a lighted lantern in his hand;
Davis beside him, with auger, mallet, and chisel.  They are by the
hatchway, which they have opened, intending descent into the hold.  With
the lantern concealed under the skirt of his ample dreadnought, Harry
Blew stands within the shadow of the mast, as if reflecting on his
faithlessness--ashamed to let his face be seen.  He even appears
reluctant to proceed in the black business, while affecting the
opposite.

As the others are now occupied in various ways, with their eyes turned
from him, he steps out to the ship's side, and looks over the rail.  The
moon is now full upon his face, which, under her soft innocent beams,
shows an expression difficult as ever to interpret.  The most skilled
physiognomist could not read it.  More than one emotion seem struggling
within his breast, mingling together, or succeeding each other, quick as
the changing hues of the chameleon.  Now, as if cupidity, now remorse,
anon the dark shadow of despair!

This last growing darker, he draws nearer to the side, and looks
earnestly over, as if about to plunge into the briny deep, and so rid
himself of a life, ever after to be a burden!

While standing thus, apparently hesitating as to whether he shall drown
himself and have done with it, soft voices fall upon his ear, their
tones blending with the breeze, as it sweeps in melancholy cadence
through the rigging of the ship.  Simultaneously there is a rustling of
dresses, and he sees two female forms robed in white, with short cloaks
thrown loosely over their shoulders, and kerchiefs covering their heads.

Stepping out on the quarterdeck, they stand for a short while, the moon
shining on their faces, both bright and innocent as her beams.  Then
they stroll aft, little dreaming of the doom that awaits them.

That sight should soften his traitorous heart.  Instead, it seems but to
steel it the more--as if their presence recalled and quickened within
him some vow of revenge.  He hesitates no longer; but gliding back to
the hatch, climbs over its coaming, and, lantern in hand, drops down
into the hold--there to do a deed which neither light of moon nor sun
should shine upon.

Though within the tropic zone, and but a few degrees from the
equinoctial line, there is chillness in the air of the night, now
nearing its mid-hours.

Drawing their cloaks closer around them, the young ladies mount up to
the poop-deck, and stand resting their hands on the taffrail.

For a time they are silent; their eyes directed over the stern, watching
the foam in the ship's wake, lit up with luminous phosphorescence.

They observe other scintillation besides that caused by the _Condor's_
keel.  There are broad splatches of it all over the surface of the sea,
with here and there elongated _sillons_, seemingly made by some
creatures in motion, swimming parallel to the ship's course, and keeping
pace with her.

They have not voyaged through thirty degrees of the Pacific Ocean to be
now ignorant of what these are.  They know them to be sharks, as also
that some of larger size and brighter luminosity are the tracks of the
_tintorera_--that species so much-dreaded by the pearl-divers of Panama
Bay and the Californian Gulf.

This night both _tiburones_ and _tintoreras_ are more numerous than they
have ever observed them--closer also to the vessel's side; for the
sharks, observantly have seen a boat lowered down, which gives
anticipation of prey within nearer reach of their ravenous jaws.

"_Santissima_!" exclaims Carmen, as one makes a dash at some waif
drifting astern.  "What a fearful thing it would be to fall overboard
there--in the midst of those horrid creatures!  One wouldn't have the
slightest chance of being saved.  Only to think how little space there
is between us and certain death!  See that monster just below, with its
great, glaring eyes!  It looks as if it wanted to leap up, and lay hold
of us.  Ugh!  I mustn't keep my eyes on it any longer.  It makes me
tremble in a strange way.  I do believe, if I continued gazing at it, I
should grow giddy, and drop into its jaws."

She draws back a pace or two, and for some moments remains silent--
pensive.  Perhaps she is thinking of a sailor saved from sharks after
falling among them, and more still of the man who saved him.  Whether or
no, she soon again speaks, saying:

"_Sobrina_! are you not glad we're so near the end of our voyage?"

"I'm not sorry, _tia_--I fancy no one ever is.  I should be more
pleased, however, if it _were_ the end of our voyage, which
unfortunately it isn't.  Before we see Spain, we've another equally as
long."

"True--as long in duration, and distance.  But otherwise, it may be very
different, and I hope more endurable.  Across the Atlantic we'll have
passage in a big steamship, with a grand dining saloon, and state
sleeping-rooms, each in itself as large as the main-cabin of the
_Condor_.  Besides, we'll have plenty of company--passengers like
ourselves.  Let us hope they may turn out nice people.  If so, our
Atlantic voyage will be more enjoyable than this on the Pacific."

"But we've been very comfortable in the _Condor_; and _I'm_ sure Captain
Lantanas has done all he could to make things agreeable for us."

"He has indeed, the dear good creature; and I shall ever feel grateful
to him.  Still you must admit that, however well meant, we've been at
times a little bored by his learned dissertations.  O Inez, it's been
awfully lonely, and frightfully monotonous--at least, to me."

"Ah!  I understand.  What you want is a bevy of bachelors as
fellow-passengers, young ones at that.  Well; I suppose there will be
some in the big steamer.  Like enough, a half-score of our moustached
_militarios_, returning from Cuba and other colonies.  Wouldn't that
make our Atlantic voyage enjoyable?"

"Not mine--nothing of the sort, as you ought to know.  To speak truth,
it was neither the loneliness nor monotony of our Pacific voyage that
has made it so miserable.  Something else."

"I think I can guess the something else."

"If so, you'll be clever.  It's more than I can."

"Might it have anything to do with that informal leave-taking?  Come,
Carmen--you promised me you'd think no more about it till we see them in
Cadiz, and have it all cleared up."

"You're wrong again, Inez.  It is not anything of that."

"What then?  It can't be the _mare amiento_?  Of it I might complain.
I'm even suffering from it now--although the water is so smooth.  But
you! why, you stand the sea as well as one of those rough sailors
themselves!  You're just the woman to be a naval officer's wife; and
when your _novio_ gets command of a ship, I suppose you'll be for
circumnavigating the world with him."

"You're merry, _mora_."

"Well, who wouldn't be, with the prospect of soon setting foot on land.
For my part, I detest the sea; and when I marry my little
_guardia-marina_, I'll make him forsake it, and take to some pleasanter
profession.  And if he prefer doing nothing, by good luck the rent of my
lands will keep us both comfortably, with something to spare for a town
house in Cadiz.  But say, Carmen!  What's troubling you?  Surely you
must know?"

"Surely I don't, Inez."

"That's strange--a mystery.  Might it be regret at leaving behind your
_preux chevaliers_ of California--that grand, gallant De Lara, whom, at
our last interview, we saw sprawling in the road dust?  You ought to
feel relieved at getting rid of him, as I of my importunate suitor, the
Senor Calderon.  By the way, I wonder whatever became of them!  Only to
think of their never coming near us to say good-bye!  And that nothing
was seen or heard of them afterwards!  Something must have happened.
What could it have been!  I've tried to think, but without succeeding."

"So I the same.  It is indeed very strange; though I fancy father heard
something about them, which he does not wish to make known to us.  You
remember what happened after we'd left the house--those men coming to it
in the night.  Father has an idea they intended taking his gold,
believing it still there.  What's more, I think he half suspects that of
the four men--for there appears to have been four of them--two were no
other than our old suitors, Francisco de Lara and Faustino Calderon."

She had almost said _sweethearts_, but the word has a suggestion of
pain.

"_Maria de Merced_!" exclaims Inez.  "It's frightful to think of such a
thing.  We ought to be thankful to that good saint for saving us from
such villains, and glad to get away from a country where their like are
allowed to live."

"_Sobrina_, you've touched the point.  The very thought that's been
distressing me is the remembrance of those men.  Even since leaving San
Francisco, as before we left, I've had a strange heaviness on my heart--
a sort of boding fear--that we haven't yet seen the last of them.  It
haunts me like a spectre.  I can't tell why, unless it be from what I
know of De Lara.  He's not the man to submit to that ignominious defeat
of which we were witnesses.  Be assured he will seek to avenge it.  We
expected a duel, and feared it.  Likely there would have been one, but
for the sailing of the English ship.  Still that won't hinder such a
desperate man as De Lara from going after Edward, and trying to kill him
any way he can.  I have a fear he'll follow him--is after him now."

"What if he be?  Your _fiance_ can take care of himself.  And so can
mine, if Calderon should get into his silly head to go after _him_.  Let
them go, so long as they don't come after us; which they're not likely--
all the way to Spain."

"I'm not so sure of that.  Such as they may make their way anywhere.
Professional gamblers--as we know them to be--travel to all parts of the
world.  All cities give them the same opportunity to pursue their
calling--why not Cadiz?  But, Inez, there's something I haven't told
you, thinking you might make mock of it.  I've had a fright more than
once--several times, since we came aboard."

"A fright! what sort of a fright?"

"If you promise not to laugh at me, I'll tell you."

"I promise.  I won't."

"'Twould be no laughing matter were it true.  But, of course, it could
only be fancy."

"Fancy about what?  Go on, _tia_: I'm all impatience."

"About the sailors on board.  All have bad faces; some of them seem very
_demonios_.  But there's one has particularly impressed me.  Would you
believe it, Inez, he has eyes exactly like De Lara's!  His features too
resemble those of Don Francisco; only that the sailor has a beard and
whiskers, while he had none.  Of course the resemblance can be but
accidental.  Still, it caused me a start, when I first observed it, and
has several times since.  Never more than this very morning, when I was
up here, and saw that man.  He was at the wheel, all by himself,
steering.  Several times, on turning suddenly round, I caught him
looking straight at me, staring in the most insolent manner.  I had half
a mind to complain to Captain Lantanas; but reflecting that we were so
near the end of our voyage--"

She is not permitted to say more.  For at the moment, a man appearing on
the poop-deck, as if he had risen out of it, stands before her--the
sailor who resembles De Lara!

Making a low bow, he says:

"Not _near_ the end of your voyage, _senorita_; but _at_ it," adding
with an ironical smile: "Now, ladies! you're going ashore.  The boat is
down; and, combining business with pleasure, it's my duty to hand you
into it."

While he is speaking, another of the sailors approaches Inez; Hernandez,
who offers his services in a similar style and strain.

For a moment, the girls are speechless, through sheer stark
astonishment.  Horror succeeds, as the truth flashes upon them.  And
then, instead of coherent speech, they make answer by a simultaneous
shriek; at the same time making an attempt to retreat towards the
cabin-stair.

Not a step is permitted them.  They are seized in strong arms; and
half-dragged, half-lifted off their feet, hurried away from the
taffrail.

Their cries are stifled by huge woollen caps drawn over their heads, and
down to their chins, almost choking them.  But though no longer seeing,
and only indistinctly hearing, they can tell where they are being taken.
They feel themselves lifted over the vessel's side, and lowered down
man-ropes into a boat; along the bottom of which they are finally laid,
and held fast--as if they had fallen into the jaws of those terrible
_tintoreras_, they so lately looked at keeping company with the ship!


CHAPTER SIXTY.

THE SCUTTLERS.

Harry Blew is in the hold, Bill Davis beside him.

They are standing on the bottom-timbers on a spot they have selected for
their wicked work, and which they have had some difficulty in finding.
They have reached it, by clambering over sandal-wood logs, cases of
Manilla cigars, and piles of tortoise-shell.  Clearing some of these
articles out of the way, they get sight of the vessel's ribs, and at a
point they know to be under the water-line.  They know also that a hole
bored between their feet, though ever so small, will in due time fill
the barque's hold with water, and send her to the bottom of the sea.

Davis, auger in hand, stands in readiness to bore the hole; waiting for
the first officer to give the word.

But something stays the latter from giving it, as the former from
commencing the work.

It is a thought that seems to occur simultaneously to both, bringing
their eyes up to one another's faces, in a fiance mutually
interrogative.  Blew is the first to put it in speech.

"Dang me, if I like to do it!"

"Ye've spoke my mind exact, Mr Blew!" rejoins Davis.  "No more do I."

"'Tan't nothing short of murder," pursues the chief mate.  "An' that's
just why I an't up to it; the more, as there an't any downright
needcessity.  As I sayed to them above, I can see no good reason for
sinking the ship.  She'd sail right out, an' we'd never hear word o' her
again.  An' if them to be left 'board o' her shud get picked up, what
matters that to us?  We'll be out o' the way, long afore they could go
anywhere to gi'e evidence against us.  Neer a fear o' their ever findin'
us--neyther you nor me, anyhow.  I dare say, Davis, you mean to steer
for some port, where we're not likely to meet any more Spaniards.  I do,
when I've stowed my share o' the plunder."

"Yes; I'm for Australia, soon's I can get there.  That's the place for
men like me."

"There you'll be safe enough.  So I, where I intend goin'.  And we'll
both feel better, not havin' a ugly thing to reflect back on.  Which we
would, if we send these three poor creeturs to Davy's locker.  Now, I
propose to you what you heerd me say to the rest: let's gi'e them a
chance for their lives."

"And not do this?"

As he puts the question, Davis points his auger to the bottom of the
ship.

"There an't no need--not a morsel o' good can come from sinkin' her.
And not a bit harm in lettin' her slip."

"What will the others say?"

"They won't know anything about it--they can't unless we tell 'em.  And
we won't be the fools to do that.  As I argied to them, with the wind
off-shore, as 'tis now, she'll scud out o' sight o' land long afore
daylight.  Bill Davis! whatsomever the others may do, or think they're
doin', let's me an' you keep our consciences clear o' this foul deed.
Believe me, mate, we'll both feel better for't some day."

"If you think they won't know, I'm agreed."

"How can they?  There an't none o' them to see what we do down here.
'Taint likely there's any listener.  Gie a knock or two wi' the mallet!"

The ship's carpenter obeying, strikes several blows against an empty
water-cask, the noise ascending through the open hatch.  He suspends his
strokes at hearing exclamations above; then screams in the shrill treble
of female voices.

"You see they're not thinking o' us," says the mate.  "Them Spaniards
are too busy about their own share o' the job.  They're gettin' the
girls into the boat."

"Yes; that's what they're doing."

"Sweet girls both be.  An't they, Davis?"

"Ay, that they are; a pair of reg'lar beauties."

"Look here, shipmate!  Since we've settled this other thing, I want to
say a word about them too, and I may's well say it now.  Gomez and that
land-lubber, Hernandez, are layin' claim to them, as if they had a
right.  Now they haven't, no more than any o' the rest o' us.  Some
others may have fancies, too.  I confess to havin' a weakness for the
one wi' the copper-coloured hair, which is she as Gil Gomez wants to
'propriate.  I made no objection to his takin' her into the boat.  But
soon's we get ashore, I intend to stan' out for my rights to that little
bit o' property, which are just as good as his.  Do you feel like
backin' me?"

"Hang me, if I don't!  I'm myself a bit sweet upon the dark 'un, and
have been, ever since settin' eyes on her.  And though I've said
nothing, like yourself, I wasn't going to give that point up, before
having a talk about it.  You say the word--I'll stan' by you.  And if it
comes to fightin', I'll make short work with that bandy-legged chap
Hernandez, the one as wants her.  We can count on Jack Striker on our
side; and most like the Dane and Dutchman; La Crosse for certain.
Frenchy don't cotton to them Spaniards, ever since his quarrel with
Padilla.  But, as you say, let's go in for the girls, whether or not.
You can claim the light-haired.  I'm for the dark one, an' damned if I
an't ready to fight for her--to the death!"

"As I for the other!" exclaims the ex-man-o'-war, in eager serious
earnest.

"But what's to be done after we go ashore?" asks Davis.  "That's what's
been bothering me.  We're about to land in a strange country, but where
these Spanish chaps will be at home, speakin' the lingo, an'll so have
the advantage of us.  There's a difficulty.  Can you see a way out of
it?"

"Clearly."

"How?"

"Because the girls don't care for eyther o' the two as are layin' claim
to them.  Contrarywise, they hate 'em both.  I've knowd that all along.
So, if we get 'em out o' their clutches--at the same time givin' the
girls a whisper about protectin' them--they'll go willin'ly 'long wi'
us.  Afterwards, we can act accordin' to the chances that turn up.  Only
swear you'll stan' by me, Bill, an' wi' Striker to back us, we'll bring
things right."

"I'm bound to stan' by you; so'll Jack, I'm sure.  Hark! that's him,
now!  He's calling to us.  By God, I believe they're in the boat!"

"They are!  Let's hurry up!  Just possible them Spaniards may take it
into their heads--.  Quick, shipmate!  Heave after me!"

With this, Blew holds out the lantern to light them up the hatch, both
making as much haste to reach the deck as if their lives depended upon
speed.


CHAPTER SIXTY ONE.

THE BARQUE ABANDONED.

While the scuttlers are shirking their work in the _Condor's_ hold, and
simultaneous with the abduction on deck, a scene is transpiring in her
cabin, which might be likened to a saturnalia of demons.

The skipper and Don Gregorio, sitting over their walnuts and wine, are
startled by the sound of footsteps descending the stair.  As they are
heavy and hurried, bearing no resemblance to the gentle tread of woman--
it cannot be the ladies coming down again.  Nor yet the negro cook,
since his voice is heard above in angry expostulation.  Two of the
sailors have just seized him in his galley, throttled him back on the
bench, and are there lashing him with a piece of log-line.

They at the cabin-table know nothing of this.  They hear his shouts, and
now also the shrieks of the young girls; but have no time to take any
steps, as at that instant the cuddy-door is dashed open, and several men
come rushing in; the second mate at their head.  Lantanas, sitting with
his face to the door, sees them first, Don Gregorio, turning in his
seat, the instant after.

Neither thinks of demanding a reason for the rude intrusion.  The
determined air of the intruders, with the fierce expression on their
faces, tells it would be idle.

In a time shorter than it takes to tell it, the two doomed men are made
fast to the stanchioned chairs; where they sit bolt upright, firm as
bollard heads.  But not in silence.  Both utter threats, oaths, angry
fulminations.

Not for long are they allowed this freedom of speech.  One of the
sailors, seizing a pair of nutcrackers, thrusts them between the
skipper's teeth, gagging him.  Another with a corkscrew, does the like
for Don Gregorio.

Then the work of pillage proceeds.  The locker lids are forced, and the
boxes of gold-dust dragged out.

Several goings and comings are required for its transport to the
pinnace; but at length it is stowed in the boat, the plunderers taking
their seats beside it.

One lingers in the cabin behind the rest; that fiend in human shape who
has all along counselled killing the unfortunate men.

Left alone with them, helpless, and at his mercy, he looks as if still
determined to do this.  It is not from any motive of compassion that he
goes from one to the other, and strikes the gags from between their
teeth.  For at the same time he apostrophises them in horrid mockery:

"_Carramba_!  I can't think of leaving two gentlemen seated at such a
well-furnished table, and no end of wine, without being able to hob-nob,
and drink one another's health!"

Then specially addressing himself to Lantanas, he continues:

"You see, captain, I'm not spiteful; else I shouldn't think of showing
you this bit of civility, after the insults you've offered me, since
I've been second officer of your ship."

After which, turning angrily upon Don Gregorio, and going close up, he
shrieks into his ears:

"Perhaps you don't know me, Montijo?  Can your worship recall a
circumstance that occurred some six years ago, when you where
_alcalde-mayor_ of Yerba Buena?  You may remember having a poor fellow
pilloried, and whipped, for doing a bit of contraband.  I was that
unfortunate individual.  And this is my satisfaction for the indignity
you put upon me.  Keep your seats, gentlemen!  Drink your wine and eat
your walnuts.  Before you've cleared the table, this fine barque, with
your noble selves, will be at the bottom of the sea."

The ruffian concludes with a peal of scornful laughter, continued as he
ascends the cabin-stair, after striding out and banging the door behind
him!

On deck, he sees himself alone; and hurrying to the ship's waist,
scrambles over the side, down into the boat; where he finds everything
stowed, the oarsmen seated on the thwarts, their oars in the rowlocks,
ready to shove off.

They are not all there yet.  Two--the first mate and Davis are still
aboard the barque--down in her hold.

There are those who would gladly cast loose, and leave the laggards
behind.  Indeed, soon as stepping into the boat, Padilla proposes it,
the other Spaniards abetting him.

But their traitorous desire is opposed by Striker.  However otherwise
debased, the ex-convict is true to the men who speak his own tongue.

He protests in strong determined language, and is backed by the
Dutchman, Dane, and La Crosse, as also Tarry and Slush.

"Bah!" exclaims Padilla, seeing himself in the minority; "I was only
jesting.  Of course, I had no intention to abandon them.  Ha, ha, ha!"
he adds with a forced laugh, "we'd be the blackest of traitors to behave
that way."

Striker pays no heed to the hypocritical speech, but calls to his old
chum and Harry Blew--alternately pronouncing their names.

He gets response, and soon after sees Davis above, clambering over the
rail.

Blew is not far behind, but still does not appear.  He is by the foot of
the mainmast with a haulyard in his hands as though hoisting something
aloft.  The moon has become clouded, and it is too dark for any one to
see what it is.  Besides, there is no one observing him--no one could,
the bulwarks being between.

"Hillo, there, Blew!" again hails Striker; "what be a-keepin' ye?  Hurry
down!  These Spanish chaps are threetnin' to go off without ye."

"Hang it!" exclaims the chief mate, now showing the side; "I hope that
an't true!"

"Certainly not!" exclaims Padilla; "nothing of the kind.  We were only
afraid you might delay too long, and be in danger of going down with the
vessel."

"Not much fear of that," returns Blew, dropping into the boat, "It'll be
some time afore she sinks.  Ye fixed the rudder for her to run out,
didn't ye?"

"Ay, ay!" responds he who was the last at the wheel.

"All right; shove off, then!  That wind'll take the old _Condor_
straight seawart; and long afore sunrise she'll be out sight o' land.
Give way there--way!"

The oars dip and plash.  The boat separates from the side, with prow
turned shoreward.

The barque, with her sails still spread, is left to herself, and the
breeze, which wafts her gently away towards the wide wilderness of
ocean.

Proceeding cautiously, guarding against the rattle of an oar in its
rowlock, the pirates run their boat through the breakers, and approach
the shore.  Right ahead are the two summits, with the moon just going
down behind; and between is a cove of horseshoe shape, the cliffs
extending around it.

With a few more strokes the boat is brought into it and glides on to its
innermost end.

As the keel grates upon the shingly strand, their ears are saluted by a
chorus of cries--the alarm signal of seabirds, startled by the
intrusion; among them the scream of the harpy eagle, resembling the
laugh of a maniac.

These sounds, despite their discordance, are sweet to those now hearing
them.  They tell of a shore uninhabited--literally, that the "coast is
clear"--just as they wish it.

Beaching the boat, they bound on shore, and lift their captives out;
then the spoils--one unresisting as the other.

Some go in search of a place where they may pass the night; for it is
too late to think of proceeding inland.

Between the strand and the cliff's base, these discover a beach, several
feet above sea-level, having an area of over an acre, covered with
coarse grass, just the spot for a camping-place.

As the sky has become clouded, and threatens a downpour of rain, they
carry thither the boat's sail, intending to rig it up as an awning.

But a discovery is made which spares them the trouble.  Along its base
the cliff is honeycombed with caves, one of ample dimensions, sufficient
to shelter the whole crew.  A ship's lamp, which they have brought with
them, when lighted throws its glare upon stalactites, that sparkle like
the pendants of chandeliers.

Disposing themselves in various attitudes, some reclined on their spread
pilot-coats, some seated on stones or canvas bags, they enter upon a
debauch with the wines abstracted from the stores of the abandoned
barque--drinking, talking, singing, shouting, and swearing, till the
cavern rings with their hellish revelry.  It is well their captives are
not compelled to take part in, or listen to, it.  To them has been
appropriated one of the smaller grottoes, the boat-sail fixed in front
securing them privacy.  Harry Blew has done this.  In the breast of the
British man-o'-war's man there is still a spark of delicacy.  Though his
gratitude has given way to the greed of gold, he has not yet sunk to the
level of that ruffianism around him.

While the carousal is thus carried on within the cave, without, the
overcast sky begins to discharge itself.  Lightning forks and flashes
athwart the firmament; thunder rolls reverberating along the cliffs; a
strong wind sweeps them; the rain pouring down in torrents.

It is a tropic storm--short-lived, lasting scarce half-an-hour.

But, while on, it lashes the sea into fury, driving the breakers upon
the beach, where the beat has been left loosely moored.

In the reflux of the ebbing tide, this is set afloat and carried away
seaward.  Driven then upon the coral reef, it bilges, is broken to
pieces, when the fragments, as waifs, dance about, and drift far away
over the foam-crested billows.


CHAPTER SIXTY TWO.

TWO TARQUINS.

It is after midnight.  A calm has succeeded the storm; and silence
reigns around the cove where the pirates have put in.  The seabirds have
returned to their perches on the cliff, and now sit noiselessly--save an
occasional angry scream from the osprey, as a whip-poor-will, or some
other plumed plunderer of the night, flits past his place of repose,
near enough to wake the tyrant of the sea-shore, and excite his jealous
rage.

Other sounds are the dull boom of the outside breakers, and the lighter
ripple of the tidal wave washing over a strand rich in shells.

Now and then, a _manatee_, raising its bristled snout above the surf,
gives out a low prolonged wail, like the moan of some creature in mortal
agony.

But there is no human voice now.  The ruffians have ended their
carousal.  Their profane songs, ribald jests, and drunken cachinations,
inharmoniously mingling with the soft monotone of the sea, have ceased
to be heard.  They lie astretch along the cavern floor, its hollow
aisles echoing back their snores and stertorous breathing.

Still they are not all asleep, nor all within the cavern.  Two are
outside, sauntering along the shadow of the cliff.  As the moon has also
gone down, it is too dark to distinguish their faces.  Still, there is
light enough reflected from the luminous surface of the sea to show that
neither is in sailor garb, but the habiliments of landsmen--this the
national costume of Spanish California.  On their heads are _sombreros_
of ample brim; wide trousers--_cahoneras_--flap loose around their
ankles; while over their shoulders they carry cloaks, which, by the
peculiar drape, are recognisable as Mexican _mangas_.  In the obscurity
the colour of these cannot be determined, though one is scarlet, the
other sky-blue.

Apparelled as the two men are now, it would be difficult to identify
them as Gil Gomez and Jose Hernandez.  For all it is they.

They are strolling about without fear, or thought of any one observing
them.  Yet one is; a man, who has come out of the larger cavern just
after them, and who follows them along the cliff's base.  Not openly or
boldly, as designing to join in their deliberation; but crouchingly and
by stealth, as if playing spy on them.

He is in sailor togs, wearing a loose dreadnought coat, which he buttons
on coming out of the cavern.  But before closing it over his breast, the
butt of a pistol, and the handle of a knife, could be seen gleaming
there, both stuck behind a leathern waist belt.

On first stepping forth, he stands for a time with eyes fixed upon the
other two.  He can see them but indistinctly, while they cannot see him
at all, his figure making no silhouette against the dark disc of the
cave's mouth.  And afterwards, as he moves along the cliff, keeping
close in, its shadow effectually conceals him from their view.  But
still safer is he from being observed by them, after having ensconced
himself in a cleft of rock; which he does while their backs are turned
upon him.

In the obscure niche he now occupies no light falls upon his face--not a
ray.  If there did, it would disclose the countenance of Harry Blew; and
as oft before, with an expression upon it not easily understood.  But no
one sees, much less makes attempt to interpret it.

Meanwhile the two saunterers come to a stop and stand conversing.  It is
Gomez who is first heard saying:

"I've been thinking, _companero_, now we've got everything straight so
far, that our best plan will be to stay where we are till the other
matter's fixed."

"What other are you speaking of?"

"The marrying, of course."

"Oh! that.  Well?"

"We can send on for the _padre_, and bring him here; or failing him, the
_cura_.  To tell truth, I haven't the slightest idea of where we've come
ashore.  We may be a goodish distance from Santiago; and to go there,
embargoed as we are, there's a possibility of our being robbed of our
pretty baggage on the route.  You understand me?"

"I do!"

"Against risk of that kind, it is necessary we should take precautions.
And the first--as also the best I can think of--is to stay here till
we're spliced.  One of our two Californian friends can act as a
messenger.  Either, with six words I shall entrust to him, will be
certain to bring back an ecclesiastic, having full powers to perform the
flea-bite of a ceremony.  Then we can march inland without fear--ay,
with flying colours; both Benedicts, our blushing brides on our arms,
and in Santiago spend a pleasant honeymoon."

"Delightful anticipation!"

"Just so.  And for that very reason, we mustn't risk marring it; which
we might, by travelling as simple bachelors.  So I say, let us get
married before going a step farther."

"But the others?  Are they to assist at our nuptials?"

"Certainly not."

"In what way can it be avoided?"

"The simplest in the world.  It's understood that we divide our plunder
the first thing in the morning.  When that's done, and each has packed
up his share, I intend proposing that we separate--every one to go his
own gait."

"Will they agree to that, think you?"

"Of course they will.  Why shouldn't they?  It's the safest way for all,
and they'll see that.  Twelve of us trooping together through the
country--to say nothing of having the women along--the story we're to
tell about shipwreck might get discredited.  When that's made clear, to
our old shipmates, they'll be considerate for their own safety.  Trust
me for making it clear.  Of course we'll keep our Californian friends to
act as groomsmen; so that the only things wanted will be a brace of
bridesmaids."

"Ha, ha, ha!" laughs Hernandez.

"And now to see about our brides.  We've not yet proposed to them.  We
went once to do that, and were disappointed.  Not much danger of that
now."

"For all that, we may count upon a flat refusal."

"Flat or sharp, little care I.  And it won't signify, one way or the
other.  In three days or less I intend calling Carmen Montijo my wife.
But come on; I long to lay my hand and heart at her feet."

Saying which Gomez strides on towards the grotto, the other by his side,
like two Tarquins about to invade the sleep of virginal innocence.


CHAPTER SIXTY THREE.

WITHIN THE GROTTO.

Though the grotto is in darkness, its occupants are not asleep.  To them
repose is impossible; for they are that moment in the midst of anguish,
keen as human heart could feel.  They have passed through its first
throes, and are for the while a little calmer.  But it is the
tranquillity of deep, deadening grief, almost despair.  They mourn him
dearest to them as dead.

Nor have they any doubt of it.  How could they?  But as the perceptions
of the mind are perfectly known, and I have used all imaginable caution
in forming conclusions concerning them, I have always hoped to keep clear
of those contradictions, which have attended every other system. Accordingly
the difficulty, which I have at present in my eye, is nowise contrary
to my system; but only departs a little from that simplicity, which has
been hitherto its principal force and beauty.

The passions of love and hatred are always followed by, or rather conjoined
with benevolence and anger. It is this conjunction, which chiefly
distinguishes these affections from pride and humility.

For pride and humility are pure emotions in the soul, unattended with any
desire, and not immediately exciting us to action. But love and
hatred are not compleated within themselves, nor rest in that
emotion, which they produce, but carry the mind to something farther.

Love is always followed by a desire of the happiness of the person
beloved, and an aversion to his misery: As hatred produces a desire of
the misery and an aversion to the happiness of the person hated.

So remarkable a difference betwixt these two sets of passions of
pride and humility, love and hatred, which in so many other particulars
correspond to each other, merits our attention.

The conjunction of this desire and aversion with love and hatred may be
accounted for by two different hypotheses. The first is, that love and
hatred have not only a cause, which excites them, viz, pleasure
and pain; and an object, to which they are directed, viz, a person
or thinking being; but likewise an end, which they endeavour to
attain, viz, the happiness or misery of the person beloved or hated;
all which views, mixing together, make only one passion.

According to this system, love is nothing but the desire of happiness
to another person, and hatred that of misery.

The desire and aversion constitute the very nature of love and hatred.
They are not only inseparable but the same.

But this is evidently contrary to experience. For though it is certain
we never love any person without desiring his happiness, nor hate any
without wishing his misery, yet these desires arise only upon the ideas
of the happiness or misery of our friend or enemy being presented
by the imagination, and are not absolutely essential to love and hatred.
They are the most obvious and natural sentiments of these affections, but
not the only ones.

The passions may express themselves in a hundred ways, and may
subsist a considerable time, without our reflecting on the happiness
or misery of their objects; which clearly proves, that these desires
are not the same with love and hatred, nor make any essential part
of them.

We may, therefore, infer, that benevolence and anger are passions
different from love and hatred, and only conjoined with them, by
the original constitution of the mind.

As nature has given to the body certain appetites and inclinations, which
she encreases, diminishes, or changes according to the situation of the
fluids or solids; she has proceeded in the same manner with the
mind. According as we are possessed with love or hatred, the correspondent
desire of the happiness or misery of the person, who is the object
of these passions, arises in the mind, and varies with each variation
of these opposite passions.

This order of things, abstractedly considered, is not necessary.
Love and hatred might have been unattended with any such desires,
or their particular connexion might have been entirely reversed.

If nature had so pleased, love might have had the same effect as hatred,
and hatred as love. I see no contradiction in supposing a desire of
producing misery annexed to love, and of happiness to hatred.

If the sensation of the passion and desire be opposite, nature coued have
altered the sensation without altering the tendency of the desire,
and by that means made them compatible with each other.

SECT. VII OF COMPASSION

But though the desire of the happiness or misery of others, according
to the love or hatred we bear them, be an arbitrary and original
instinct implanted in our nature, we find it may be counterfeited
on many occasions, and may arise from secondary principles.

Pity is a concern for, and malice a joy in the misery of others, without
any friendship or enmity to occasion this concern or joy. We pity even
strangers, and such as are perfectly indifferent to us: And if our
ill-will to another proceed from any harm or injury, it is not, properly
speaking, malice, but revenge. But if we examine these affections
of pity and malice we shall find them to be secondary ones, arising
from original affections, which are varied by some particular turn
of thought and imagination.

It will be easy to explain the passion of pity, from the precedent
reasoning concerning sympathy. We have a lively idea of every thing related
to us. All human creatures are related to us by resemblance.
Their persons, therefore, their interests, their passions, their pains
and pleasures must strike upon us in a lively manner, and produce an
emotion similar to the original one; since a lively idea is easily
converted into an impression.

If this be true in general, it must be more so of affliction and
sorrow. These have always a stronger and more lasting influence than any
pleasure or enjoyment.

A spectator of a tragedy passes through a long train of grief, terror,
indignation, and other affections, which the poet represents in
the persons he introduces.

As many tragedies end happily, and no excellent one can be composed
without some reverses of fortune, the spectator must sympathize
with all these changes, and receive the fictitious joy as well as
every other passion.

Unless, therefore, it be asserted, that every distinct passion is
communicated by a distinct original quality, and is not derived
from the general principle of sympathy above-explained, it must be
allowed, that all of them arise from that principle.

To except any one in particular must appear highly unreasonable.
As they are all first present in the mind of one person, and afterwards
appear in the mind of another; and as the manner of their appearance,
first as an idea, then as an impression, is in every case the same,
the transition must arise from the same principle.

I am at least sure, that this method of reasoning would be considered
as certain, either in natural philosophy or common life.

Add to this, that pity depends, in a great measure, on the contiguity,
and even sight of the object; which is a proof, that it is derived
from the imagination.

Not to mention that women and children are most subject to pity, as
being most guided by that faculty. The same infirmity, which makes them
faint at the sight of a naked sword, though in the hands of their best
friend, makes them pity extremely those, whom they find in any
grief or affliction.

Those philosophers, who derive this passion from I know not what subtile
reflections on the instability of fortune, and our being liable
to the same miseries we behold, will find this observation contrary
to them among a great many others, which it were easy to produce.

There remains only to take notice of a pretty remarkable phaenomenon
of this passion; which is, that the communicated passion of sympathy
sometimes acquires strength from the weakness of its original, and
even arises by a transition from affections, which have no existence.

Thus when a person obtains any honourable office, or inherits a
great fortune, we are always the more rejoiced for his prosperity,
the less sense he seems to have of it, and the greater equanimity
and indifference he shews in its enjoyment.

In like manner a man, who is not dejected by misfortunes, is the
more lamented on account of his patience; and if that virtue extends
so far as utterly to remove all sense of uneasiness, it still farther
encreases our compassion.

When a person of merit falls into what is vulgarly esteemed a great
misfortune, we form a notion of his condition; and carrying our fancy
from the cause to the usual effect, first conceive a lively idea of his
sorrow, and then feel an impression of it, entirely over-looking that
greatness of mind, which elevates him above such emotions, or
only considering it so far as to encrease our admiration, love and
tenderness for him. We find from experience, that such a degree of
passion is usually connected with such a misfortune; and though
there be an exception in the present case, yet the imagination is
affected by the general rule, and makes us conceive a lively idea
of the passion, or rather feel the passion itself, in the same
manner, as if the person were really actuated by it.

From the same principles we blush for the conduct of those, who
behave themselves foolishly before us; and that though they shew
no sense of shame, nor seem in the least conscious of their folly.

All this proceeds from sympathy; but it is of a partial kind, and views
its objects only on one side, without considering the other, which
has a contrary effect, and would entirely destroy that emotion,
which arises from the first appearance.

We have also instances, wherein an indifference and insensibility under
misfortune encreases our concern for the misfortunate, even though
the indifference proceed not from any virtue and magnanimity.

It is an aggravation of a murder, that it was committed upon persons
asleep and in perfect security; as historians readily observe of any
infant prince, who is captive in the hands of his enemies, that
he is the more worthy of compassion the less sensible he is of his
miserable condition.

As we ourselves are here acquainted with the wretched situation of
the person, it gives us a lively idea and sensation of sorrow, which
is the passion that generally attends it; and this idea becomes
still more lively, and the sensation more violent by a contrast
with that security and indifference, which we observe in the person
himself.

A contrast of any kind never fails to affect the imagination, especially
when presented by the subject; and it is on the imagination that pity
entirely depends.

[Footnote 11. To prevent all ambiguity, I must observe, that where I
oppose the imagination to the memory, I mean in general the faculty
that presents our fainter ideas.

In all other places, and particularly when it is opposed to the understanding,
I understand the same faculty, excluding only our demonstrative
and probable reasonings.]

SECT. VIII OF MALICE AND ENVY

We must now proceed to account for the passion of malice, which
imitates the effects of hatred, as pity does those of love; and gives
us a joy in the sufferings and miseries of others, without any
offence or injury on their part.

So little are men governed by reason in their sentiments and opinions,
that they always judge more of objects by comparison than from their
intrinsic worth and value.

When the mind considers, or is accustomed to, any degree of. perfection,
whatever falls short of it, though really esteemable, has notwithstanding
the same effect upon the passions; as what is defective and ill.

This is an original quality of the soul, and similar to what we have
every day experience of in our bodies.

Let a man heat one band and cool the other; the same water will, at the
same time, seem both hot and cold, according to the disposition of the
different organs. A small degree of any quality, succeeding a greater,
produces the same sensation, as if less than it really is,
and even sometimes as the opposite quality. Any gentle pain, that
follows a violent one, seems as nothing, or rather becomes a pleasure;
as on the other hand a violent pain, succeeding a gentle one, is doubly
grievous and uneasy.

This no one can doubt of with regard to our passions and sensations.
But there may arise some difficulty with regard to our ideas and
objects.
When an object augments or diminishes to the eye or imagination from a
comparison with others, the image and idea of the object are still
the same, and are equally extended in the retina, and in the brain
or organ of perception.

The eyes refract the rays of light, and the optic nerves convey the images
to the brain in the very same manner, whether a great or small
object has preceded; nor does even the imagination alter the
dimensions of its object on account of a comparison with others.

The question then is, how from the same impression and the same idea we
can form such different judgments concerning the same object, and
at one time admire its bulk, and at another despise its littleness.

This variation in our judgments must certainly proceed from a
variation in some perception; but as the variation lies not in the
immediate impression or idea of the object, it must lie in some
other impression, that accompanies it.

In order to explain this matter, I shall just touch upon two principles,
one of which shall be more fully explained in the progress of this
treatise; the other has been already accounted for.

I believe it may safely be established for a general maxim, that no object
is presented to the senses, nor image formed in the fancy, but
what is accompanyed with some emotion or movement of spirits
proportioned to it; and however custom may make us insensible of
this sensation and cause us to confound it with the object or idea,
it will be easy, by careful and exact experiments, to separate and
distinguish them.

For to instance only in the cases of extension and number; it is evident,
that any very bulky object, such as the ocean, an extended plain, a
vast chain of mountains, a wide forest: or any very numerous
collection of objects, such as an army, a fleet, a crowd, excite
in the mind a sensible emotion; and that the admiration, which arises
on the appearance of such objects, is one of the most lively pleasures,
which human nature is capable of enjoying. Now as this admiration
encreases or diminishes by the encrease or diminution of the
objects, we may conclude, according to our foregoing [Book I.

Part III. Sect. 15.] principles, that it is a compound effect, proceeding
from the conjunction of the several effects, which arise from each part
of the cause.

Every part, then, of extension, and every unite of number has a separate
emotion attending it; and though that emotion be not always
agreeable, yet by its conjunction with others, and by its agitating
the spirits to a just pitch, it contributes to the production of
admiration, which is always agreeable.

If this be allowed with respect to extension and number, we can
make no difficulty with respect to virtue and vice, wit and folly,
riches and poverty, happiness and misery, and other objects of that
kind, which are always attended with an evident emotion.

The second principle I shall take notice of is that of our adherence
to general rules; which has such a mighty influence on the actions
and understanding, and is able to impose on the very senses.

When an object is found by-experience to be always accompanyed with
another; whenever the first object appears, though changed in very
material circumstances; we naturally fly to the conception of the
second, and form an idea of it in as lively and strong a manner,
as if we had infered its existence by the justest and most authentic
conclusion of our understanding.

Nothing can undeceive us, not even our senses, which, instead of
correcting this false judgment, are often perverted by it, and seem
to authorize its errors.

The conclusion I draw from these two principles, joined to the influence
of comparison above-mentioned, is very short and decisive. Every object
is attended with some emotion proportioned to it; a great object with a
great emotion, a small object with a small emotion. A great object,
therefore, succeeding a small one makes a great emotion succeed a
small one.

Now a great emotion succeeding a small one becomes still greater, and
rises beyond its ordinary proportion. But as there is a certain degree
of an emotion, which commonly attends every magnitude of a-n object;
when the emotion encreases, we naturally imagine that the object has
likewise encreased. The effect conveys our view to its usual cause,
a certain degree of emotion to a certain magnitude of the object; nor do
we consider, that comparison may change the emotion without changing
anything in the object.

Those who are acquainted with the metaphysical part of optics and
know how we transfer the judgments and conclusions of the understanding
to the senses, will easily conceive this whole operation.

But leaving this new discovery of an impression, that secretly attends
every idea; we must at least allow of that principle, from whence
the discovery arose, that objects appear greater or less by a
comparison with others.

We have so many instances of this, that it is impossible we can dispute
its veracity; and it is from this principle I derive the passions of
malice and envy.

It is evident we must receive a greater or less satisfaction or
uneasiness from reflecting on our own condition and circumstances, in
proportion as they appear more or less fortunate or unhappy, in proportion
to the degrees of riches, and power, and merit, and reputation,
which we think ourselves possest of.

Now as we seldom judge of objects from their intrinsic value, but
form our notions of them from a comparison with other objects; it
follows, that according as we observe a greater or less share
of happiness or misery in others, we must make an estimate of our
own, and feel a consequent pain or pleasure. The misery of another
gives us a more lively idea of our happiness, and his happiness
of our misery.

The former, therefore, produces delight; and the latter uneasiness.

Here then is a kind of pity reverst, or contrary sensations arising in
the beholder, from those which are felt by the person, whom he
considers.
In general we may observe, that in all kinds of comparison an object makes
us always receive from another, to which it is compared, a sensation
contrary to what arises from itself in its direct and immediate survey.
A small object makes a great one appear still greater. A great object
makes a little one appear less. Deformity of itself produces uneasiness;
but makes us receive new pleasure by its contrast with a beautiful
object, whose beauty is augmented by it; as on the other hand, beauty,
which of itself produces pleasure, makes us receive a new pain by the
contrast with any thing ugiy, whose deformity it augments. The case,
therefore, must be the same with happiness and misery. The direct survey
of another's pleasure naturally gives us plcasure, and therefore produces
pain when cornpared with our own. His pain, considered in itself, is
painful to us, but augments the idea of our own happiness, and gives
us pleasure.

Nor will it appear strange, that we may feel a reverst sensation from
the happiness and misery of others; since we find the same comparison
may give us a kind of malice against ourselves, and make us rejoice
for our pains, and grieve for our pleasures.

Thus the prospect of past pain is agreeable, when we are satisfyed
with our present condition; as on the other hand our past pleasures
give us uneasiness, when we enjoy nothing at present equal to them. The
comparison being the same, as when we reflect on the sentiments
of others, must be attended with the same effects.

Nay a person may extend this malice against himself, even to his present
fortune, and carry it so far as designedly to seek affliction, and
encrease his pains and sorrows. This may happen upon two occasions.
First, Upon the distress and misfortune of a friend, or person dear to
him. Secondly, Upon the feeling any remorses for a crime, of
which he has been guilty.

It is from the principle of comparison that both these irregular
appetites for evil arise. A person, who indulges himself in any pleasure,
while his friend lies under affliction, feels the reflected uneasiness
from his friend more sensibly by a comparison with the original pleasure,
which he himself enjoys. This contrast, indeed, ought also to inliven
the present pleasure. But as grief is here supposed to be the predominant
passion, every addition falls to that side, and is swallowed up
in it, without operating in the least upon the contrary affection.

It is the same case with those penances, which men inflict on
themselves for their past sins and failings. When a. criminal reflects
on the punishment he deserves, the idea of it is magnifyed by a
comparison with his present ease and satisfaction; which forces
him, in a manner, to seek uneasiness, in order to avoid so disagreeable
a contrast.

This reasoning will account for the origin of envy as well as of
malice.
The only difference betwixt these passions lies in this, that envy is
excited by some present enjoyment of another, which by comparison
diminishes our idea of our own: Whereas malice is the unprovoked desire
of producing evil to another, in order to reap a pleasure from
the comparison. The enjoyment, which is the object of envy, is commonly
superior to our own. A superiority naturally seems to overshade us, and
presents a disagreeable comparison. But even in the case of an
inferiority, we still desire a greater distance, in order to augment,
still more the idea of ourself. When this distance diminishes, the
comparison is less to our advantage; and consequently gives us
less pleasure, and is even disagreeable.

Hence arises that species of envy, which men feel, when they perceive
their inferiors approaching or overtaking them in the pursuits of glory
or happiness.

In this envy we may see the effects of comparison twice repeated.
A man, who compares himself to his inferior, receives a pleasure from
the comparison: And when the inferiority decreases by the elevation of
the inferior, what should only have been a decrease of pleasure, becomes
a real pain, by a new comparison with its preceding condition.

It is worthy of observation concerning that envy, which arises from
a superiority in others, that it is not the great disproportion
betwixt ourself and another, which produces it; but on the contrary,
our proximity.

A common soldier bears no such envy to his general as to his sergeant
or corporal; nor does an eminent writer meet with so great jealousy
in common hackney scriblers, as in authors, that more nearly
approach him.

It may, indeed, be thought, that the greater the disproportion is, the
greater must be the uneasiness from the comparison.
But we may consider on the other hand, that the great disproportion
cuts off the relation, and either keeps us from comparing ourselves
with what is remote from us, or diminishes the effects of the
comparison.

Resemblance and proximity always produce a relation of ideas; and where
you destroy these ties, however other accidents may bring two ideas
together; as they have no bond or connecting quality to join them
in the imagination; it is impossible they can remain long united, or
have any considerable influence on each other.

They have already resolved to strike for the city of Santiago; but in
what order should they travel?  Separate into several parties, or go all
together?

The former plan, proposed by Gomez, is supported by Padilla, Hernandez,
and Velarde.  Gomez gives his reasons.  Such a large number of
pedestrians along roads where none save horsemen are ever seen, could
not fail to excite surprise.  It might cause inconvenient questions to
be asked them--perhaps lead to their being arrested, and taken before
some village _alcalde_.  And what story could they tell?

On the other hand, there will be the chance of coming across Indians;
and as those on the Veraguan coast are ranked among the "bravos"--having
preserved their independence, and along with it their instinctive
hostility to the whites--an encounter with them might be even more
dangerous than with any _alcalde_.  Struggling along in squads of two or
three, they would run a risk of getting captured, or killed, or
scalped--perhaps all three.

This is the suggestion of Harry Blew, Striker and Davis alone favouring
his view.  All the others go against it, Gomez ridiculing the idea of
danger from red men; at the same time enlarging on that to be
apprehended from white ones.

As the majority have more reason to fear civilised man than the
so-called savage, it ends in their deciding for separation.  They can
come together again in Santiago if they choose it; or not, should chance
for good or ill so determine.  They are all now amply provided for,
playing an independent part in the drama of life; and with this pleasant
prospect, they may part company without a sigh of regret.


CHAPTER SIXTY SIX.

A TENDER SUBJECT.

The pirates having definitively settled the mode of making their inland
journey, there is a short interregnum; during which most of those ready
for the road stand idling, one or two still occupied in equipping
themselves.

La Crosse has been sent up the ravine, to report how things look
landward.

The four Spaniards have signified their intention to remain a little
longer on the ground; while the three Englishmen have not said when they
will leave.  These are together conferring in low voice; but with an
earnestness in their eyes--especially Blew's--which makes it easy to
guess the subject.  Only thoughts of woman could kindle these fiery
glances.

Soon all appear ready to depart.  Still no one stirs from the spot.  For
there is something yet: still another question to be determined; to most
of them a matter of little, though to some of all consequence.

Merrow_ who has the _beau rôle_, and, I must add, deserves it. For the
rest I must let Mr.
Marshall's book speak for itself.

He has written a very powerful and interesting story

.

* * * * *
Among reviewers of books there is a convention by which the matter
of a first edition--whether a single story or a collection of stories--which
has been reproduced from a magazine or magazines, is treated as if it
were a novelty. It is a sound and benevolent convention, because
the stuff of magazines only receives at best a very sketchy notice.
Miss May Sinclair, however, is apparently prepared; to risk the loss of
any advantage to be derived from it, for her collection of short and
middle-sized stones republished under the title of the first of them,
_The Judgment of Eve_ (Hutchinson), is prefaced by an article in which
she replies to those critics who took notice of some of them at the time
of their appearance in magazine form. By this recognition of judgment
already passed she sets me free to regard her stories as old matter,
and to confine myself to a review of her introduction.

In this answer to her critics I cannot feel that she has been well
advised. Even in a second edition critics are best left alone,
unless the author can correct them on a point of fact or interpretation
of fact.

Here it is on a matter of opinion that she joins issue with them. They
seem (the misguided ones) to have rashly said that "The Judgment of
Eve" was "a novel boiled down," and that "The Wrackham Memoirs,"
on the other hand, was "a short story spun out."

But Miss Sinclair is very sure that she knew what she was about.

She can "lay her hand on her heart and swear that 'The Judgment of
Eve' would have lost by any words that could conceivably have been
added to it;" she is certain that "Charles Wrackham required the
precise amount of room that has been given him."

I dare say she is right, but I wish she could have left someone else to
say so. For myself I should have thought it obvious that a story dealing
with character and its development by circumstance demanded more
room in which to spread itself than one that dealt with a situation,
dramatic or psychologic; yet "The Wrackham Memoirs," which, whatever
its complexity, belongs to the latter type, takes up very nearly
as much space as "The Judgment of Eve," which belongs to the former.

demands the Spaniard, his eyes betraying
anger, with some uneasiness.

"No use your losin' temper, Gil Gomez.  You ain't goin' to scare me.  So
you may as well keep cool.  By doin' that, and listenin', you'll larn
what I mean.  The which is, that you and Hernandez have no more right to
them creeturs in the cave than any o' the rest of us.  Just as the gold,
so ought it to be wi' the girls.  In coorse, we can't divide them all
round; but that's no reason why any two should take 'em, so long's any
other two wants 'em as well.  Now, _I_ wants one o' them."

"And I another!" puts in Davis.

"Yes," continues Blew; "and though I be a bit older than you, Mr Gomez,
and not quite so pretentious a gentleman, I can like a pretty wench as
well's yerself.  I've took a fancy to the one wi' the tortoise-shell
hair, an' an't goin' to gi'e her up in the slack way you seem to be
wishin'."

"Glad to hear it's the red one, Blew," says Davis.  "As I'm for the
black one, there'll be no rivalry between us.  Her I mean to have--
unless some better man hinders me."

"Well," interpolates Striker, "as 'twas me first put the questyun, I
'spose I'll be allowed to gi'e an opeenyun?"

No one saying nay, the ex-convict proceeds:

"As to any one hevin' a speecial claim to them weemen, nobody has, an'
nobody shed have.  'Bout that, Blew's right, an' so's Bill.  An' since
the thing's disputed, it oughter be settled in a fair an' square--"

"You needn't waste your breath," interrupts Gomez, in a tone of
determination.  "I admit no dispute in the matter.  If these gentlemen
insist, there's but one way of settling.  First, however, I'll say a
word to explain.  One of these ladies is my sweetheart--was, before I
ever saw any of you.  Senor Hernandez here can say the same of the
other.  Nay, I may tell you more; they are pledged to us."

"It's a lie!" cries Blew, confronting the slanderer, and looking him
straight in the face.  "A lie, Gil Gomez, from the bottom o' your black
heart!"

"Enough!" exclaims Gomez, now purple with rage.  "No man can give Frank
Lara the lie, and live after."

"Frank Lara; or whatever you may call yerself, I'll live long enough to
see you under ground--or what's more like, hangin' high above it wi'
your throat in a halter.  Don't make any mistake about me.  I can shoot
straight as you."

"Avast theer!" shouts Striker to Gomez, now calling himself De Lara,
seeing him about to draw a pistol.  "Keep yer hand off that wepun!  If
theer must be a fight, let it be a fair one.  But, before it begin, Jack
Striker has a word to say."

While speaking, he has stepped between the two men, staying their
encounter.

"Yes; let the fight be a fair one!" demand several voices, as the
pirates come clustering around.

"Look here, shipmates!" continues Striker, still standing between the
two angry men, and alternately eyeing them.  "What's the use o' spillin'
blood about it--maybe killin' one the other?  All for the sake o' a pair
o' petticoats, or a couple o' pairs, as it be.  Take my advice, an'
settle the thing in a pacifical way.  Maybe ye will, after ye've heerd
what I intend proposin'; which I daresay 'll be satisfactory to all."

"What is it, Jack?" asks one of the outsiders.

"First, then, I'm goin' to make the observashun, that fightin' an't the
way to get them weemen, whoever's fools enough to fight for 'em.
Theer's somethin' to be done besides."

"Explain yourself, old Sydney!  What's to be done besides?"

"If the gals are goin' to be fought for, they've first got to be _paid_
for."

"How that?"

"How?  What humbuggin' stuff askin' such a questyin!  Han't we all equil
shares in 'em?  Coorse we hev.  Tharfore, them as wants 'em, must pay
for 'em.  An' they as wants 'em so bad as to do shootin' for 'em, surely
won't objek to that.  Theer appear to be four candydates in the field,
an', kewrous enuf, they're set in pairs, two for each one o' the gals.
Now, 'ithout refarin' to any fightin' that's to be done--an', if they're
fools enuf to fight, let 'em--I say that eyther who eventyally gets a
gal, shed pay a considerashin o' gold-dust all roun' to the rest o' us--
at least a pannikin apiece.  That's what Jack Striker proposes first."

"It's fair," says Slush.

"Nothing more than our rights," observes Tarry; the Dane and the
Dutchman also endorsing the proposal.

"I agree to it," says Harry Blew.

"I also," adds Davis.

De Lara--late Gomez--signifies his assent by a disdainful nod, but
without saying a word; Hernandez imitating the action.  In fear of
losing adherents, neither dares disapprove of it.

"What more have you to say, Jack?" asks Slush, recalling Striker's last
words, which seemed to promise something else.

"Not much.  Only thet I think it a pity, after our livin' so long in
harmony thegither, we can't part same way.  Weemen's allers been a
bother ever since I've know'd 'em.  An', I 'spose, it'll continue so to
the eend o' the chapter, an' the eend o' some lives heer.  I repeet,
thet it be a pity we shed hev to wind up wi' a quarrel wheer blood's
bound to be spilt.  Now, why, can't it be settled 'ithout thet?  I think
I know o' a way."

"What way?"

"Leave it to the ladies theirselves.  Gi'e them the chance o' who they'd
like for theer purtectors; same time lettin' 'em know they've got to
choose 'tween one or t'other.  Let 'em take theer pick, everybody
unnerstanin' afterwards theer's to be no quarrellin', or fightin'.
That's our law in the Australyin bush, when we've cases o' the kind; an'
every bushranger hez to 'bide by it.  Why shedn't it be the same heer?"

"Why shouldn't it?" asks Slush.  "It's a good law--just and fair for
all."

"I consent to it," says Blew, with apparent reluctance, as if doubtful
of the result, yet satisfied to submit to the will of the majority.  "I
mayn't be neyther so young nor so good-lookin' as Mr Gomez," he adds;
"I know I an't eyther.  Still I'll take my chance.  If she I lay claim
to pronounces against me, I promise to stand aside, and say ne'er
another word--much less think o' fightin' for her.  She can go 'long wi'
him, an' my blessin' wi' both."

"Bravo, Blew!  You talk like a good 'un.  Don't be afraid; we'll stand
by you!"

This, from several of the outsiders.

"Comrades!" says Davis, "I place myself in your hands.  If my girl's
against me, I'm willin' to give her up, same as Blew."

What about the other two?  What answer will they make to the proposed
peaceful compromise?  All eyes are turned on them, awaiting it.

De Lara speaks first, his eyes flashing fire.  Hitherto he has been
holding his anger in check, but now it breaks out, poured forth like
lava from a burning mountain.

"_Carajo_!" he cries.  "I've been listening a long time to talk--taking
it too coolly.  Idle talk, all of it; yours, Mr Striker, especially.
What care we about your ways in the Australian bush.  They won't hold
good here, or with me.  My style of settling disputes is this, or this."
He touches his pistol-butt, and then the hilt of _machete_, hanging by
his side, adding, "Mr Blew can have his choice."

"All right!" retorts the ex-man-o'-war's man.  "I'm good for a bout with
eyther, and don't care a toss which.  Pistols at six paces, or my
cutlass against that straight blade o' yours.  Both if you like."

"Both be it.  That's best, and will make the end sure.  Get ready, and
quick.  For, sure as I stand here, I intend killing you!"

"Say, you intend tryin'.  I'm ready to give you the chance.  You can
begin, soon's you feel disposed."

"And I'm ready for _you_, sir," says Davis, confronting Hernandez.
"Knives, pistols, tomahawks--anything you like."

Hernandez hangs back, as though he would rather decline this combat _a
outrance_.

"No, Bill!" interposes Striker; "one fight at a time.  When Blew an'
Gomez hev got through wi' theirs, then you can gi'e t'other his change--
if so be he care to hev it."

"T'other" appears gratified with Striker's speech, disregarding the
innuendo.  He had no thought it would come to this, and now looks as if
he would surrender up his sweetheart without striking a blow.  He makes
no rejoinder; but shrinks back, cowed-like and craven.

"Yes; one fight at a time!" cry others, endorsing the dictum of Striker.

It is the demand of the majority, and the minority concedes it.  All
know it is to be a duel to the death.  A glance at the antagonists--at
their angry eyes and determined attitudes--makes this sure.  On that
lonely shore one of the two, if not both, will sleep his last sleep!


CHAPTER SIXTY SEVEN.

A DUEL ADJOURNED.

The combat, now declared inevitable, its preliminaries are speedily
arranged.  Under the circumstances, and between such adversaries, the
punctilios of ceremony are slight.  For theirs is the rough code of
honour common to robbers of all countries and climes.

No seconds are chosen, nor spoken of.  All on the ground are to act as
such; and at once proceed to business.

Some measure off the distance, stepping it between two stones.  Others
examine the pistols, to see that both are loaded with ball-cartridge,
and carefully capped.  The fight is to be with Colt's six-shooters, navy
size.  Each combatant chances to have one of this particular pattern.
They are to commence firing at twelve paces, and if that be ineffectual,
then close up, as either chooses.  If neither fall to the shots, then to
finish with the steel.

The captives inside the cave are ignorant of what is going on.  Little
dream they of the red tragedy soon to be enacted so near, or how much
they themselves may be affected by its result.  It is indeed to them the
chances of a contrasting destiny.

The duellists take stand by the stones, twelve paces apart.  Blew having
stripped off his pilot-cloth coat, is in his shirt-sleeves.  These
rolled up to the elbow, expose ranges of tattooing, fouled anchors,
stars, crescents, and a woman--a perfect medley of forecastle souvenirs.
They show also muscles, lying along his arms like lanyards round a
ship's stay.  Should the shots fail, those arms promise well for
wielding the cutlass; and if his fingers should clutch his antagonist's
throat, the struggle will be a short one.

Still, no weak adversary will he meet in Francisco de Lara.  He, too,
has laid aside his outer garment--thrown off his scarlet cloak, and the
heavy hat.  He does not need stripping to the shirt-sleeves; his light
_jaqueta_ of velveteen in no way encumbers him.  Fitting like a glove,
it displays arms of muscular strength, with a body in symmetrical
correspondence.

A duel between two such gladiators might be painful, but for all, a
fearfully interesting spectacle.  Those about to witness it seem to
think so, as they stand silent, with breath bated, and eyes alternately
on one and the other.

As it has been arranged that Striker is to give the signal, the
ex-convict, standing centrally outside the line of fire, is about to say
a word that will set two men, mad as tigers, at one another--each with
full resolve to fire, cut down, and kill.

There is a moment of intense stillness, like the lull which precedes a
storm.  Nothing heard save the tidal wash against the near strand, the
boom of the distant breakers, and at intervals the shrill scream of a
sea-bird.

The customary "Ready!" is forming on Striker's lips, to be followed by
the "Fire!--one--two--three!"  But not one of these words--not a
syllable--is he permitted to speak.  Before he can give utterance to the
first, a cry comes down from the cliff, which arrests the attention of
all; soon as understood, enchaining it.

It is La Crosse who sends it, shouting in accent of alarm--

"_Mon Dieu! we're on an island_!"

When the forest is on fire, or the savannah swept by flood, and their
wild denizens flee to a spot uninvaded, the timid deer is safe beside
the fierce wolf or treacherous cougar.  In face of the common danger
they will stand trembling together--the beasts of prey for the time
gentle as their victims.

So with human kind; a case parallel, and in point, furnished by the crew
of the _Condor_ with their captives.

The pirates, on hearing the cry of La Crosse, are at first only
startled.  But soon their surprise becomes apprehension; keen enough to
stay the threatening fight, and indefinitely postpone it.  For at the
words "We're on an island!" they are impressed with an instinctive sense
of danger; and all, intending combatants as spectators, rush up the
ravine, to the summit of the cliff, where La Crosse is still standing.

Arrived there, and casting their eyes inland, they have evidence of the
truth of his statement.  A strait, leagues in width, separates them from
the mainland.  Far too wide to be crossed by the strongest swimmer
amongst them--too wide for them to be descried from the opposite side,
even through a telescope!  And the inland is a mere strip of sea-washed
rock, running parallel to the coast, cliff-bound, table-topped, sterile,
treeless--and, to all appearance, waterless!

As this last thought comes uppermost--along with the recollection that
their boat is gone--what was at first only a flurry of excited
apprehension, becomes a fixed fear.

Still further intensified, when after scattering over the islet, and
exploring it from end to end, they again come together, and each party
delivers its report.  No wood save some stunted bushes; no water--
stream, pond, or spring; only that of the salt sea rippling around; no
sign of animal life, except snakes, scorpions, and lizards, with the
birds flying above--screaming as if in triumph at the intruders upon
their domain being thus entrapped!

For they are so, and clearly comprehend it.  Most of them are men who
have professionally followed the sea, and understand what it is to be
"castaways."  Some have had actual experience of it, and need no
reminding of its dangers.  To a man, they feel their safety as much
compromised, as if the spot of earth under their feet, instead of being
but three leagues from land--were three thousand--for that matter in the
middle of the Pacific.

What would they not now give to be again on board the barque sent
sailing thither to miserably perish?  Ah! their cruelty has come back
upon them like a curse.

The interrupted duel--what of it?  Nothing.  It is not likely ever to be
fought.  Between the _ci-devant_ combatants, mad anger and jealous
rivalry may still remain.  But neither shows it now; both subdued, in
contemplation of the common peril.

Blew, to all appearance, is less affected than his antagonist; but all
are cowed--awed by a combination of occurrences, that look as though an
avenging angel had been sent to punish them.

From that moment Carmen Montijo and Inez Alvarez will be safe in their
midst, as if promenading the streets of Cadiz, or flirting their fans at
a _funcion de toros_.

Safe, as far as being molested by the ruffians around them.  Yet, alas!
exposed to the danger overhanging all--death from starvation.

A fearful fate threatens the late crew of the Chilian barque, in horror
equalling that to which those left aboard of her have been consigned.
Well may they deem it a retribution--that God's hand is upon them,
meting out a punishment apportioned to their crime!

But surely He will not permit the innocent to suffer with the guilty?
Let us hope--pray, He will not.


CHAPTER SIXTY EIGHT.

LONG-SUFFERING.

"_Virgen Santissima_!  Mother of God, have mercy!"

The cry is heard in the cabin of the _Condor_--Don Gregorio Montijo
giving utterance to it.

Several days have elapsed since the desertion of her crew, and she is
still afloat, drifting in a south-westerly direction, with all sail set,
just as when the pirates put away from her.

Why she has not gone to the bottom is known but to two men--they
entrusted with the scuttling.

And just as when left, are the three unfortunate beings aboard: the
black cook on his galley bench, the captain and his passenger
_vis-a-vis_ at the cabin-table, bound to and bolt upright in their
chairs.

But though the attitudes of all three are unchanged, there is a marked
change in their appearance, especially of those in the cabin.  For the
white man shown the effects of physical suffering sooner than the
Ethiopian.

For over five days Don Gregorio and Lantanas have been enduring agony
great as ever tortured Tantalus.  It has made fearful inroad on their
strength--on their frames.  Both are reduced almost to skeletons;
cheekbones protruding, eyes sunken in their sockets.  Were the cords
that confine them suddenly taken off, they would sink helpless on the
floor!

Not all this time have they been silent.  At intervals they had
conversed upon their desperate situation.  For the first day, with some
lingering hope of being released; but afterwards despairingly, as the
hours passed and nothing occurred to change it.

Now and then they have heard cries on deck; knowing they are from the
cook; whom they now believe to be, as themselves, bound up somewhere in
the forward part of the vessel.

At first they made some attempt to communicate with him, by answering
them; but found it an idle effort.  He may have heard, but could not
help them.  And now their feeble strength forbids even such exertion of
their voices.

Long since have the two men given up all hope of being able to untie the
cords keeping them to their chairs.  The knots made by the hands of a
sailor would defy the efforts of the most skilled _presti-digitateur_.

And at length also have they ceased to converse, or only at periods long
apart.  Lantanas, after his first throes of fierce rage, has sunk into a
sort of stupor, and, with head drooping down to his breast, appears as
if life had left him.

Don Gregorio, on the contrary, holds his erect--at least during most
part of the day.  For before him is something to be seen--the sea
through the stern windows, still open.

On this he keeps his eyes bent habitually; though not with much hope of
their seeing aught to cheer him.  On its blue expanse he beholds but a
streak of white, the frothing water in the vessel's wake, now and then a
"school" of tumbling porpoises, or the "spout" of a cachalot whale.

Once, however, an object came within his field of vision, which caused
him to start, writhe in his ropes, and cry out to the utmost of his
strength.  For it was a ship in full sail crossing the _Condor's_ track,
and scarce a cable's length astern!

He heard a hail and called out in response, Lantanas joining him.

And the two kept on shouting for hours after, till their feeble voices
failed them; and they again resigned themselves to a despondency,
hopeless as ever.

All their shouts have ever brought them were the Bornean apes, that they
often hear scampering up and down the cabin-stair, dashing their uncouth
bodies against the closed door.

The Chilian has now quite surrendered to despair; while Don Gregorio,
who had also lost hope of help from man, still has faith in Heaven.
Hence the prayerful appeal; which with unabated fervour he once more
sends up:--

"_Virgen Santissima_!  Mother of God, have mercy!"

All at once Lantanas, catching the words, and raising his head, cries
out:

"Virgin!  Hach!  There's no virgin!--No mother of God, nor God neither!"

"Captain Lantanas!"

"Don't captain me!  I'm not a captain.  I'm a poor miserable creature--
starving with hunger--dying of thirst.  Merciful Virgin, indeed!
Where's her mercy?  If she has it, let her show.  Let her find me food
and drink.  Cakes and fruit there!  Nothing of the sort.  Stones,
painted stones!  And those other things!  Bottles they call them--
bottles and decanters.  All a deception.  They're imps--some demigods!
But these actions are still considered as signs; and the ultimate object
of our praise and approbation is the motive, that produced
them.

After the same manner, when we require any action, or blame a person
for not performing it, we always suppose, that one in that situation
should be influenced by the proper motive of that action, and we
esteem it vicious in him to be regardless of it.

If we find, upon enquiry, that the virtuous motive was still powerful
over his breast, though checked in its operation by some circumstances
unknown to us, we retract our blame, and have the same esteem for
him, as if he had actually performed the action, which we require
of him.

It appears, therefore, that all virtuous actions derive their merit
only from virtuous motives, and are considered merely as signs of
those motives.

From this principle I conclude, that the first virtuous motive,
which bestows a merit on any action, can never be a regard to the
virtue of that action. but must be some other natural motive or
principle.

To suppose, that the mere regard to the virtue of the action. may be the
first motive, which produced the action, and rendered it virtuous, is
to reason in a circle.

Before we can have such a regard, the action must be really virtuous; and
this virtue must be derived from some virtuous motive: And
consequently the virtuous motive must be different from the regard
to the virtue of the action.

A virtuous motive is requisite to render an action virtuous. An action
must be virtuous, before we can have a regard to its virtue. Some
virtuous motive, therefore, must be antecedent to that regard.

Nor is this merely a metaphysical subtilty; but enters into all our
reasonings in common life, though perhaps we may not be able to place
it in such distinct philosophical terms. We blame a father for neglecting
his child. Why?

because it shews a want of natural affection, which is the duty of
every parent. Were not natural affection a duty, the care of children
coued not be a duty; and it were impossible we coued have the duty
in our eye in the attention we give to our offspring.

In this case, therefore, all men suppose a motive to the action
distinct from a sense of duty.

Here is a man, that does many benevolent actions; relieves the
distressed, comforts the afflicted, and extends his bounty even to
the greatest strangers.

No character can be more amiable and virtuous. We regard these actions
as proofs of the greatest humanity.

This humanity bestows a merit on the actions. A regard to this merit
is, therefore, a secondary consideration, and derived from the
antecedent principle of humanity, which is meritorious and
laudable.

In short, it may be established as an undoubted maxim, THAT NO
ACTION CAN BE VIRTUOUS, OR MORALLY GOOD, UNLESS THERE BE IN HUMAN
NATURE SOME MOTIVE TO PRODUCE IT, DISTINCT FROM THE SENSE OF ITS
MORALITY.

But may not the sense of morality or duty produce an action,
without any other motive? I answer, It may: But this is no objection to
the present doctrine.

When any virtuous motive or principle is common in human nature, a person,
who feels his heart devoid of that motive, may hate himself upon
that account, and may perform the action without the motive, from
a certain sense of duty, in order to acquire by practice, that
virtuous principle, or at least, to disguise to himself, as much
as possible, his want of it.

A man that really feels no gratitude in his temper, is still pleased to
perform grateful actions, and thinks he has, by that means, fulfilled his
duty.

Actions are at first only considered as signs of motives: But it is usual,
in this case, as in all others, to fix our attention on the signs,
and neglect, in some measure, the thing signifyed.

But though, on some occasions, a person may perform an action merely
out of regard to its moral obligation, yet still this supposes in human
nature some distinct principles, which are capable of producing the
action, and whose moral beauty renders the action meritorious.

Now to apply all this to the present case; I suppose a person to have
lent me a sum of money, on condition that it be restored in a few
days; and also suppose, that after the expiration of the term agreed
on, he demands the sum: I ask, What reason or motive have I to
restore the money?

It will, perhaps, be said, that my regard to justice, and abhorrence of
villainy and knavery, are sufficient reasons for me, if I have the
least grain of honesty, or sense of duty and obligation. And this
answer, no doubt, is just and satisfactory to man in his civilized
state, and when trained up according to a certain discipline and
education.

But in his rude and more natural condition, if you are pleased to call
such a condition natural, this answer would be rejected as perfectly
unintelligible and sophistical.

For one in that situation would immediately ask you, WHEREIN CONSISTS
THIS HONESTY AND JUSTICE, WHICH YOU FIND IN RESTORING A LOAN, AND
ABSTAINING FROM THE PROPERTY OF OTHERS? It does not surely lie in
the external action. It must, therefore be placed in the motive, from
which the external action is derived.

This motive can never be a regard to the honesty of the action. For it is
a plain fallacy to say, that a virtuous motive is requisite to
render an action honest, and at the same time that a regard to the
honesty is the motive of the action.

We can never have a regard to the virtue of an action, unless the action
be antecedently virtuous. No action can be virtuous, but so far as it
proceeds from a virtuous motive. A virtuous motive, therefore, must
precede the regard to the virtue, and it is impossible, that the
virtuous motive and the regard to the virtue can be the same.

It is requisite, then, to find some motive to acts of justice and
honesty, distinct from our regard to the honesty; and in this lies
the great difficulty.

For should we say, that a concern for our private interest or reputation
is the legitimate motive to all honest actions; it would follow, that
wherever that concern ceases, honesty can no longer have place.
But it is certain, that self-love, when it acts at its liberty,
instead of engaging us to honest actions, is the source of all injustice
and violence; nor can a man ever correct those vices, without correcting
and restraining the natural movements of that appetite.

But should it be affirmed, that the reason or motive of such actions is
the regard to publick interest, to which nothing is more contrary
than examples of injustice and dishonesty; should this be said, I
would propose the three following considerations, as worthy of our
attention.

First, public interest is not naturally attached to the observation
of the rules of justice; but is only connected with it, after an
artificial convention for the establishment of these rules, as
shall be shewn more at large hereafter.

Secondly, if we suppose, that the loan was secret, and that it is
necessary for the interest of the person, that the money be restored
in the same manner (as when the lender would conceal his riches)
in that case the example ceases, and the public is no longer
interested in the actions of the borrower; though I suppose there
is no moralist, who will affirm, that the duty and obligation ceases.

Thirdly, experience sufficiently proves, that men, in the ordinary
conduct of life, look not so far as the public interest, when they
pay their creditors, perform their promises, and abstain from theft,
and robbery, and injustice of every kind.

That is a motive too remote and too sublime to affect the generality of
mankind, and operate with any force in actions so contrary to
private interest as are frequently those of justice and common
honesty.

In general, it may be affirmed, that there is no such passion in
human minds, as the love of mankind, merely as such, independent
of personal qualities, of services, or of relation to ourseit It
is true, there is no human, and indeed no sensible, creature, whose
happiness or misery does not, in some measure, affect us when brought
near to us, and represented in lively colours: But this proceeds
merely from sympathy, and is no proof of such an universal affection
to mankind, since this concern extends itself beyond our own species.

An affection betwixt the sexes is a passion evidently implanted in human
nature; and this passion not only appears in its peculiar symptoms, but
also in inflaming every other principle of affection, and raising
a stronger love from beauty, wit, kindness, than what would otherwise
flow from them.

Were there an universal love among all human creatures, it would appear
after the same manner.

Any degree of a good quality would cause a stronger affection than the
same degree of a bad quality would cause hatred; contrary to what we
find by experience.

Men's tempers are different, and some have a propensity to the tender,
and others to the rougher, affections: But in the main, we may
affirm, that man in general, or human nature, is nothing but the
object both of love and hatred, and requires some other cause, which
by a double relation of impressions and ideas, may excite these
passions.

In vain would we endeavour to elude this hypothesis. There are no
phaenomena that point out any such kind affection to men, independent
of their merit, and every other circumstance.

We love company in general; but it is as we love any other amusement.
An Englishman in Italy is a friend: A Euro paean in China; and
perhaps a man would be beloved as such, were we to meet him in the
moon.

But this proceeds only from the relation to ourselves; which in
these cases gathers force by being confined to a few persons.

If public benevolence, therefore, or a regard to the interests of
mankind, cannot be the original motive to justice, much less can
private benevolence, or a regard to the interests of the party
concerned, be this motive.

For what if he be my enemy, and has given me just cause to hate him?
What if he be a vicious man, and deserves the hatred of all mankind?
What if he be a miser, and can make no use of what I would deprive
him of?

What if he be a profligate debauchee, and would rather receive harm
than benefit from large possessions?

What if I be in necessity, and have urgent motives to acquire something
to my family? In all these cases, the original motive to justice would
fail; and consequently the justice itself, and along with it all
property, tight, and obligation.

A rich man lies under a moral obligation to communicate to those in
necessity a share of his superfluities.

Were private benevolence the original motive to justice, a man would not
be obliged to leave others in the possession of more than he is obliged
to give them. At least the difference would be very inconsiderable. Men
generally fix their affections more on what they are possessed of,
than on what they never enjoyed: For this reason, it would be
greater cruelty to dispossess a man of any thing, than not to give it
him. But who will assert, that this is the only foundation of
justice?

Besides, we must consider, that the chief reason, why men attach
themselves so much to their possessions is, that they consider them as
their property, and as secured to them inviolably by the laws of
society.
But this is a secondary consideration, and dependent on the preceding
notions of justice and property.

A man's property is supposed to be fenced against every mortal, in every
possible case.

But private benevolence is, and ought to be, weaker in some persons, than
in others: And in many, or indeed in most persons, must absolutely fail.
Private benevolence, therefore, is not the original motive of
justice.

From all this it follows, that we have no real or universal motive for
observing the laws of equity, but the very equity and merit of that
observance; and as no action can be equitable or meritorious, where
it cannot arise from some separate motive, there is here an evident
sophistry and reasoning in a circle.

Unless, therefore, we will allow, that nature has established a sophistry,
and rendered it necessary and unavoidable, we must allow, that
the sense of justice and injustice is not derived from nature, but
arises artificially, though necessarily from education, and human
conventions.

I shall add, as a corollary to this reasoning, that since no action
can be laudable or blameable, without some motives or impelling
passions, distinct from the sense of morals, these distinct passions
must have a great influence on that sense.

It is according to their general force in human nature, that we blame or
praise. In judging of the beauty of animal bodies, we always carry
in our eye the oeconomy of a certain species; and where the limbs
and features observe that proportion, which is common to the species,
we pronounce them handsome and beautiful.

In like manner we always consider the natural and usual force of the
passions, when we determine concerning vice and virtue; and if the passions
depart very much from the common measures on either side, they are
always disapproved as vicious.

A man naturally loves his children better than his nephews, his nephews
better than his cousins, his cousins better than strangers, where every
thing else is equal. Hence arise our common measures of duty, in
preferring the one to the other.

Our sense of duty always follows the common and natural course of
our passions.

To avoid giving offence, I must here observe, that when I deny justice
to be a natural virtue, I make use of the word, natural, only as
opposed to artificial.

In another sense of the word; as no principle of the human mind is
more natural than a sense of virtue; so no virtue is more natural
than justice.

Mankind is an inventive species; and where an invention is obvious and
absolutely necessary, it may as properly be said to be natural as any
thing that proceeds immediately from original principles, without
the intervention of thought or reflection.

Though the rules of justice be artificial, they are not arbitrary. Nor
is the expression improper to call them Laws of Nature; if by
natural we understand what is common to any species, or even if we
confine it to mean what is inseparable from the species.

SECT. II OF THE ORIGIN OF JUSTICE AND PROPERTY

We now proceed to examine two questions, viz, CONCERNING THE MANNER,
IN WHICH THE RULES OF JUSTICE ARE ESTABLISHed BY THE ARTIFICE OF
MEN; and CONCERNING THE REASONS, WHICH DETERMINE US TO ATTRIBUTE
TO THE OBSERVANCE OR NEGLECT OF THESE RULES A MORAL BEAUTY AND
DEFORMITY.

These questions will appear afterwards to be distinct.

We shall begin with the former.

Of all the animals, with which this globe is peopled, there is none
towards whom nature seems, at first sight, to have exercised
more cruelty than towards man, in the numberless wants and necessities,
with which she has loaded him, and in the slender means, which she
affords to the relieving these necessities.

In other creatures these two particulars generally compensate each
other. If we consider the lion as a voracious and carnivorous
animal, we shall easily discover him to be very necessitous; but if
we turn our eye to his make and temper, his agility, his courage, his
arms, and his force, we shall find, that his advantages hold
proportion with his wants.

The sheep and ox are deprived of all these advantages; but their
appetites are moderate, and their food is of easy purchase.

In man alone, this unnatural conjunction of infirmity, and of
necessity, may be observed in its greatest perfection.

Not only the food, which is required for his sustenance, flies his
search and approach, or at least requires his labour to be produced,
but he must be possessed of cloaths and lodging, to defend him
against the injuries of the weather; though to consider him only
in himself, he is provided neither with arms, nor force, nor other
natural abilities, which are in any degree answerable to so many
necessities.

It is by society alone he is able to supply his defects, and raise
himself up to an equality with his fellow-creatures, and even acquire
a superiority above them.

By society all his infirmities are compensated; and though in that
situation his wants multiply every moment upon him, yet his abilities
are still more augmented, and leave him in every respect more
satisfied and happy, than it is possible for him, in his savage and
solitary condition, ever to become.

When every individual person labours a-part, and only for himself,
his force is too small to execute any considerable work; his labour being
employed in supplying all his different necessities, he never
attains a perfection in any particular art; and as his force and
success are not at all times equal, the least failure in either of
these particulars must be attended with inevitable ruin and misery.

Society provides a remedy for these three inconveniences.

By the conjunction of forces, our power is augmented: By the partition
of employments, our ability encreases: And by mutual succour we are
less exposed to fortune and accidents.

It is by this additional force, ability, and security, that society
becomes advantageous.

But in order to form society, it is requisite not only that it be
advantageous, but also that men be sensible of these advantages; and it
is impossible, in their wild uncultivated state, that by study and
reflection alone, they should ever be able to attain this knowledge.
Most fortunately, therefore, there is conjoined to those necessities,
whose remedies are remote and obscure, another necessity, which having
a present and more obvious remedy, may justly be regarded as the
first and original principle of human society.

This necessity is no other than that natural appetite betwixt the
sexes, which unites them together, and preserves their union, till a
new tye takes place in their concern for their common offspring. This new
concern becomes also a principle of union betwixt the parents and
offspring, and forms a more numerous society; where the parents
govern by the advantage of their superior strength and wisdom, and
at the same time are restrained in the exercise of their authority
by that natural affection, which they bear their children.

In a little time, custom and habit operating on the tender minds of the
children, makes them sensible of the advantages, which they may reap
from society, as well as fashions them by degrees for it, by rubbing
off those rough corners and untoward affections, which prevent their
coalition.

For it must be confest, that however the circumstances of human nature
may render an union necessary, and however those passions of lust
and natural affection may seem to render it unavoidable; yet there
are other particulars in our natural temper, and in our outward
circumstances, which are very incommodious, and are even contrary
to the requisite conjunction.

Among the former, we may justly esteem our selfishness to be the most
considerable. I am sensible, that generally speaking, the representations
of this quality have been carried much too far; and that the descriptions,
which certain philosophers delight so much to form of mankind in
this particular, are as wide of nature as any accounts of monsters,
which we meet with in fables and romances.

So far from thinking, that men have no affection for any thing beyond
themselves, I am of opinion, that though it be rare to meet with one,
who loves any single person better than himself; yet it is as rare
to meet with one, in whom all the kind affections, taken together, do
not overbalance all the selfish. Consult common experience: Do you not
see, that though the whole expence of the family be generally under
the direction of the master of it, yet there are few that do not bestow
the largest part of their fortunes on the pleasures of their wives,
and the education of their children, reserving the smallest portion
for their own proper use and entertainment.

This is what we may observe concerning such as have those endearing ties;
and may presume, that the case would be the same with others, were they
placed in a like situation.

But though this generosity must be acknowledged to the honour of human
nature, we may at the same time remark, that so noble an affection,
instead of fitting men for large societies, is almost as contrary
to them, as the most narrow selfishness.

For while each person loves himself better than any other single
person, and in his love to others bears the greatest affection to
his relations and acquaintance, this must necessarily produce an
oppositon of passions, and a consequent opposition of actions; which
cannot but be dangerous to the new-established union.

It is however worth while to remark, that this contrariety of passions
would be attended with but small danger, did it not concur with a
peculiarity in our outward circumstances, which affords it an
opportunity of exerting itself.

There are different species of goods, which we are possessed of; the
internal satisfaction of our minds, the external advantages of our body,
and the enjoyment of such possessions as we have acquired by our industry
and good fortune. We are perfectly secure in the enjoyment of the first.
The second may be ravished from us, but can be of no advantage to him
who deprives us of them.

The last only are both exposed to the violence of others, and may be
transferred without suffering any loss or alteration; while at the
same time, there is not a sufficient quantity of them to supply every
one's desires and necessities.

As the improvement, therefore, of these goods is the chief advantage
of society, so the instability of their possession, along with their
scarcity, is the chief impediment.

In vain should we expect to find, in uncultivated nature, a remedy
to this inconvenience; or hope for any inartificial principle of
the human mind, which might controul those are remote and obscure,
another necessity, which having a present and more obvious remedy,
may justly be regarded as the first and original principle of human
society.

This necessity is no other than that natural appetite betwixt the
sexes, which unites them together, and preserves their union, till
a new tye takes place in their concern for their common offspring.

This new concern becomes also a principle of union betwixt the parents
and offspring, and forms a more numerous society; where the parents
govern by the advantage of their superior strength and wisdom, and
at the same time are restrained in the exercise of their authority by
that natural affection, which they bear their children. In a little
time, custom and habit operating on the tender minds of the children,
makes them sensible of the advantages, which they may reap from
society, as well as fashions them by degrees for it, by rubbing off
those rough corners and untoward affections, which prevent their
coalition.

For it must be confest, that however the circumstances of human nature
may render an union necessary, and however those passions of lust and
natural affection may seem to render it unavoidable; yet there are other
particulars in our natural temper, and in our outward circumstances,
which are very incommodious, and are even contrary to the requisite
conjunction.

Among the former, we may justly esteem our selfishness to be the most
considerable. I am sensible, that generally speaking, the representations
of this quality have been carried much too far; and that the descriptions,
which certain philosophers delight so much to form of mankind in
this particular, are as wide of nature as any accounts of monsters,
which we meet with in fables and romances.

So far from thinking, that men have no affection for any thing beyond
themselves, I am of opinion, that though it be rare to meet with one,
who loves any single person better than himself; yet it is as rare
to meet with one, in whom all the kind affections, taken together, do not
overbalance all the selfish. Consult common experience: Do you not see,
that though the whole expence of the family be generally under the
direction of the master of it, yet there are few that do not bestow
the largest part of their fortunes on the pleasures of their wives,
and the education of their children, reserving the smallest portion
for their own proper use and entertainment This is what we may
observe concerning such as have those endearing ties; and may
presume, that the case would be the same with others, were they
placed in a like situation.

But though this generosity must be acknowledged to the honour of human
nature, we may at the same time remark, that so noble an affection,
instead of fitting men for large societies, is almost as contrary
to them, as the most narrow selfishness.

They
turn out of it papers of various sorts: some letters, several numbers of
an old newspaper, and a pack of Spanish playing-cards--all pictured.
But among them is one of a different sort--a white one, with a name
printed upon it.

A visiting card--but whose?

As Crozier picks it up, and reads the name, his blood curdles, the hair
crisping on his head:

"Mr Edward Crozier; H.B.M. Frigate Crusader."

His own!

He does not need to be told how the card came there.  Too well remembers
he when, where, and to whom he gave it--to Don Francisco De Lara on the
day of their encounter.

Thrusting it into his pocket, he clutches at the letters, and looks at
their superscription--"_Don Francisco de Lara_!"

Opening, he rapidly reads them one after another.  His hands holding
them shake as with a palsy; while in his eyes there is a look of keenest
apprehension.  For he fears that, subscribed to some, he will find
another name--that of Carmen Montijo!  If so, farewell to all faith in
human kind.  Harry Blew's ingratitude has destroyed his belief in man.
A letter from the daughter of Don Gregorio Montijo to the gambler Frank
Lara, will alike wither his confidence in woman.

With eager eyes, and lips compressed, he continues the perusal of the
letters.  They are from many correspondents, and relate to various
matters, most about money and _monte_, signed "Faustino Calderon."

As the last of them slips through his fingers, he breathes freely, but
with a sigh of self-reproach for having doubted the woman who was to
have been his wife.

Turning to Cadwallader--as himself aware of all--he says, in solemn
emphasis:

"_Now we know_!"


CHAPTER SEVENTY THREE.

THE LAST LEAF IN THE LOG.

No common pirates then, no mere crew of mutinous sailors, have carried
off Carmen Montijo and Inez Alvarez.  It has been done by Francisco de
Lara and Faustino Calderon, if or although there is no evidence of the
latter having been aboard the barque, it is deducible, and not even
doubtful.  For a scheme such as that, the confederates were not likely
to have parted.

The young officers have returned to the quarterdeck, and there stand
gazing in one another's faces; on both an expression of anguish, which
the new discovery has intensified.  It was painful enough to think of
their betrothed sweethearts being the sport of rough robbers; but to
picture them in the power of De Lara and Calderon--knowing what they do
of these men--is agony itself.

"Yes; it's all clear," says Crozier.  "No idea of getting gold has
brought the thing about.  That may have influenced the others who
assisted them; but with them the motive was different--I see it now."

"Do you know, Ned, I half suspected it from the first.  You remember
what I said as we were leaving San Francisco.  After what happened
between us and the gamblers, I had my fears about our girls being left
in the same place with them.  Still, who'd have thought of their
following them aboard ship?  Above all, with Blew there, and after his
promise to protect them!  You remember him saying, he would lay down his
life for theirs?"

"He swore it--to me he swore it.  Oh! if ever I set eyes on him again,
I'll make him suffer for that broken oath!"

"What do you propose doing, after we reach Panama?  If we find the
frigate there, we'll be obliged to join her."

"Obliged! there's no obligation to bind a man situated as I--reckless as
this misery makes me.  Unless Captain Bracebridge consents to assist us
in the search, I'll go alone."

"Not alone.  There's one will be with you."

"I know it, Will.  Of course, I count upon you.  What I mean is, if
Bracebridge won't help us with the frigate.  I'll throw up my
commission, charter a vessel myself, engage a crew, and search every
inch of the American coast, till I find where they've put in."

"What a pity we can't tell the place!  They must have been near land to
have taken to an open boat."

"In sight of--close to it, I've been questioning Don Gregorio.  He knows
that much and but little beside.  The poor gentleman is almost as crazed
as the skipper.  I wonder he's not more.  He says they had sighted land
that very morning, the first they saw since leaving California.  The
captain told them they would be in Panama in about two days after.  As
the boat was being rowed away, Don Gregorio saw a coast-line through the
cabin windows, and not far-off.  He saw their boat too, and they
appeared making straight for it.  Of course they--.  That's all I can
get out of the poor old gentleman, at present."

"The negro?  Can he tell no better story?"

"I've questioned him too.  He is equally sure of their having been close
in.  What point, he has no idea, any more than the orangs.  However, he
states a particular fact, which is more satisfactory.  A short while
before they seized hold of him, he was looking over the side, and saw a
strangely shaped hill--a mountain.  He describes it as having two tops.
The moon was between them, the reason for his taking notice of it.  That
double-headed hill may yet stand us in stead."

"How unfortunate the skipper losing his senses!  If he'd have kept them,
he could have told us where he was at the time the barque was abandoned.
It's enough to make one think the very Fates are against us.  By the
way, we've never thought of looking at the log-book.  That ought to
throw some light on the locality."

"It ought; and doubtless would, if we only had it.  You're mistaken in
saying we never thought of it.  I have; and been searching for it
everywhere.  But it's gone; and what's become of it, I know not.  They
may have thrown it overboard before forsaking the ship--possibly to blot
out all traces.  Still, it's odd too, De Lara leaving these letters
behind!"

"And the barque under all sail."

"Well, I take it, they were hurried, and of course expected she'd soon
go to the bottom.  Strange she didn't.  No doubt she's met only smooth
weather till we came aboard her."

"I wonder where her log-book can be?"

"Not more than I.  The old darkey says it used to lie on a little shelf
at the turning of the cabin-stair.  I've looked there, but no log-book.
As you say, it's enough to make one believe the Fates were against us.
If so, we may never reach Panama, much less live to--"

"See," cries Cadwallader, interrupting the despairing speech.  "Those
brutes! what's that they're knocking about?  By Jove!  I believe it's
the very thing we're speaking of!"

The brutes are the Myas monkeys, that, away in the ship's waist, are
tossing something between them; apparently a large book bound in rough
red leather.  They have mutilated the binding, and, with teeth and
claws, are tearing out the leaves, as they strive to take it from one
another.

"It is--it must be the log-book!" cries Crozier, as both rush off to
rescue it from the clutch of the orangs.

They succeed; but not without difficulty, and a free handling of
handspikes--almost braining the apes before they consent to relinquish
it.

It is at length recovered, though in a ruinous condition; fortunately,
however, with the written leaves untorn.  Upon the last of these is an
entry, evidently the latest made:

"Latitude 7 degrees 20 minutes North; Longitude 82 degrees 12 minutes
West.  Light breeze."

"Good!" exclaims Crozier, rushing back to the quarterdeck, and bending
over the chart.  "With this, and the double-headed hill, we may get upon
the track of the despoilers.  Just when we were despairing!  Will, old
boy; there's something in this.  I have a presentiment that things are
taking a turn, and the _Fates will yet be or us_."

"God grant they may!"

"Ah?" sighs Crozier: "if we had but ten men aboard this barque--or even
six--I'd never think of going on to Panama, but steer straight for the
island of Coiba."

"Why the island of Coiba?" wonderingly asks Cadwallader.

"Because it must have been in sight when this entry was made--either it
or Hicaron, which lies on its sou'west side.  Look at this chart; there
they are!"

The midshipman bends over the map, and scans it.

"You're right, Ned.  They must have seen one or other of those islands,
when the Chilian skipper made his last observation."

"Just so.  And with a light breeze she couldn't have made much way
after.  Both the cook and Don Gregorio say it was that.  Oh! for ten
good hands.  A thousand pounds apiece for ten stout, trusty fellows!
What a pity in that squall the cutter's crew weren't left along with
us."

"Never fear, Ned.  We'll get them again, or as good.  Old Bracebridge
won't fail us, I'm sure.  He's a dear old soul, and when he hears the
tale we've to tell, it'll be all right.  If he can't himself come with
the frigate, he'll allow us men to man this barque; enough to make short
work with her late crew, if we can once stand face to face with them.  I
only wish we were in Panama."

"I'd rather we were off Coiba; or on shore wherever the ruffians have
landed."

"Not as we now are--three against twelve!"

"I don't care for that.  I'd give ten thousand pounds to be in their
midst--even alone."

"Ned, you'll never be there alone; wherever you go, I go with you.  We
have a common cause, and shall stand or fall together."

"That we shall.  God bless you, Will Cadwallader!  I feel you're worthy
of the friendship--the trust I've placed in you.  And now, let's talk no
more about it; but bend on all the sail we can, and get to Panama.
After that, we'll steer for the island of Coiba.  We're so far
fortunate, in having this westerly wind," he continues, in a more
cheerful tone.  "If it keep in the same quarter, we'll soon come in
sight of land.  And if this Chilian chart may be depended on, that
should be a promontory on the west side of Panama Bay.  I hope the
chart's a true one; for Punta Malo, an its name imports, isn't a nice
place to make mistakes about.  By running too close to it with the wind
in this quarter--"

"_Steamer to norrard_!" cries a rough voice, interrupting.  It is
Grummet's.

The young officers, turning with a start, see the same.

Crozier, laying hold of a telescope, raises it to his eye, while he
holds it there, saying:

"You're right, cox: it is a steamer.  And standing this way!  She'll run
right across our bows.  Up helm, and set the barque's head on for her!"

The coxswain obeys; and with a few turns of the wheel brings the
_Condor's_ head round, till she is right to meet the steamer.  The
officers, with the negro assisting, loose tacks and sheets, trimming her
sails for the changed course.

Soon the two vessels, going in almost opposite directions, lessen the
distance between.  And as they mutually make approach, each speculates
on the character of the other.  They on board the barque have little
difficulty in determining that of the steamer.  At a glance they see she
is not a warship; but a passenger packet.  And as there are no others in
that part of the Pacific, she can be only one of the "liners" late
established between San Francisco and Panama; coming down from the
former port, her destination the latter.

Not so easy for those aboard the steamship to make out the manner of the
odd-looking craft that has turned up in their track, and is sailing
straight towards them.  They see a barque, polacca-masted, with some
sails set, and others hanging in shreds from her yards.

This of itself would be enough to excite curiosity.  But there is
something besides; a flag reversed flying at her mainmast-head--the flag
of Chili!  For the distress signal has not been taken down.  And why it
was ever run up, or by whom, none of those now in the barque could tell.
At present it serves _their_ purpose well, for, responding to it, the
commander of the steam packet orders her engines to slow, and then cease
action; till the huge leviathan, late running at the rate of twelve
knots an hour, gradually lessens speed, and at length lies motionless
upon the water.

Simultaneously the barque is "hove to," and she lies at less than a
cable's length from the steamer.

From the latter the hail is heard first:

"Barque ahoy!  What barque is that?"

"The _Condor_--Valparaiso.  In distress."

"Send a boat aboard!"

"Not strength to man it."

"Wait, then!  We'll board you."

In less than five minutes' time one of the quarter boats of the liner is
lowered down, and a crew leaps into it.

Pushing off from her side, it soon touches that of the vessel in
distress.

But not for its crew to board her.  Crozier has already traced out his
course of action.  Slipping down into the steamer's boat, he makes
request to be rowed to the ship; which is done without questioning.  The
uniform he wears entitles him to respect.

Stepping aboard the steamship, he sees that she is what he has taken her
for: a line-packet from San Francisco, bound for Panama.  She is crowded
with passengers; at least a thousand seen upon her decks.  They are of
all qualities and kinds; all colours and nationalities; most of them
Californian gold-diggers returning to their homes; some successful and
cheerful; others downcast and disappointed.

He is not long in telling his tale; first to the commander of the
steamer and his officers; then to the passengers.

For to these last he particularly addresses himself, in an appeal--a
call for volunteers--not alone to assist in navigating the barque, but
to proceed with him in pursuit of the scoundrels who cast her away.

He makes known his position, with his power to compensate them for the
service sought; both endorsed by the commander of the steamship, who by
good luck is acquainted with, and can answer for, his credentials.

Nothing of this is needed; nor yet the promise of a money reward.  Among
these stalwart men are many who are heroes--true Paladins, despite their
somewhat threadbare habiliments.  And amidst their soiled rags shine
pistols and knives, ready to be drawn for the right.

After hearing the young officer's tale, without listening farther,
twenty of them spring forward responsive to his call.  Not for the
reward offered, but in the cause of humanity and right.  He would enlist
twice or thrice the number, but deeming twenty enough, with these he
returns to the _Condor_.

Then the two vessels part company, the steamer continuing on for Panama;
while the barque, now better manned, and with more sail set, is steered
for the point where the line of Latitude 7 degrees 20 minutes North
intersects that of Longitude 82 degrees 12 minutes West.


CHAPTER SEVENTY FOUR.

A LOTTERY OF LIFE AND DEATH.

While these scenes are passing upon the ocean, others of equally
exciting character occur upon that desert isle, where, by ill-starred
chance for themselves, the pirate crew of the _Condor_ made landing.

They are still there, all their efforts to get off having proved idle.
But how different now from that hour when they brought their boat upon
its beach laden with the spoils of the plundered vessel!  Changed not
only in their feelings but looks--scarce recognisable as the same men.
Then in the full plenitude of swaggering strength, mental as bodily,
with tongues given to loud talk; now subdued and silent, stalking about
like spectres, with weak, tottering steps; some sitting listlessly upon
stones, or lying astretch along the earth; not resting, but from sheer
inability to stand erect!

Famine has set its seal upon their faces; hunger can be read in their
hollow eyes, and pale sunken cheeks; while thirst shows upon their
parched and shrivelled lips.

Not strange all this.  For nine days they have tasted no food, save
shell-fish and the rank flesh of sea-fowl--both in scant supply.  And no
drink, excepting some rain-water caught in the boat-sail during an
occasional slight shower.

All the while have they kept watch with an earnestness such as their
desperate circumstances evoked.  A tarpauling they have rigged up by oar
and boat-hook, set upon the more elevated summit of the two--the highest
point on the isle--has failed to attract the eye of any one on the
mainland; or if seen, the signal has been disregarded; while to seaward,
no ship or other vessel has been observed--nought but the blank blue of
ocean, recalling their crime--in its calm tranquillity mocking their
remorse!

Repentant are they now; and if they could, willingly would they undo
their wicked deed--joyfully restore the stolen gold--gladly surrender up
their captives--be but too glad to bring back to life those they have
deprived of it.

It cannot be.  Their victims left aboard the barque must have long ago
gone to the bottom of the sea.  In its bed they are now sleeping their
last sleep, released from all earthly cares; and they who have so
ruthlessly consigned them to their eternal rest, now almost envy it.

In their hour of agony, as hunger gnaws at their entrails, and thirst
scorches them like a consuming fire, they reck little of life--some even
desiring death!

All are humbled now.  Even the haughty Gomez no longer affects to be
their leader, and the savage Padilla is tamed to silent inaction, if not
tenderness.  By a sort of tacit consent, Harry Blew has become the
controlling spirit--perhaps from having evinced more humanity than the
rest.  Now that adversity is on them, their better natures are brought
out, and the less hardened of them have resumed the gentleness of
childhood's days.

The change has been of singular consequence to their captives.  These
are no longer restrained, but free to go and come as it pleases them.
No more need they fear insult or injury; no rudeness is offered them
either by speech or gesture.  On the contrary they are treated with
studied respect, almost with deference.  The choicest articles of food--
bad at best--are apportioned to them, as also the largest share of the
water; fortunately, sufficient of both to keep up their strength.  And
they in turn have been administering angels--tender nurses to the men
who have made all their misery!

Thus have they lived up till the night of the ninth day since their
landing on the isle; then a heavy rainfall, filling the concavity of the
boat's sail, enables them to replenish the beaker, with other vessels
they had brought ashore.

On the morning of the tenth, a striking change takes place in their
behaviour.  No longer athirst, the kindred appetite becomes keener,
imparting a wolf-like expression to their features.  There is a ghoulish
glance in their eyes, as they regard one another, fearful to
contemplate--even to think of.  For it is the gaze of cannibalism!

Yes, it has come to this, though no one has yet spoken of it; the thing
is only in their thoughts.

But as time passes, it assumes substantial shape, and threatens soon to
be the subject not only of speech, but action.

One or two show it more than the rest--Padilla most of all.  In his
fierce eyes the unnatural craving is clearly recognisable--especially
when his glances are given to the fair forms moving in their midst.
There can be no mistaking that look of hungry concupiscence--the cold
calculating stare of one who would eat human flesh.

It is the mid-hour of the day, and there has been a long interregnum of
silence; none having said much on any subject, though there is a tacit
intelligence, that the thoughts of all are on the same.

Padilla, deeming the hour has arrived, breaks the ominous silence:

"_Amigos_!" he says--an old appellation, considering the proposal he is
about to make--"since there's no food obtainable, it's clear we've got
to die of starvation.  Though, if we could only hold out a little
longer, something might turn up to save us.  For myself, I don't yet
despair but that some coasting craft may come along; or they may see our
signal from the shore.  It's only a question of time, and our being able
to keep alive.  Now, how are we to do that?"

"Ay, how?" asks Velarde, as if secretly prompted to the question.

"Well," answers Padilla, "there's a way, and only one, that I can think
of.  There's no need for all of us to die--at least, not yet.  Some
_one_ should, so that the others may have a chance of being saved.  Are
you all agreed to it!"

The interrogatory does not require to be more explicitly put.  It is
quite comprehensible; and several signify assent, either by a nod, or in
muttered exclamations.  A few make no sign, one way or the other; being
too feeble, and far gone, to care what may become of them.

"How do you propose, Padilla?"

It is again Velarde who questions.

Turning his eyes towards the grotto, in which the two ladies have taken
refuge from the hot rays of the sun, the ruffian replies:

"Well, _camarados_!  I don't see why men should suffer themselves to be
starved to death, while women--"

Harry Blew does not permit him to finish his speech.  Catching its
significance, he cries:

"Avast there!  Not another word o' that.  If any o' as has got to be
eaten, it must be a _man_.  As for the women, they go last--not first.
I, for one, will die afore they do; an' so'll somebody else."

Striker and Davis endorse this determination; Hernandez too, feebly; but
Gomez in speech almost firm as that of Blew himself.  In De Lara's
breast there is a sentiment, which revolts at the horrid proposal of his
confederate.

It is the first time he and Harry Blew have been in accord; and being
so, there is no uncertainty about the result.  It is silently
understood, and but waits for one to declare it in words; which Striker
does, saying:

"Though I hev been a convick, an' don't deny it, I an't a coward, nor no
way afeerd to kick up my heels whensoever I see my time's come.  If that
he's now, an' Jack Striker's got to die, dash it! he's ready.  But it
must be a fair an' square thing.  Theerfor, let it be settled by our
castin' lots all round."

"I agree to that," growls Padilla; "if you mean it to include the women
as well."

"We don't mean anythin' o' the sort," says Blew, springing to his feet.
"Ye unmanly scoundrel!" he continues, approaching Padilla,--"Repeat your
dastardly proposal, an' there'll be no need for drawin' lots.  In a
minnit more, eyther you or me'll make food, for anybody as likes to eat
us.  Now!"

The Californian, who has still preserved much of his tenacious strength,
and all of his ruffian ferocity, nevertheless shrinks and cowers before
the stalwart sailor.

"_Carajo_!" he exclaims, doggedly and reluctantly submitting.  "Be it as
you like.  I don't care any more than the rest of you.  When it comes to
facing Fate, Rafael Rocas isn't the man to show the white-feather.  I
only proposed what I believed to be fair.  In a matter of life and
death, I don't see why women are any better than men.  But if you all
think different, then be it as you say.  We can cast lots, leaving them
out."

Padilla's submissive speech puts an end to the strange debate.  The
side-issue is decided against him, and the main question once more comes
up.

After a time, it too is determined.  Hunger demands a victim.  To
appease it one must die.

The horrid resolve reached, it remains but to settle the mode of
selection.  No great difficulty in this, and it is got over by Striker
saying:

"Chums! theer's just twelve o' us, the even dozen.  Let's take twelve o'
them little shells ye see scattered about, an' put 'em into the boat's
pannikin.  One o' them we can mark.  Him as draws out the marked shell,
must--I needn't say what."

"Die" would have been the word, as all understand without hearing it
spoken.

The plan is acceptable, and accepted.  There seems no fairer for
obtaining the fiat of Fate on this dread question.

The shells--_unios_--lie thickly strewn over the ground.  There are
thousands, all of the same shape and size.  By the "feel" it would be
impossible to tell one from another.  Nor yet by their colour, since all
are snow-white.

Twelve of them are taken up, and put into the tin pannikin--a quart
measure--one being marked with a spot of red--by blood drawn from
Striker's own arm, which he has purposely punctured.  Soon absorbed by
the porous substance of the shell, it cannot be detected by the touch.

The preliminaries completed, all gather around, ready to draw.  They but
wait for him who is on watch beside the spread tarpauling, and who must
take his chances with the rest in this lottery of life and death.  It is
the Dutchman who is above.  They have already hailed, and commanded him
to come down, proclaiming their purpose.

But he neither obeys them, nor gives back response.  He does not even
look in their direction.  They can see him by the signal-staff, standing
erect, with face turned towards the sea, and one hand over his eyes
shading them from the sun.  He appears to be regarding some object in
the offing.

Presently he lowers the spread palm, and raises a telescope with which
he is provided.

They stand watching him, speechless, and with bated breath, their solemn
purpose for the time forgotten.  In the gleam of that glass they have a
fancy there may be life, as there is light.

The silence continues till 'tis seen going down.  Then they hear words,
which send the blood in quick current through their veins, bringing hope
back into their hearts.  They are:

"_Sail in sight_!"


CHAPTER SEVENTY FIVE.

BY THE SIGNAL-STAFF.

"Sail in sight!"

Three little words, but full of big meaning, of carrying the question of
life or death.

To the ears of that starving crew sweet as music, despite the harsh
Teutonic pronunciation of him who gave them utterance.

Down drops the pannikin, spilling out the shells; which they have hopes
may be no more needed.

At the shout from above, all have faced towards the sea, and stand
scanning its surface.  But with gaze unrewarded.  The white flecks seen
afar are only the wings of gulls.

"Where away?" shouts one, interrogating him on the hill.

"Sou'-westart."

South-westward they cannot see.  In this direction their view is
bounded; a projection of the cliff interposing between them and the
outside shore.  All who are able start off towards its summit.  The
stronger ones rush up the gorge as if their lives depended on speed.
The weaker go toiling after.  One or two, weaker still, stay below to
wait the report that will soon reach them.

The first up, on clearing the scarp, have their eyes upon the Dutchman.
His behaviour might cause them surprise, if they could not account for
it.  As said, the beacon is upon the higher of the two peaks, some two
hundred yards beyond the clift's brow.  He is beside it, and apparently
beside himself.  Dancing over the ground, he makes grotesque
gesticulations, tossing his arms about, and waving his hat overhead--all
the while shouting as if to some vessel close at hand--calling in rapid
repetition:

"Ship, Ahoy!  Ahoy!"

Looking they can see no ship, nor craft of any kind.  For a moment they
think him mad, and fear, after all, it may be a mistake.  Certainly
there is no vessel near enough to be hailed.

But sending their eyes farther out, their fear gives place to joy almost
delirious.  There _is_ a sail, and though leagues off, seeming but a
speck, their practised eyes tell them she is steering that way--running
coastwise.  Keeping this course, she must come past the isle--within
sight of their signal, so long spread to no purpose.

Without staying to reflect farther, they strain on towards the summit,
where the staff is erected.

Harry Blew is the first to reach it; and clutching the telescope, jerks
it from the hands of the half-crazed Dutchman.  Raising it to his eye,
he directs it on the distant sail--there keeping it more than a minute.
The others have meanwhile come up, and, clustering around, impatiently
question him.

"What is she?  How's she standing?"

"A bit o' a barque," responds Blew.  "And from what I can make out,
close huggin' the shore.  I'll be better able to tell when she draws out
from that clump of cloud."

Gomez, standing by, appears eager to get hold of the glass; but Blew
seems unwilling to give it up.  Still holding it at his eye, he says:

"See to that signal, mates!  Spread the tarpaulin' to its full streetch.
Face it square, so's to _give_ 'em every chance of sightin' it."

Striker and Davis spring to the piece of tarred canvas; and grasping it,
one at each corner, draw out the creases, and hold as directed.

All the while Blew stands with the telescope levelled, loath to
relinquish it.  But Gomez, grown importunate, insists on having his
turn, and it is at length surrendered to him.

Blew, stepping aside, seems excited with some emotion he would conceal.
Strong it must be, judging from its effects on the ex-man-o'-war's man.
On his face there is an expression difficult to describe--surprise
amounting to amazement--joy subdued by anxiety.  Soon, as having given
up the glass, he pulls off his dreadnought, then divesting himself of
his shirt--a scarlet flannel--he suspends it from the outer end of the
cross-piece which supports the tarpauling; as he does so, saying to
Striker and Davis:

"That's a signal no ship ought to disregard, and won't if manned by
Christian men.  _She_ won't, if she sees it.  You two stay here, and
keep the things well spread I'm goin' below to say a word to them poor
creeturs in the cave.  Stand by the staff, and don't let any o' them
haul it down."

"Ay, ay!" answers Striker, without comprehending, and somewhat wondering
at Blew's words--under the circumstances strange.  "All right, mate.  Ye
may depend on me an' Bill."

"I know it--I do," rejoins the ex-man-o'-war's man, again slipping the
pilot-coat over his shirtless skin.

"Both o' you be true to me, and 'fore long I may be able to show as
Harry Blew an't ungrateful."

Saying this, he separates from them, and hurries back down the gorge.

The Sydney Ducks, left standing by the staff, more than ever wonder at
what he has said, and interrogate one another as to his meaning.

In the midst of their mutual questioning, they are attracted by a cry
strangely intoned.  It is from Gomez, who has brought down the
telescope, and holds it in hands that shake as with a palsy.

"What is it?" asks Padilla, stepping up to him.

"Take the glass, Rafael Rocas.  See for yourself!"

The contrabandista does as directed.

He is silent for some seconds, while getting the telescope on the
strange vessel.  Soon as he has her within the field of view, he
commences making remarks, overheard by Striker and Davis, giving both
surprise--though the latter least.

"Barque she is--polacca-masts.  _Carramba_! that's queer.  About the
same bulk, too!  If it wasn't that we're sure of the _Condor_ being
below, I'd swear it was she.  Of course, it can be only a coincidence.
_Santissima_! a strange one!"

Velarde, in turn, takes the telescope; he, too, after a sight through
it, expressing himself in a similar manner.

Hernandez next--for the four Spaniards have all ascended to the hill.

But Striker does not wait to hear what Hernandez may have to say.
Dropping the tarpauling, he strides up to him, and, _sans ceremonie_,
jerks the instrument out of his fingers.  Then bringing it to his eye,
sights for himself.

Less than twenty seconds suffice for him to determine the character of
the vessel.  Within that time, his glance taking in her hull, traversing
along the line of her bulwarks, and then ascending to the tops of her
tall smooth masts, he recognises all, as things with which he is well
acquainted.

He, too, almost lets drop the telescope, as, turning to the others, he
says in a scared, but confident voice:

"_By God, its the Condor_!"


CHAPTER SEVENTY SIX.

A VERY NEMESIS.

Striker's announcement, profanely as emphatically made, thrills the
hearts of those hearing it with fear.  Not fear of the common kind, but
a weird undefinable apprehension.

"_Caspitta_!" exclaims Padilla.  "The _Condor_! that cannot be.  How
could it?"

"It's her for all that," returns Striker.  "How so, I don't understan'
any more than yourselves.  But that yonder craft be the Chili barque, or
her ghost, I'll take my affydavy on the biggest stack o' Bibles."

His words summon up strange thoughts which take possession of the minds
of those listening.  For how can it be the _Condor_, scuttled, sent to
the bottom of the sea?  Impossible!

In their weak state, with nerves unnaturally excited, they almost
believe it an illusion--a spectre!  One and all are the prey to wild
fancies, that strike terror to their guilty souls.  Something more than
mortal is pursuing--to punish them.  Is it the hand of God?  For days
they have been in dread of God's hand; and now they seem to see it
stretched out, and coming towards them!  On the side of the pond that
is bounded by high gravelly banks, the margin will be covered by
Poplars and Birches.

The White Pine, the most noble and the most beautiful tree of the whole
coniferous tribe, predominates in the New-England forest; though some
wide tracts are covered with the more homely Pitch-Pines, which are
the trees that scent the atmosphere on damp still days with their
delightful terebinthine odors.

The woods in the vicinity of Concord, N.H., on the banks of the
Merrimack, known by the poetic appellation of "The Dark Plains",
are of this description.

In still higher latitudes the dark, majestic Firs become the prevailing
timber, and are regarded as typical of sub-arctic regions, where they
are accompanied, as if to form a striking and cheerful contrast
with their melancholy grandeur, by groups of graceful Birches, and
lively, tremulous Poplars.

The Pine-Barrens of the Southern States are celebrated as healthful
retreats for the inhabitants of seaport towns, whither they resort
in summer for security from the prevailing fevers.

They are of a mixed character, consisting of the Northern Pitch-Pine, the
Broom-Pine, and the Cypress, intermixed with Red Maples, Sweet
Gums, and other deciduous trees.

The Pines, however, are the dominant growth: but here they do not
grow so compactly as in colder regions, standing widely apart, with
a frequent intervening growth of Willows and shrubbery. The sparseness
of these woods may be in part attributed to the practice of tapping
the trees for their turpentine, which has caused them for a century
past to be gradually thinned by consequent decay.

Their tall, gaunt forms and almost branchless trunks show that they
obtained their principal growth in a dense wood.

The first time I entered one of these Pine-Barrens was some years since,
in the month of June, when vegetation was in its prime, before the summer
droughts had seared the green herbage, and when the flowering trees
and shrubs were in all their glory.

During my botanical rambles in the wood, I was struck with the multitude
of beautiful flowers in its shady retreats,--seeming the more
numerous to me, as I had previously confined my researches
to Northern woods.

The Phlox grew here in all its native grace and delicacy, where it had
never known the fostering hand of Art.

Crimson Rhexias, called by the inhabitants Deer-Weed, were distributed
among the grassy knolls, like clusters of Picotees.
Variegated Passion-Flowers were conspicuous on the bare white sand
that checkered the ground, displaying their emblematic forms on their
low repent vines, and reminding the wanderer in these almost
trackless solitudes of that Faith which was founded on humility and
crowned with martyrdom.

Here, too, the Spiderwort of our gardens, in a meeker form of beauty and
with a paler radiance, luxuriated under the protection of the wood.
Already I observed the predominance of luxuriant vines, indicating our
nearness to the tropic, wreathed gayly over the tall and branchless
trunks of the trees: some, like the Bignonia, in a full blaze of
crimson; others, like the Climbing Fern, draping the trees in
continual verdure.

To resist, will only be to hasten their doom--death.

They do not think of resistance, nor yet flight; but remain upon the
hill-top, sullen and speechless.

Calderon is the first to break the silence, frantically exclaiming:

"_Santos Dios_! the officers of the English frigate!  Mystery of
Mysteries!  What can it mean?"

"No mystery," rejoins De Lara, addressing himself to the other three;
"none whatever.  I see it all now, clear as the sun at noonday.  Blew
has been traitor to us, as I suspected all along.  He and Davis have not
scuttled the barque, but left her to go drifting about; and the frigate
to which these officers belong has come across, picked her up--and lo!
they are there!"

"That's it, no doubt," says Velarde, otherwise Don Manuel Diaz.  "But
those rough fellows along with them don't appear to be men-of-war's men,
nor sailors of any kind.  More like gold-diggers, I should say; such as
crowd the streets of San Francisco.  They must have come thence."

"It matters not what they are, or where from.  Enough that they're here,
and we in their power."

At this Diaz and Padilla, now known as Rafael Rocas, step towards the
cliff's edge to have a look below, leaving the other two by the staff.

"What do you suppose they'll do to us?" asks Calderon of De Lara.  "Do
you think they'll--"

"Shoot, or hang us?" interrupts De Lara; "that's what you'd say.  I
don't think anything about it.  I'm sure of it.  One or other they'll
do, to a certainty."

"_Santissima_!" piteously exclaims the ex-ganadero.  "Is there no chance
of escaping?"

"None whatever.  No use our trying to get away from them.  There's
nowhere we could conceal ourselves; not a spot to give us shelter for a
single hour.  For my part, I don't intend to stir from this spot.  I may
as well be taken here as anywhere else.  _Carramba_, no!" he exclaims,
as if something has occurred to make him change his mind.  "I shall go
below, and meet my death like a man.  No; like a tiger.  Before dying,
_I shall kill_.  Are you good to do the same?  Are you game for it?"

"I don't comprehend you," answers Calderon.  "Kill what, or whom?"

"Whomsoever I can.  Two for certain."

"Which two?"

"Edward Crozier and Carmen Montijo.  You may do as you please.  I've
marked out my pair, and mean to have their lives before yielding up my
own--hers, if I can't his.  She sha'n't live to triumph over me.  No; by
the Almighty God!"

While speaking, the desperado has taking out his revolver, and holding
it at half-cock, spins the cylinder round, to see that all the six
chambers are loaded, with the caps on the nipples.  Assured of this, he
returns it to its holster; and then glances at his _machete_, hanging on
his left hip.  All this with a cool carefulness, which shows him
determined upon his hellish purpose.

Calderon, trembling at the very thought of it, endeavours to dissuade
him; urging that, after all, they may be only made prisoners, and
leniently dealt with.

He is cut short by De Lara crying out:

"You may go to prison and rot there, if it so please you.  After what's
happened, that's not the destiny for me.  I prefer death, and
vengeance."

"Better life, and vengeance," cries Rocas, coming up, Diaz along with
him, both in breathless haste.  "Quick, comrades!" he continues; "follow
me!  I'll find a way to save the first, and maybe get the last, sooner
than you expected."

"It's no use, Rafael," argues De Lara, misunderstanding the speech of
the seal-hunter.  "If we attempt flight, they'll only shoot us down the
sooner.  Where could we flee too?"

"Come on; I'll show you where.  _Carajo_!  Don't stand hesitating; every
second counts now.  If we can but get ther in time--"

"Get where?"

"_Al bote_!"

On hearing the words, De Lara utters an exclamation of joy.  They
apprise him of a plan which may not only get him out of danger, but give
revenge, sweet as ever fell to the lot of mortal man.

He hesitates no longer, but hastens after the seal-hunter; who, with the
other two, has already started towards the brow of the cliff.

But not to stay there; for in a few seconds after the four are
descending it; not through the gorge by which they came up, but
another--also debouching into the bay.

Little dream the English officers, or the brave men who have landed with
them, of the peril impending.  If the scheme of the seal-hunter succeed,
theirs will be a pitiful fate: the tables will be turned upon them!


CHAPTER SEVENTY SEVEN.

ALMOST A MURDER.

At the cliff's base, the action, simultaneous, is even more exciting.

Having left their boat behind, with a man to take care of it, the
rescuers advance towards the inner end of the cove.

At first with caution: till passing the rock-portal, they see the
platform and those on it.

Then the young officers rush forward, with no fear of having to fight.
Instead of armed enemies to meet them, they behold the dear ones from
whom they have been so long apart.  Beside them, half-a-dozen figures,
more like skeletons than men--with cowed, craven faces, seeming so
feeble as to have a difficulty in keeping their feet!

With swords sheathed, and pistols returned to their holsters, the
English officers hasten on, the young ladies rushing out to receive
them.

Soon they are together, two and two, breasts touching, and arms enfolded
in mutual embrace.

For a while no words--the hearts of all too full for speech.  Only
ejaculations and kisses, with tears, but not of sorrow.

Then succeeds speech, necessarily brief and half-incoherent, Crozier
telling Carmen that her father is still alive, and aboard the barque.
He lives--he is safe! that is enough.

Then in answer to his questions, a word or two, on her fide.  But
without waiting to hear all, he turns abruptly upon Harry Blew, who is
seen some paces off.  Neither by word, nor gesture, has the sailor yet
saluted him.  He stands passive, a silent spectator; as Crozier
supposes, the greatest criminal on earth.  In quick retrospect of what
has occurred, and what he has heard from Don Gregorio, how could it be
otherwise?

But he will not condemn without hearing him, and stepping up to the
ex-man-o'-war's man, he demands explanation of his conduct, sternly
saying:

"Now, sir, I claim an account from you.  Tell your story straight, and
don't conceal aught, or prevaricate.  If your treason be as black as I
believe it, you deserve no mercy from me.  And your only chance to
obtain it, will be by telling the truth."

While speaking, he has again drawn his sword, and stands confronting the
sailor--as if a word were to be the signal for thrusting him through.

Blew is himself armed with both pistol and knife.  But, so far from
touching either, or making any sign of an intention to defend himself he
remains cowed-like, his head drooping down to his breast.

He gives no response.  His lips move not; neither his arms nor limbs.
Alone, his broad chest heaves and falls, as if stirred by some terrible
emotion.

His silence seems a confession of guilt!

Taking, or mistaking, it for this, Crozier cries out:

"Traitor!  Confess, before I run this blade through your miserable
body!"

The threat elicits an answer.

"You may kill me, if you wish, Master Edward.  By rights, my life
belongs to ye.  But, if you take it, I'll have the satisfaction o'
knowin', I've done the best I could to prove my gratefulness for your
once savin' it."

Long before he has finished his strange speech, the impending stroke is
stayed, and the raised blade dropped point downward.  For, on the hand
which grasps it, a gentler one is laid, a soft voice saying:--

"Hold, Eduardo!  _Dios de mi alma_!  What would you do?  You know not.
This brave man--to him I owe my life--I and Inez."

"Yes," adds Inez, advancing, "more than life.  'Tis he who protected
us."

Crozier stands trembling, the sword almost shaken from his grasp.  And
while sheathing it, he is told how near he has been to doing that which
would ever after have made him miserable.

He feels like one withheld from murder--almost parricide.  For to have
killed Harry Blew, would have been like killing his own father.

The exciting episode is almost instantly succeeded by another, even more
stirring, and longer sustained.  While Carmen is proceeding to explain
her interference on behalf of Blew, she is interrupted by cries coming
up from the beach.  Not meaningless shouts, but words of ominous import.

"Ahoy, there! help! help!"

Coupled with them, Crozier hears his own name, then the "Help, help!"
reiterated; recognising the voice of the man left in charge of the
boat--Grummet.

Without hesitating an instant, he springs off toward the strand,
Cadwallader and the gold-diggers following; two staying to keep guard
over those of the robbers who have surrendered.

On clearing the rocky ledge, they see what is causing the coxswain to
sing out in such terrified accents.  Grummet is in the boat, but upon
his feet, with a boat-hook in his hands, which he brandishes in a
threatening manner, shouting all the while.  Four men are making towards
him fast as their legs can carry them.  They are coming along the beach
from the right side of the cove.

At a glance the English officers recognise two of them--De Lara and
Calderon--sooner from their not meeting them there unexpectedly.  For
aware that they are on the isle, they were about to go in quest of those
gentlemen, after settling other affairs.

No need to search for them now.  There they are, with their
confederates, rushing direct for the boat--already within pistol-shot of
it.

Nor can there be any doubt about their intention to seize upon the boat
and carry her off!


CHAPTER SEVENTY EIGHT.

THE TABLES NEARLY TURNED.

The sight thus unexpectedly brought before the eyes of the rescuers
sends a shiver through their hearts, and draws exclamations of alarm
from their lips.  With quick intuition one and all comprehend the
threatened danger.  All at that moment remember having left only two or
three men on the barque; and, should the pirates succeed in boarding,
they may carry her off to sea, leaving themselves on the isle.

The prospect is appalling!  But they do not dwell upon it; they have
neither time, nor need.  It is too clear, like a flash passing before
their minds, in all its dread details!  Without waiting to exchange word
with one another, they rush on to arrest the threatened catastrophe,
bounding over the rocks, crashing through shells and pebbles.  But they
are behind time, and the others will reach the boat before them!

Crozier, perceiving this, shouts to the coxswain--

"Shove off, Grummet!  Into deep water with you!"

Grummet, understanding what is meant, brings the boat-hook point
downward, and with a desperate effort, pushes the keel clear, sending
the boat adrift.

England had, however, abrogated usury laws, and left the value of money
to be determined by the ordinary relations of supply and demand. To
this principle the governor resolved to adhere (1844).

What the law could not effect was produced by a less exceptionable
process. The merchants and professional men addressed the banks, and
urged an abatement of interest, then 10 per cent. for short-dated bills,
and 12-1/2 for renewals. They appealed rather to liberality than to
abstract right.

This was followed by a reduction in the Van Diemen's Land Bank,--an
example which the other establishments did not readily adopt.

Eight per cent. soon, however, became the highest amount usually
exacted in regular transactions.

The difficulties of the agriculturists from the low price of grain,
induced them to look for artificial relief.

With too much facility Wilmot gave hopes which he could not realise.
The imposition of a heavy duty on New South Wales tobacco, amounting to
prohibition, and that just as it was reaching considerable perfection,
led to the imposition of a duty on our grain.

It was the wish of the Tasmanian settlers to restore free trade
between the colonies, and to impose discriminating duties on the
produce of foreign countries; but the harsh and ridiculous system
of colonial government, which discriminated between Australian and
Canadian grain, compelled one British colony to treat another, its
next neighbor, as an alien, and that while England demanded free
admittance for English manufactures.

The peremptory instructions of Stanley were conveyed to the local governors
in terms of intimidation.[233] They were forbidden to allow any kindred
colony the least advantage over foreigners, or to pass any bill
for that purpose, and were told that any evasion of this restriction
would occasion the high displeasure of the crown.

The reason alleged for this interference was that colonies could not
be expected to understand the treaties and trading system of the parent
state; as if any treaty should have hindered a commerce actually
not more distinct than the trade between London and Liverpool.

Wilmot warmly espoused the claim of the Australian colonies to
share in the privilege of Canada, in favor of which the duties had
been relaxed on colonial grain.

Mr. Hutt brought their petitions before the attention of parliament;
but he could not plead a political necessity, and the ministers
were able to resist without the risk of a rebellion. They asserted that
the distance made the concession of no practical value, while it would
tend to augment the alarm of the English farmers! Thus, while they
humored the empty fears of their own constituents, they afforded
another example of the futility of colonial petitions which, however
just, it is convenient to disregard.

To assist agriculture, the council passed an act interdicting the use
of sugar, under certain conditions, by public brewers. The trade strongly
objected to the restriction, as impolitic, vexatious, and impracticable.

Their objections were admitted by the secretary of state, who
quietly observed that he had been advised that sugar could not be
considered deleterious.

This is the last attempt at protective legislation.

To benefit the rural interest the governor proposed a grand scheme
of irrigation.

An eminent engineer, Major Cotton, was employed to report on the
subject, and suggested the detention of the waters of the vast lakes
which overflow from the heights of the western mountains.

A rate to be imposed on the various estates was to discharge the cost.
Thus in those seasons of drought which sometimes occur the lowlands
would be made increasingly fertile. The immediate object--the employment
of probation labor at the colonial cost--detracted something from the
charms of the project.

Nor did it seem just that the settlers should risk the ultimate cost
of an undertaking they could not limit. Sir E. Wilmot earnestly
recommended the scheme to the home government, but Lord Stanley hesitated
until the evils of the probation system enforced a change, and
lessened the labor at the disposal of the crown.

Had the men been employed on a work so popular they would have been
withdrawn from the colonial eye, and the interest of their new
labors might have extinguished the prevailing discontent.

But while the governor waited for instructions the men were idle, or
employed in useless attempts at cultivation on barren land, of which the
produce rarely defrayed the cost of the implements destroyed.

Only one short glance he gives them; another to a pistol which hangs
holstered on the hip of a gold-digger guarding him.

A spring, and he has possession of it; a bound, and he is off from
between the two men, and rushing on towards the group standing apart!

Fortunately for Edward Crozier--for Carmen Montijo as well--there are
cries of alarm, shouts of warning, that reach him in time.

He turns on hearing them, sees the approaching danger, and takes
measures to avert it.  Simple enough these--but the drawing of his
revolver, and firing at the man who advances.

Two shots are heard, one on each side, almost simultaneous; but enough
apart to decide which of the two who fired must fall.

Crozier's pistol had cracked first; and as the smokes of both swirl up,
the gambler is seen astretch upon the sward--the blood spurting from his
breast, and spreading over his shirt bosom!

Harry Blew, rushing forward, and bending over him, cries out:

"Dead!  Shot through the heart--a brave heart too!  What a pity 'twar so
black!"

"Come away, _mia querida_!" says Crozier to Carmen.  "Your father will
be suffering from anxiety about you.  You've had enough of the horrible.
Let us hope this is the end of it."

Taking his betrothed by the hand, he leads her down to the boat--
Cadwallader and Inez accompanying them.

All seat themselves in the stern-sheets, and wait for the diggers; who
soon after appear, conducting their prisoners, the pirate crew of the
_Condor_; short four left behind--a banquet for the _caracaras_!


CHAPTER SEVENTY NINE.

A SAILOR'S TRUE YARN.

It is the second day after the tragedy upon the isle, and the Chilian
barque has sailed away from the Veraguan coast, out of that indentation
known upon modern maps as "Montijo Bay."

She has long since rounded Cabo Mala, and is standing in for the port of
Panama.  With a full crew--most of them old and able seamen--no fear but
she will reach it now.

Crozier in command, has restored Harry Blew to his old rank of first
officer; which so far from having forfeited, he is now deemed to doubly
deserve.  But still weak from his long privation, the ex-man-o'-war's
man is excused from duty, Cadwallader doing it for him.

Harry is strong enough, however, to tell the young officers what they
are all ears to hear--the story of that _Flag of Distress_.  Their time
hitherto taken up attending upon their _fiancees_, they have deferred
calling for the full account, which only the English sailor can give
them.

Now having passed Cabo Mala, as if with that promontory of bad repute
all evil were left behind, they are in the mood to listen to the
narration in all its details; and for this have summoned the chief
officer to their side.

"Your honours!" he begins, "it's a twisted-up yarn, from the start to
the hour ye hove in sight; an' if ye hadn't showed yerselves just in the
nick o' time, an' ta'en the twist out o' it, hard to say how 'twould 'a
ended.  No doubt, in all o' us dyin' on that desert island, an' layin'
our bones there.  Thank the Lord, for our delivery--'ithout any
disparagement to what's been done by both o' you, young gentlemen.  For
that He must ha' sent you, an has had a guidin' hand throughout the
whole thing, I can't help thinkin', 'specially when I look back on the
scores o' chances that seemed goin' against the right, an' still sheered
round to it after all."

"True," assents Crozier, honouring the devout faith of the sailor.
In like manner our antagonist in a law-suit, and our competitor for any
office, are commonly regarded as our enemies; though we must
acknowledge, if we would but reflect a moment, that their motive
is entirely as justifiable as our own.

Besides we may consider, that when we receive harm from any person, we
are apt to imagine him criminal, and it is with extreme difficulty
we allow of his justice and innocence. This is a clear proof, that,
independent of the opinion of iniquity, any harm or uneasiness has
a natural tendency to excite our hatred, and that afterwards we
seek for reasons upon which we may justify and establish the passion.

Here the idea of injury produces not the passion, but arises from
it.

Nor is it any wonder that passion should produce the opinion of
injury; since otherwise it must suffer a considerable diminution,
which all the passions avoid as much as possible. The removal of
injury may remove the anger, without proving that the anger arises
only from the injury.

The harm and the justice are two contrary objects, of which the one has
a tendency to produce hatred, and the other love; and it is according to
their different degrees, and our particular turn of thinking, that
either of the objects prevails, and excites its proper passion.

SECT. IV OF THE LOVE OF RELATIONS

Having given a reason, why several actions, that cause a real pleasure or
uneasiness, excite not any degree, or but a small one, of the passion
of love or hatred towards the actors; it will be necessary to shew,
wherein consists the pleasure or uneasiness of many objects, which
we find by experience to produce these passions.

According to the preceding system there is always required a double
relation of impressions and ideas betwixt the cause and effect, in order
to produce either love or hatred. But though this be universally
true, it is remarkable that the passion of love may be excited by only
one relation of a different kind, viz, betwixt ourselves and the object;
or more properly speaking, that this relation is always attended with
both the others. Whoever is united to us by any connexion is always sure
of a share of our love, proportioned to the connexion, without enquiring
into his other qualities. Thus the relation of blood produces the strongest
tie the mind is capable of in the love of parents to their children,
and a lesser degree of the same affection, as the relation lessens.

Nor has consanguinity alone this effect, but any other relation without
exception. We love our country-men, our neighbours, those of the same
trade, profession, and even name with ourselves. Every one of these
relations is esteemed some tie, and gives a title to a share of our
affection.

There is another phaenomenon, which is parallel to this, viz, that
acquaintance, without any kind of relation, gives rise to love and
kindness. When we have contracted a habitude and intimacy with any person;
though in frequenting his company we have not been able to discover any
very valuable quality, of which he is possessed; yet we cannot
forebear preferring him to strangers, of whose superior merit we
are fully convinced.

These two phaenomena of the effects of relation and acquaintance will
give mutual light to each other, and may be both explained from the same
principle.

Those, who take a pleasure in declaiming against human nature, have
observed, that man is altogether insufficient to support himself; and
that when you loosen all the holds, which he has of external
objects, he immediately drops down into the deepest melancholy and
despair.

From this, say they, proceeds that continual search after amusement
in gaming, in hunting, in business; by which we endeavour to forget
ourselves, and excite our spirits from the languid state, into which
they fall, when not sustained by some brisk and lively emotion. To
this method of thinking I so far agree, that I own the mind to be
insufficient, of itself, to its own entertainment, and that it naturally
seeks after foreign objects, which may produce a lively sensation, and
agitate the spirits. On the appearance of such an object it awakes,
as it were, from a dream: The blood flows with a new tide: The heart
is elevated: And the whole man acquires a vigour, which he cannot
command in his solitary and calm moments. Hence company is naturally so
rejoicing, as presenting the liveliest of all objects, viz, a rational
and thinking Being like ourselves, who communicates to us all the actions
of his mind; makes us privy to his inmost sentiments and affections;
and lets us see, in the very instant of their production, all the emotions,
which are caused by any object. Every lively idea is agreeable, but
especially that of a passion, because such an idea becomes a kind
of passion, and gives a more sensible agitation to the mind, than
any other image or conception.

This being once admitted, all the rest is easy.
It war after night when they set about it, myself
actin' as a sort o' recognised leader.  I'd played my part, so's to get
control o' the rest.  We first lowered a boat, putting our things into
her.  Then we separated, some to get out the gold-dust, others to seize
the saynoreetas.  I let Gomez look after them, for fear of bringing on
trouble too soon.  Me an' Davis--who chances to be a sort o' Jack
carpenter--were to do the scuttlin'; an', for that purpose, went down
into the hold.  There I proposed to him to give the doomed ones a chance
for their lives, by lettin' the barque float a bit longer.  Though he be
a convict, he warn't nigh so bad as the rest.

"He consented to my proposal, an' we returned on deck 'ithout tapping
the barque's bottom-timbers.

"Soon's I had my head over the hatch coamin', I seed them all below in
the boat, the girls along wi' them.  I didn't know what they'd done to
the Don an' skipper I had my fears about 'em, thinkin' they might ha'e
been murdered, as Padilla had proposed.  But I darn't go back to the
cabin then, lest they might shove off, an' leave us in the lurch: as
some war threatenin' to do, more than one wantin' it, I know.  If they'd
done that--well, it's no use sayin' what might ha' been the upshot.
Tharfore, I had to hurry down into the boat.  Then, we rowed away;
leavin' the barque just as she'd been the whole o' that day.

"As we pulled shoreward, we could see her standing off, all sails set--
same as tho' the crew wor abroad o' her workin' 'em."

"But her ensign reversed?" asks Cadwallader.  "She was carrying it so,
when we came across her.  How came that, Harry?"

"Ah! the bit o' buntin' upside-down!  I did that myself in the dark;
thinkin' it might get them a better chance o' bein' picked up.  I'd just
time to do it afore droppin' into the boat."

"And you did the very thing!" exclaims Crozier.  "I see God's hand in
that surely!  But for the distress signal, the _Crusader_ would have
kept on without giving chase; and--.  But, proceed!  Tell us what
happened afterwards."

"Well; we landed in the island, not knowin' it to be a island.  An'
theer's another o' the chances, showin' we've been took care o' by the
little cherub as sits up aloft.  If it hed been the mainland--well, I
needn't tell ye, things would now be different.  After landin', we
stayed all night on the shore; the men sleeping in the biggest o' the
caves, while the ladies occupied a smaller one.  I took care 'bout that
separation myself, detarmined they shouldn't come to no harm.

"That night theer war a thing happened which I dar say they've told you;
an' twar from them I afterwards larned that Gomez an' Hernandez war no
other than the two chaps you'd trouble wi' at San Francisco.  They went
into the cave, an' said some insultin' things to the saynoreetas; I
warn't 'far off, an' would 'a made short work wi' them, hed it goed
farther than talk.

"Well; up at a early hour next mornin', we found the boat had drifted
off seaward, an' got bilged on the breakers.  But supposin' we shouldn't
want her any more, nobody thought anythin' about it.  Then comed the
dividin' o' the gold-dust, an' after it the great questyun--leastwise,
so far as I war consarned--as to who should take away the girls.  I'd
been waitin' for this, an' for the settlin' o't I war ready to do or
die.  Gomez an' Hernandez war the two who laid claim to 'em--as I
knowed, an' expected they would.  Pertendin' a likin' for Miss Carmen
myself, an' puttin' Davis up to what I wanted 'bout the tother, we also
put in our claim.  It ended in Gomez an' me goin' in for a fight; which
must 'a tarminated in the death o' one or other o' us.  I hed no dread
o' dyin'; only from the fear o' its leavin' the saynoreetas unprotected.
But thar war no help for't, an' I agreed to the duel, which war to be
fought first wi' pistols, an' finished up, if need be, wi' the steel.

"Everythin' settled, we war 'bout settin' to, when one o' the fellows--
who'd gone up the cliff to take a look ahead--just then sung out, that
we'd landed on a island.  Recallin' the lost boat, we knew that meant a
dreadful danger.  In coorse it stopped the fight, an' we all rushed up
to the cliff.

"When we saw how things stood, there war no more talk o' quarrellin'.
The piratical scoundrels war scared nigh out o' thar senses; an' would
'a been glad to get back aboard the craft they'd come out o', the which
all, 'ceptin' Davis an' myself, supposed to be at the bottom o' the sea.

"After that, 'twar all safe, as far as concarned the saynoreetas.  To
them as wanted 'em so bad, they war but a second thought, in the face of
starvation; which soon tamed the wolves down, an' kep 'em so till the
last o' the chapter.

"Now, young gentlemen; ye know how Harry Blew hev behaved, an' can judge
for yourselves, whether he's kep the word he gi'ed you 'fore leavin' San
Francisco."

"Behaved nobly, grandly!" cries Crozier.  "Kept your word like a man:
like a true British sailor!  Come to my arms--to my heart, Harry!  And
forgive the suspicions we had, not being able to help them.  Here, Will!
take him to yours, and show him how grateful we both are, to the man who
has done more for us than saving our lives."

"Bless you, Blew!  God bless you!" exclaims Cadwallader, promptly
responding to the appeal; and holding Harry in a hug that threatens to
crush in his ribs.

The affecting scene is followed by an interval of profound silence;
broken by the voice of Grummet, who, at the wheel, is steering straight
into the port of Panama, now in sight.

"Mr Crozier!" calls out the old coxswain, "do ye see that craft--the
one riding at anchor out yonder in the roadstead?"

All three turn their eyes in the direction indicated; soon as they have
done so, together exclaiming:

"_The Crusader_!"

The last incident of our tale takes place at Cadiz, in a grand cathedral
church; before the altar of which stand two English naval officers, and
alongside each a beautiful Spanish damsel, soon to be his wedded wife.

It scarce needs to tell that the bridegrooms are Edward Crozier and
Willie Cadwallader--both now lieutenants.  Nor need we say who are the
brides; since they are to be given away by Don Gregorio Montijo.

As little necessary to speak of the ceremonial splendour of that double
wedding--long time the _novedad_ of Cadiz.

Enough to say that present at it are all the wealth and fashion of the
old Andalusian city, with foreign consuls, and the commanders of
warships in the port: conspicuous amongst these, Captain Bracebridge,
and the officers of Her Britannic Majesty's frigate _Crusader_.

But he had been wise in the language of his youth, and he read the legend
thus--
"The earth must hide Both eyes and pride!"
Now, as he uttered these words, they stood in the Pleasance by the
mound; and on a sudden there was a low faint cry! They beheld, and O
wondrous and strange!

there was a small dark creature, clothed in a soft velvet skin, in
texture and in hue like the Lady Alice her robe; and they saw, as
it went into the earth, that it moved along without eyes, in
everlasting night.He
now knows all, and above all, Harry Blew in his true colours; and,
though on the _Condor's_ deck they are still captain and mate, when
below by themselves in her cabin, all distinction of rank disappears,
and they are affectionate friends--almost as brothers.

In the prosperous trading-craft _Condor_, re-converted into her original
shape of ship--regularly voyaging between Valparaiso and Cadiz,
exchanging the gold and silver of Chili for the silks and sweet wines of
Spain--but few would recognise a barque once chased over the South Sea,
believed to be a spectre; and, it is to be hoped, no one will ever again
see her sailing under a _Flag of Distress_.