type does not have page numbers, in references to a figure in the List
of Illustrations and in the Index these figure labels are used
instead of page number. In the body text, references to figures by page
number have been supplemented with the figure labels.

The illustrations f006, f007, f008 and f016 do not have captions in the
original and descriptive captions have been added.

The caret is used to indicate superscripts, for example ED^wd^ indicates
ED followed by a small superscript "wd".

Two minor typographical errors were corrected: "thing" to "think" on
page 10 and "intregal" to "integral" on page 197.


                                 PREFACE


As in the case of "The Bases of Design," to which this is intended to
form a companion volume, the substance of the following chapters on Line
and Form originally formed a series of lectures delivered to the
students of the Manchester Municipal School of Art.

There is no pretension to an exhaustive treatment of a subject it would
be difficult enough to exhaust, and it is dealt with in a way intended
to bear rather upon the practical work of an art school, and to be
suggestive and helpful to those face to face with the current problems
of drawing and design.

These have been approached from a personal point of view, as the results
of conclusions arrived at in the course of a busy working life which has
left but few intervals for the elaboration of theories apart from
practice, and such as they are, these papers are now offered to the
wider circle of students and workers in the arts of design as from one
of themselves.

They were illustrated largely by means of rough sketching in line before
my student audience, as well as by photographs and drawings. The rough
diagrams have been re-drawn, and the other illustrations reproduced, so
that both line and tone blocks are used, uniformity being sacrificed to
fidelity.

                                    WALTER CRANE.
     Kensington, July, 1900.


                                 CONTENTS


CHAPTER I

  Origin and Function of Outline--Silhouette--Definition of Boundaries
  by--Power of Characterization by--Formation of Letters--Methods of
  Drawing in Line--The Progressive Method--The Calligraphic Method--The
  Tentative Method--The Japanese Direct Brush Method--The Oval Method--
  The Rectangular Method--Quality of Line--Linear Expression of
  Movement--Textures--Emotion--Scale of Linear Expression                 1

CHAPTER II

  The Language of Line--Dialects--Comparison of the Style of Various
  Artists in Line--Scale of Degrees in Line--Picture Writing--Relation
  of Line to Form--Two Paths--The Graphic Purpose--Aspect--The
  Ornamental Purpose--Typical Treatment or Convention--Rhythm--Linear
  Plans in Pattern Designing--Wall-paper Design--Controlling
  Forms--Memory--Evolution in Design--Variety in Unity--
  Counterbalance--Linear Logic--Recurring Line and Form--Principle
  of Radiation--Range and Use of Line                                    23

CHAPTER III

  Of the Choice and Use of Line--Degree and Emphasis--Influence of the
  Photograph--The Value of Emphasis--The Technical Influence--The
  Artistic Purpose--Influence of Material and Tools--Brushwork--
  Charcoal--Pencil--Pen                                                  51

CHAPTER IV

  Of the Choice of Form--Elementary Forms--Space-filling--Grouping--
  Analogies of Form--Typical Forms of Ornament--Ornamental Units--
  Equivalents in Form--Quantities in Design--Contrast--Value of
  Variations of Similar or Allied Forms--Use of the Human Figure
  and Animal Forms in Ornamental Design                                  73

CHAPTER V

  Of the Influence of Controlling Lines, Boundaries Spaces, and Plans in
  Designing--Origin of Geometric Decorative Spaces and Panels in
  Architecture--Value of Recurring Line--Tradition--Extension--
  Adaptability--Geometric Structural Plans--Frieze and Field--
  Ceiling Decoration--Co-operative Relation                             108

CHAPTER VI

  Of the Fundamental Essentials of Design: Line, Form, Space--Principles
  of Structural and Ornamental Line in Organic Forms--Form and Mass in
  Foliage--Roofs--The Mediæval City--Organic and Accidental
  Beauty--Composition: Formal and Informal--Power of Linear
  Expression--Relation of Masses and Lines--Principles of Harmonious
  Composition                                                           138

CHAPTER VII

  Of the Relief of Form--Three Methods--Contrast--Light and Shade, and
  Modelling--The Use of Contrast and Planes in Pattern
  Designing--Decorative Relief--Simple Linear Contrast--Relief by Linear
  Shading--Different Emphasis in relieving Form by Shading Lines--Relief
  by means of Light and Shade alone without Outline--Photographic
  Projection--Relief by different Planes and Contrasts of Concave and
  Convex Surfaces in Architectural Mouldings--Modelled Relief--
  Decorative Use of Light and Shade, and different Planes in Modelling
  and Carving--Egyptian System of Relief Sculpture--Greek and Gothic
  Architectural Sculpture, influenced by Structural and Ornamental
  Feeling--Sculptural Tombs, Medals, Coins, Gems--Florentine
  Fifteenth-century Reliefs--Desiderio di Settignano                    165

CHAPTER VIII

  Of the Expression of Relief in Line-drawing--Graphic Aim and
  Ornamental Aim--Superficial Appearance and Constructive
  Reality--Accidents and Essentials--Representation and Suggestion of
  Natural Form in Design--The Outward Vision and the Inner Vision       204

CHAPTER IX

  Of the Adaptation of Line and Form in Design, in various materials and
  methods--Mural Decoration--Fresco-work of the Italian Painters--
  Modern Mural Work--Mural Spacing and Pattern Plans--Scale--The
  Skirting--The Dado--Field of the Wall--The Frieze--Panelling--
  Tapestry--Textile Design--Persian Carpets--Effect of Texture on
  Colour--Prints--Wall-paper--Stained Glass                             224

CHAPTER X

  Of the Expression and Relief of Line and Form by _Colour_--Effect of
  same Colour upon different Grounds--Radiation of Colour--White Outline
  to clear Colours--Quality of Tints relieved upon other Tints--
  Complementaries--Harmony--The Colour Sense--Colour Proportions--
  Importance of Pure Tints--Tones and Planes--The Tone of Time--
  Pattern and Picture--A Pattern not necessarily a Picture, but a
  Picture in principle a Pattern--Chiaroscuro--Examples of Pattern-work
  and Picture-work--Picture-patterns and Pattern-pictures               256

INDEX                                                                   283


                          LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS

 The Origin of Outline                                                 f002

 Silhouettes                                                           f003

 Coast and Mountain Lines--Gulf of Nauplia                             f004

 Proportions of Roman Capital Letters and of lower-case               f005a
 German text. From Dürer's "Geometrica"

 The Progressive Method of Drawing in Line                            f006a

 The Calligraphic Method                                              f007a

 The Tentative Method                                                 f007b

 The Oval and Rectangular Methods                                      f008

 Lines of Characterization in the Form and Feature of                  f009
 Flowers: Lily and Poppy

 Silhouette of Beech Leaves and Line Rendering of the same            f010a

 Lines of Movement                                                    f010b

 Effect of Wind upon Trees                                             f011

 Line Arrangement in ribbed Sea-sand                                   f012

 Lines of different Textures, Structures, and Services                 f013

 Lines of Exaltation and Rejoicing in Unison. The Morning              f014
 Stars, after William Blake

 Lines of Grief and Dejection: Designs from Flaxman's Homer            f015

 Landscape                                                             f016

 Scale of various Degrees of Linear Weight and Emphasis                f017

 Curvilinear Scale of Direction                                        f018

 Rectangular Scale of Direction                                        f018

 Picture Writing                                                       f019

 Olive Branch, from Nature                                             f020

 Olive Branch, simplified in Decorative Treatment                      f021

 Study of Horned Poppy                                                 f022

 Adaptation of Horned Poppy in Design: Vertical Panel for              f023
 Needlework

 Question and Answer in Line                                     f024, f025

 Diagram showing the Use of a Geometric Basis in Designing a           f026
 Repeating Pattern

 Use of Controlling Boundaries in Designing Sprays                     f027

 Method of Testing a Repeating Pattern                                 f028

 Sketch to show how a Pattern of Diverse Elements may be               f029
 harmonized by Unity of Inclosing and Intermediary Lines

 The Principle of Counterbalance in different Systems of               f030
 Design

 Border Units and Border Motive                                        f031

 Recurring Line and Form in Border Motives                             f032

 Radiating Principle of Line in Natural Form                           f033

 Radiating Lines of the Pectoral Muscles and Ribs                      f034

 Vaulting of Chapter House, Westminster                                f035

 Lines of Characterization of Feathers and Shells                      f036

 Pen Drawing of Fruit                                                  f037

 Effect of different Emphasis in Treatment of the same           f038, f039
 Designs

 Effect of different Emphasis in the Drawing of Landscape              f040

 Example of Page Treatment to show Ornamental Relation                f041a
 between Text and Pictures

 Suggestion for a Carpet Pattern and Abstract Treatment of            f041b
 the same on Point Paper as detail of Brussels Carpet

 Brush Forms                                                           f042

 Direct Brush Expression of Animal Form                                f043

 Japanese Drawing of a Bird. From "The Hundred Birds of Bari"          f044

 Elementary Geometrical Forms                                         f045a

 Use of the same Forms in Architecture                                f045b

 Poppy-heads                                                           f046

 Apple cut to show Position of Seeds                                   f047

 Cube and Sphere in Architectural Ornament                            f048a

 Filling of Square Space                                              f049a

 Filling of Circular Space                                            f049b

 Inlay Design: Pattern Units and Motives                               f050

 Grouping of Allied Forms: Composition of Curves                      f051a

 Grouping of Allied Forms: Composition of Angles                      f051b

 Still-life Group illustrative of Wood-engraving                       f052

 Japanese Diagonal Pattern                                             f053

 Treatment of Fruit and Leaf Forms: Corresponding Curvature            f054

 Correspondence in General Contour between Leaf and Tree              f055a

 Some Analogies in Form                                               f055b

 Tree of Typical Pattern Forms, Units and Systems                      f056

 Sketches to show Use of Counterbalance, Quantity, and                 f057
 Equivalents in Designing

 Quantities and Counterchange of Border and Field in Carpet            f058
 Motives

 Sketches to illustrate Value of different Quantities in          f058-f061
 Persian Rugs

 Recurrence and Contrast in Border Motives                             f062

 Use of inclosing Boundaries in Designing Animal Forms in             f063a
 Decorative Pattern

 Decorative Spacing of Figures within Geometric Boundaries            f063b

 Simple Linear Motives and Pattern Bases                               f064

 Use of Intervals in Repeating the same Ornamental Units               f065

 Designs of Floral, Human, and Animal Forms, governed by               f066
 Shape of inclosing Boundary

 The Parthenon: Sketch to show Spaces used for Decorative              f067
 Sculpture in Greek Architecture

 The Tower of the Winds, Athens                                        f068

 Sketch of part of the Arch of Constantine to show spaces for          f069
 Decorative Sculpture in Roman Architecture

 Byzantine (Mosaic) Treatment of Architectural Structural              f070
 Features: Apse, S. Vitale, Ravenna

 Detail of Canopy of Tomb of Gervaise-Alard, Winchelsea                f071

 Walberswick Church: West Door                                         f072

 Miserere in St. David's Cathedral                                     f073

 Recessed Panel from the Tomb of Bishop John Morgan, St.               f074
 David's Cathedral

 Corbel from Bishop Vaughan's Chapel, St. David's Cathedral            f075

 Gothic Tile Pattern, St. David's Cathedral                            f076

 Surface Pattern Motives derived from Lines of Structure              f077a

 Repeating Patterns built upon Square and Circular Bases              f077b

 Plan of a Drop Repeat                                                 f078

 Sketch Designs to show Relation between Frieze and Field in           f079
 Wall-paper

 Principles of Structural and Ornamental Line in Natural               f080
 Forms

 Radiating, Recurring and Counterbalancing Lines in the               f081a
 Structure of the Skeleton and the Muscles

 General Principles of Line and Form in the Branching and             f081b
 Foliage Masses of Trees

 Principles of Structure in Foliage Masses                             f082

 Albert Dürer: Detail from "The Prodigal Son"                          f083

 Albert Dürer: St. Anthony                                             f084

 Roof-lines: Rothenburg                                                f085

 St. Margaret Street, Canterbury                                       f086

 Figure Designs controlled by Geometric Boundaries               f087, f088

 Expression of Storm and Calm in Landscape                             f089

 Expression of Repose and Action                                       f090

 Controlling Lines of Movement: Movement in a Procession              f091a

 Lines left by a Watercourse--Lines governing fallen Débris           f091b
 from a Quarry

 Relief of Form, (1) by Outline, (2) by Contrast, (3) by               f092
 Light and Shade

 Relief of Form and Line in Pattern Design by means of                 f093
 Contrast and the Use of Planes

 Treatment of Mantling (14th-16th centuries)                   f094a, f094b

 Brass of Martin de Visch, Bruges, 1452                                f095

 Relief in Pattern Design by means of Simple Linear Contrasts         f096a

 Relief by adding Shading Lines to Outline                            f097a

 Relief by Diagonal Shading                                           f097b

 Different Method and different Emphasis in Relieving Form by          f098
 Shading Lines

 Albert Dürer's Principle in the Treatment of Drapery: From            f099
 the Woodcut in the "Life of the Virgin" Series

 Albert Dürer: Pen-drawing                                             f100

 Filippino Lippi: Study of Drapery                                     f101

 Raphael: Studies of Drapery                                           f102

 Relief by means of Light and Shade alone, in Pen-drawing             f103a
 without Outline

 Relief by means of White Line on a Dark Ground and _vice             f103b
 versâ_

 Relief in Architectural Mouldings                                     f104

 Roman Treatment of Corinthian Order, Forum of Nerva, Rome             f105

 Egyptian Relief Sculpture: Thebes                                     f106

 Greek Relief: Eleusis                                                 f107

 Egyptian Relief: Denderah                                             f107

 Chartres Cathedral: Carving on West Front                             f108

 Chartres Cathedral: Tympanum of Central Door of West Front
                                                                       f109

 Medals of the Lords of Mantua, Cesena, and Ferrara, by                f110
 Vittore Pisano

 Treatment of Draped Figure in Black on White Ground and              f111a
 _vice versâ_

 Treatment of the same Figure in Light and Shade                      f111b

 The Graphic Principle of the Expression of Form by Light and          f112
 Shade; with and without Outline

 Linear Expression of Features, Feathers and Fur: Notes from           f113
 Nature

 Sketches to illustrate the Graphic and the Decorative                 f114
 Treatment of Draped Figures

 Decorative Treatment of Birds                                         f115

 Floral Designs upon Typical Inclosing Shapes of Indian and            f116
 Persian Ornament

 Dancing Figure with the Governing Lines of the Movement              f117a

 Lines of Floral Growth and Structure: Lily and Rose                  f117b

 Coast-lines, Gulf of Nauplia                                         f118a

 Lines of Movement in Water, Shallow Stream over Sand                 f118b

 Giotto: Chastity (Lower Church, Assisi)                               f119

 Pinturicchio: Mural Painting (Piccolomini Chapel, Siena)              f120

 Diagram showing the Principal Fundamental Plans or Systems            f121
 of Line governing Mural Spacing and Decorative Distribution

 Diagram to show how the apparent Depth of a Space is                  f122
 increased by the Use of Vertical Lines, and its apparent
 Width by the Use of Horizontal Lines

 Decorative Spacing of the Wall: Sketches (to half-inch                f123
 scale) to show different Treatment and Proportions

 Figure of Laura, from the Burgundian Tapestries: The                  f124
 Triumphs of Petrarch, in the South Kensington Museum

 Pinturicchio: Fresco in the Appartimenti Borgia                       f125

 Portion of Detail of the Holy Carpet of the Mosque of                 f126
 Ardebil: Persian, sixteenth century

 Sketch to illustrate Treatment of Borders in a Persian Rug            f127

 Arras Tapestry: Diagrams to show the Principle of Working             f128
 and Surface Effect

 Contrasting Surfaces in Warp and Weft in Woven Silk Hanging           f129

 Indian printed Cotton Cover: South Kensington Museum                  f130

 Stained Glass Treatment: Inclosure of Form and Colour by              f131
 Lead Lines

 Sketch to show Effect of the same Colour and Form upon                f132
 different Coloured Grounds

 Principle of the Effect of the Blending or Blurring of                f133
 Colours at their Edges

 Use of Black and White Outline to clear the Edges of                  f133
 Coloured Forms upon different Coloured Grounds

 J. Van Eyck: Portrait of J. Arnolfini and his Wife                    f134

 Ver Meer of Delft: Lady at a Spinet                                   f135

 Botticelli: The Nativity                                              f136

 Holbein: The Ambassadors                                              f137

 Botticelli: Madonna and Child                                         f138

 Crivelli: The Annunciation                                            f139

 Perugino: The Virgin in Adoration with St. Michael and St.            f140
 Raphael, and Tobias

 Titian: Bacchus and Ariadne                                           f141

 Madox Brown: Christ Washing St. Peter's Feet                          f142

[Illustration (f002): The Origin of Outline.]


                             OF LINE AND FORM


                                CHAPTER I


    Origin and Function of Outline--Silhouette--Definition of
    Boundaries by--Power of Characterization by--Formation of
    Letters--Methods of Drawing in Line--The Progressive Method--The
    Calligraphic Method--The Tentative Method--The Japanese Direct
    Brush Method--The Oval Method--The Rectangular Method--Quality of
    Line--Linear Expression of Movement--Textures--Emotion--Scale of
    Linear Expression.

Outline, one might say, is the Alpha and Omega of Art. It is the
earliest mode of expression among primitive peoples, as it is with the
individual child, and it has been cultivated for its power of
characterization and expression, and as an ultimate test of
draughtsmanship, by the most accomplished artists of all time.

The old fanciful story of its origin in the work of a lover who traced
in charcoal the boundary of the shadow of the head of his sweetheart as
cast upon the wall by the sun, and thus obtained the first profile
portrait, is probably more true in substance than in fact, but it
certainly illustrates the _function_ of outline as the definition of the
boundaries of form.

                                                              [Silhouette]

As children we probably perceive forms in nature defined as flat shapes
of colour relieved upon other colours, or flat fields of light on dark,
as a white horse is defined upon the green grass of a field, or a black
figure upon a background of snow.

[Illustration (f003a): Silhouette]

[Illustration (f003b): Silhouette]

                                                [Definition of Boundaries]

To define the boundaries of such forms becomes the main object in early
attempts at artistic expression. The attention is caught by the
edges--the shape of the silhouette which remains the paramount means of
distinction of form when details and secondary characteristics are
lost; as the outlines of mountains remain, or are even more clearly
seen, when distance subdues the details of their structure, and evening
mists throw them into flat planes one behind the other, and leave
nothing but the delicate lines of their edges to tell their character.
We feel the beauty and simplicity of such effects in nature. We feel
that the mind, through the eye resting upon these quiet planes and
delicate lines, receives a sense of repose and poetic suggestion which
is lost in the bright noontide, with all its wealth of glittering
detail, sharp cut in light and shade. There is no doubt that this
typical power of outline and the value of simplicity of mass were
perceived by the ancients, notably the Ancient Egyptians and the Greeks,
who both, in their own ways, in their art show a wonderful power of
characterization by means of line and mass, and a delicate sense of the
ornamental value and quality of line.

[Illustration (f004): Coast and Mountain Lines--Gulf of Nauplia]

                                                    [Formation of Letters]

Regarding line--the use of outline from the point of view of its value
as a means of definition of form and fact--its power is really only
limited by the power of draughtsmanship at the command of the artist.
From the archaic potters' primitive figures or the rudimentary attempts
of children at human or animal forms up to the most refined outlines of
a Greek vase-painter, or say the artist of the Dream of Poliphilus, the
difference is one of degree. The tyro with the pen, learning to write,
splotches and scratches, and painfully forms trembling, limping O's and
A's, till with practice and habitude, almost unconsciously, the power to
form firm letters is acquired.

Writing, after all, is but a simpler form of drawing, and we know that
the letters of our alphabet were originally pictures or symbols. The
main difference is that writing stops short with the acquisition of the
purely useful power of forming letters and words, and is seldom pursued
for the sake of its beauty or artistic qualities as formerly; while
drawing continually leads on to new difficulties to be conquered, to new
subtleties of line, and fresh fascinations in the pursuit of distinction
and style.

[Illustration (f005a): Proportions of Roman Capital Letters and Method
of Drawing Them (From Albert Dürer's "Geometrica").]

[Illustration (f005b): Proportions of Lower-Case German Text and Method
of Drawing the Letters (From Albert Dürer's "Geometrica").]

The practice of forming letters with the pen or brush, from good types,
Roman and Gothic, however, would afford very good preliminary practice
to a student of line and form. The hand would acquire directness of
stroke and touch, while the eye would grow accustomed to good lines of
composition and simple constructive forms. The progressive nature of
writing--the gradual building up of the forms of the letters--and the
necessity of dealing with recurring forms and lines, also, would bear
usefully upon after work in actual design. Albert Dürer in his
"Geometrica" gives methods on which to draw the Roman capitals, and also
the black letters, building the former upon the square and its
proportions, the thickness of the down strokes being one-eighth of
square, the thin strokes being one-sixteenth, and the serifs being
turned by circles of one-fourth and one-eighth diameter. The capital O,
it will be noted, is formed of two circles struck diagonally.

                                              [Methods of Drawing in Line]

Letters may be taken as the simplest form of definition by means of
line. They have been reduced through centuries of use from their
primitive hieroglyphic forms to their present arbitrary and fixed types,
though even these fixed types are subject to the variation produced by
changes of taste and fancy.

But when we come to unformulated nature--to the vast world of complex
forms, ever changing their aspect, full of life and movement, trees,
flowers, woods and waters, birds, beasts, fishes, the human form--the
problem how to represent any of these forms, to express and characterize
them by means of so abstract a method as line-drawing, seems at first
difficult enough.

But since the growth of perception, like the power of graphic
representation, is gradual and partial, though progressive, the eye and
the mind are generally first impressed with the salient features and
leading characteristics of natural forms, just as the child's first idea
of a human form is that of a body with four straight limbs, with a
preponderating head. That is the first impression, and it is
unhesitatingly recorded in infantine outline.

The first aim, then, in drawing anything in line is to grasp the general
truths of form, character, and expression.

                                                  [The Progressive Method]

There are various methods of proceeding in getting an outline of any
object or figure. To begin with, the student might begin progressively
defining the form by a series of stages in this way. Take the profile
of a bird, for instance; the form might be gradually built up by the
combination of a series of lines:

[Illustration (f006a): (bird forms)]

or take the simpler form of a flask bottle:

[Illustration (f006b): (bottle forms)]

or a jar on the same principle:

[Illustration (f006c): (jar forms)]

or, simpler still, a leaf form, putting in the stem first with one
stroke (1):

[Illustration (f006d): (leaf forms)]

and building the form around it (2, 3).

                                                 [The Calligraphic Method]

[Illustration (f007a): (calligraphic forms)]

This might be termed the calligraphic method of drawing; and in this
method facility of hand might be further practised by attempting the
definition of forms by continuous strokes, or building it up by as few
strokes as possible. The simpler types of ornament consisting of
meandering and flowing lines can all be produced in this way, i.e., by
continuous line, as well as natural forms treated in a certain abstract
or conventional way, which adapts them to decoration.

                                                   [The Tentative Method]

[Illustration (f007b): (jar forms)]

Another method is to sketch in lightly guide lines for main masses,
building a sort of scaffolding of light lines to assist the eye in
getting the correct outline in its place, using vertical centre lines
for symmetrical forms to get the poise right. This is the method very
generally in use, but I think it very desirable to practise direct
drawing as well, to acquire certainty of eye and facility of hand; and
one must not mind failure at first, as this kind of power and facility
is so much a matter of practice.

[Illustration (f007c): (birdbath sketch)]

                                        [The Japanese Direct Brush Method]

The Japanese, who draw with the brush, have accustomed themselves to
draw in a direct manner without any preliminary sketching, and the charm
of their work is largely owing to that crisp freshness of touch only
possible to their direct method. The great object is to establish a
perfectly intimate correspondence between eye and hand, so that the
latter will record what the former perceives.

Abundant specimens of the freedom and naturalism of the modern school of
Japanese artists in this direct brush method may be found in the work of
Bari, Hiroshigi, and Hokusai, and in the numerous prints and books of
designs from their hands. To all draughtsmen and designers they are most
valuable to study for their direct method and simple means of expression
of form and fact. Accidental as they frequently seem in composition, the
placing of the drawing upon the paper is carefully considered before
starting, and this, of course, is always a very important point.

Yet another method of drawing, more especially in relation to the
drawing of the human figure and animal forms, I may mention as a help to
those who do not feel strong enough for the direct method. At the same
time it must be borne in mind that we can accustom ourselves to _any_
method; and the more dependent we become upon a single method, the less
facility we shall have for working in any other. But for all that it is
desirable to master _one_ method--that is, to be able to draw in line
_freely_ in one way or another--and experience and practice alone will
enable us to find the method most satisfactory.

                                        [The Oval and Rectangular Methods]

[Illustration (f008): (human and horse forms)]

                                                  [The Rectangular Method]

This other method is to block in the principal masses of the forms we
desire to represent by means of a series of ovals, as shown in the
illustration, and when we have got the masses in their proper relations,
to proceed to draw in the careful outline of the figure, or whatever it
may be, upon this substructure of guiding lines, correcting as we go
along. It would be quite possible to work on the same principle, but
upon a structure of more or less rectangular masses. The real use of the
method is to assist the student to get a grasp of the relation of the
masses of a figure and a sense of structure in drawing; whether square
or oval blocking in is used may be a matter of choice. It may be said
for the oval forms that they resemble the contours of the structure in
human and animal forms.

If one had a tendency to round one's forms too much, it would be well to
try the rectangular method to correct this, and _vice versâ_.

After a certain facility has been acquired in rendering form by means of
line, we shall perceive further capacities of expression in its use, and
begin to note how different characteristics of form and natural fact may
be expressed by varying the quality of our outline.

If we are drawing a plant or a flower, for instance, we should endeavour
to show by the quality of our line the difference between the fine
springing curves in the structure of the lily, the solid seed-centre and
stiff radiation of the petals of the daisy, and the delicate silky folds
of the poppy.

                                                         [Quality of Line]

[Illustration (f009): Lines of Characterization in the Form and Feature
of Flowers: Lily and Poppy.]

But, as leaves come before flowers, it would be best to begin with leaf
forms and try to express the character of oak and beech, lime and
chestnut leaves, for instance, by means of outline. Probably at first
we shall feel dissatisfied with our outline as not being full enough: it
may look meagre in quality and small in definition of form. This
probably arises from not allowing enough space--from setting the
outline too much within the boundary of the form. To correct this one
cannot do better than block in the form of the object we are drawing
(leaf, flower, or figure) with a full brush in black silhouette, placing
the object against the light or white paper, so that its true boundary
may be seen uninterfered with by surface markings or shadows, and,
concentrating our attention upon the _edge_, follow it as carefully as
possible with the solid black. Then, if we compare the result with our
outline, it will help to show where it has failed; and the practice of
thus blocking in with the brush in solid silhouette will tend to
encourage a larger style of drawing, since good outline means good
perception of mass; and as a general principle in drawing, it may be
recommended to place one's outline _outside_ the silhouette boundary of
the form rather than within it; that is to say, when the figure or
object is relieved in light against dark, as the line in that case
defines the edge against the background. When the figure or object
appears as dark upon a light ground, however, the outline should be
within the silhouette, obviously, or its delicate boundary is lost.

[Illustration (f010a): Silhouette of Beech Leaves and Line Rendering of
the Same.]

                                           [Linear Expression of Movement]

Another important attribute of line is its power of expressing or
suggesting _movement_. By a law of inseparable association, undulating
lines approaching the horizontal, or leading down to it, are connected
with the sense of repose; whereas broken curves and rectangular lines
always suggest action and unrest, or the resistance to force of some
kind.

[Illustration (f010b): Lines of Movement]

The recurrence of a series of lines in the same direction in a kind of
crescendo or wave-like movement suggests continuous pressure of force in
the same direction, as in this series of instantaneous actions of a man
bowling, where the line drawn through or touching the highest points in
each figure takes the line of the curve of a wave. The wave-line,
indeed, may be said not only to suggest movement, but also to describe
its direction and force. It is, in fact, _the line of movement_. The
principle may be seen in a simpler way, as Hogarth points out in his
"Analysis of Beauty," by observing the line described along a wall by
the head of a man walking along the street. Or, as we may see sometimes
near the coast, trees exposed to the constant pressure of the wind
illustrate this recurrence of lines in the same direction governing
their general shape; and as each tree is forced to spread in the
direction away from the wind, the effect is that of their being always
struggling against its pressure even in the calmest weather; and this is
entirely due to our association of wind-movement with this peculiar
linear expression.

[Illustration (f011): Lines Expressive of Movement: Effect of Wind Upon
Trees]

Flowing water, again, is expressed by certain recurring wave-lines,
which remind us of the ancient linear symbols of the zigzag and meander
used from the earliest times to express water. In the streams that
channel the sands of the sea-shore when the tide recedes we may see
beautiful flowing lines, sometimes crossing like a network, and
sometimes running into a series of shell-like waves; while the sands
themselves are ribbed and channelled and modelled by the recurring
movement of the waves, which leave upon them the impress and the
expression of their motion (much as in a more delicate medium the
air-currents impress the fields of cloud, and give them their
characteristic forms).

[Illustration (f012): Line Arrangement in Ribbed Sea Sand]

                                           [Linear Expression of Textures]

Textures and surfaces, too, fall within the range of linear expression.
One would naturally use lines of totally different consistency and
character to express rough or smooth surfaces: to express the difference
of value, for instance, between the ivory-like smoothness of an egg and
the scaly surface of a pine-cone, entirely different qualities of line
are obviously wanted. The firm-set yet soft feathers of the plumage of a
bird must be rendered by a very different touch from the shining scales
of a fish. The hair and horns of animals, delicate human features,
flowers, the sinuous lines of thin drapery, or the broad massive folds
of heavy robes, all demand from the designer and draughtsman in line
different kinds of suggestive expression, a translation or rendering of
natural fact subordinate to the artistic purpose of his work, and in
relation to the material and purpose for which he works.

                                            [Linear Expression of Emotion]

[Illustration (f013): Lines of Different Textures, Structures, and
Surfaces.]

Then, again, when we come to the expression of ideas--of thought and
sentiment--we find in line an abstract but direct medium for their
illustration; and this again, too, by means of that law of inseparable
association which connects the idea of praise or aspiration and
ascension, for instance, with long lines inclining towards the severe
vertical, as when we draw a figure with upraised hands; while the
feeling might be increased if led up to or re-echoed by other groups and
objects in the composition, forming a kind of vertical crescendo on the
same principle which we were considering in regard to the expression of
lateral movement. Few things in design are finer or more elevated in
feeling than William Blake's design of the Morning Stars singing
together, in the series of the Book of Job, yet it is little more than
a vertical arrangement of figures with uplifted and intercrossing arms.
The linear plan gives the main impetus to the expressiveness of the
design, and is the basis of the beauty, which culminates in the rapture
of the fresh youthful faces.

[Illustration (f014): Expression of Emotion: Lines of Exaltation and
Rejoicing in Unison. The Morning Stars, After William Blake. (From the
Book of Job.)]

                                              [Scale of Linear Expression]

Bowed and bent lines tending downwards, on the other hand, convey the
opposite ideas of dejection and despair. This is illustrated in these
figures of Flaxman's, who was a great master of style in outline.

[Illustration (f015): Lines of Grief and Dejection. Flaxman: Designs to
Homer.]

                                                        [Capacity of Line]

We seem here to discover a kind of scale of linear expression--the two
extremes at either end: the horizontal and the vertical, with every
degree and modulation between them; the undulating curve giving way to
the springing energetic spiral, the meandering, flowing line sinking to
the horizontal: or the sharp opposition and thrust of rectangular, the
nervous resistance of broken curves, the flame-like, triumphant,
ascending verticals. Truly the designer may find a great range of
expression within the dominion of pure line. Line is, indeed, as I have
before termed it, a language, a most sensitive and vigorous speech of
many dialects; which can adapt itself to all purposes, and is, indeed,
indispensable to all the provinces of design in line. Line may be
regarded simply as a means of record, a method of registering the facts
of nature, of graphically portraying the characteristics of plants and
animals, or the features of humanity: the smooth features of youth, the
rugged lines of age. A sprig of chervil is to be placed at each end of
the fillet.

[_Seulette._]

SKATE STEW
Put the fins, skin, trimmings of skate into water enough to cook them,
with pepper and salt and simmer for half an hour. Strain it through a
fine sieve. Make a brown sauce of butter and flour, pepper, salt,
adding a little milk, about a teacupful for a pound of skate, then
squeeze in the juice of half a lemon, and if you have it, a glass
of white wine.

Take the skate, cut it in pieces, simmer it in salted water; when
cooked, strain away the water, dish the fish, pouring over it the
above sauce.

                                Decorate with strips of lemon peel laid in a lattice-work down the
center.

    [_Une epiciere_.]
    
    TO DRESS COARSE FISH
    Any fish is good if dressed in this way. Make a brown sauce,
    well flouring it with salt, pepper, and dried herbs. Mince and fry
    a shallot and add it, then a large glass of red wine, a few drops
    of lemon juice.
    Cook some fish roe, sieve it, and stir it into the sauce.

Take your fish and simmer it in milk and water till cooked, then heat it
up quickly in the sauce to serve.

[_F. R._]

FLEMISH SALAD

                                                                This is fillets of herring, laid in a bowl with slices of apple,
beetroot, cold potatoes, and cold cooked sprouts, covered with the
ordinary salad dressing.

If the fish is salted, let it soak first of all in milk to take away the
greater part of the salt. This is a winter dish, but the same sort of
thing is prepared in summer, substituting cold cooked peas, cauliflower,
artichokes, beans, with the fish.

[_Amie reconnaissante._]

FLEMISH SAUCE
This popular sauce is composed of melted butter thickened with yolk
of egg and flavored with mustard; it is used greatly for fish.

BEEF SQUARES
If you have a small piece of very good beef, such as rump steak or fillet
of beef, it is more economical to cut it into squares, and grill it
lightly at a clear fire. Have ready some squares of toast, buttered
and hot, lay these on a hot dish with a bit of steak on the top, and
on the top of that a slice of tomato much peppered and salted and a
small pile of horse-radish.

This makes a pretty dish and can be varied by using capers or chopped
gherkins instead of horse-radish.

It is a great saving to cut meat, bread, etc., in squares instead of
rounds.

[_Une amie au convent._]

                                                IMITATION CUTLETS

A dish that I have done for those who like curry flavoring is the
following. Take any cold cooked vegetables, and cutting them in small
pieces, roll them in a thick white sauce which you have strongly
flavored with curry. Put it aside to get firm. If you are in a hurry
you can bind with the yolk of an egg in the flour and make a thick
batter in that way.
Form into cutlets and fry as you would a real cutlet. The same thing
can be done with macaroni or spaghetti that is already cooked,
with cold fish or anything that is insipid to the taste.

[_Une amie au convent_.]

KIDNEYS WITH MADEIRA
Use either sheep or pigs' kidneys. Cut them longways, so as to be able
to take out the threads from the inside of them. Put some butter on to
fry over a brisk fire and when it is browned, but not burnt, put in the
kidneys for three or four minutes.

Take them out and keep them hot for a minute while you add to the
butter they were cooked in a soupspoonful of Madeira wine, a good
dust of chopped parsley, a little cayenne pepper and salt.

Mix it well, and if too thick add a little gravy. Pour the sauce over the
kidneys and finish with a powdering of chopped parsley. Fried potatoes
are eaten with this dish.

[_Mme. Vanderbelle Genotte._]

PIGS' TROTTERS IN BLANQUETTE
Any part of pork or veal is good done in this way.

                                                Take your pieces of meat and fry them in butter till they are a
good golden brown color.

Put them in a pan, covering them with water, and adding a sliced onion, a
bay leaf, a whole carrot, a leek, pepper, salt,--let it all simmer
gently over a slow fire till the meat is cooked but not boiled.
Take the pieces from the liquor and pass it through a sieve. Mix a
little rice flour in a cup of cold water, stirring well.

Drop in the juice of half a lemon and the beaten yolk of an egg, which
stir round quickly. Put in the meat again for a moment and serve it with
boiled potatoes.

LOIN OF MUTTON IN THE POT
Put in an earthenware pot three shallots, finely minced; take a bit
of garlic, cut it close and rub it round the side of the pot; put
in as well a lump of butter, pepper and salt, and some rather fat
gravy.

Divide the loin and put six chops in to simmer for three quarters
of an hour on a moderate fire, covering the pot with the lid.

Before you serve it, stir in a little lemon juice and stir up the
sauce. To be served with Cauliflower à la Aerschot as follows: Cut
your cauliflower into medium pieces, seeing that it is very clean, while
you have some salted water boiling up.

                                                     Put in the pieces, boil till tender, then drain them on a sieve.

Put leaves and trimming of the vegetable into the pot to simmer and
serve as basis for a vegetable soup. Make a good white sauce, adding
the yolk of an egg, and flavoring it with nutmeg. Put the vegetable
on a dish and pour over the sauce, letting it stand for a few moments
by the fire before it is eaten.

[_Madame Herman Noppen._]

OX TONGUE WITH SPINACH AND WHITE SAUCE
Boil the tongue in salted water till the outer skin will peel off.
Take this off, then put the tongue back in the liquor to simmer while
you prepare the same.

    Take a piece of butter the size of an egg,
    melt it and mix it with two dessertspoonfuls of ground rice, add
some of the liquor, pepper, and salt, stir well, so that it makes
a good cream; drop in the yolks of two eggs, always stirring, and
a little lemon juice.

Serve the tongue whole with this sauce poured over it and spinach done
in the following way: Wash the spinach in running water till every bit
of grit has gone. Put some water on to boil, salt it well, and throw
in the spinach which you have freed from mid-rib and stalk. The
water must be boiling and the fire brisk. When tender, pass the spinach
through the sieve, then put a bit of butter into an enameled saucepan,
then the spinach, which heat for six minutes, add a little pepper. Serve
it with the tongue, and you can garnish as well with little croutons
of bread fried in butter.

[_Madame Herman Noppen_.]

VEAL FRITTERS
If you have only a little piece of veal or other cold meat, you can
make a very presentable dish in the following way: Cut a thin slice
of meat and spread on each side of it a layer of mashed potatoes
to which you have added some tomato sauce.

Beat up an egg and dip the slices and potato into it, lay them in
fine breadcrumbs and fry them till a good golden color in plenty
of fat.

Send them to table under a hot cover.

[_Pour la Patrie._]

STEWED BEEF
If you are obliged to make a hot dish in a hurry and have only a piece
of inferior meat, there is no better way of using it than by dressing
it in the Brabant way, which is rather expensive. Clean and cook some
mushrooms, and when fried lightly, add them and their liquor to
your beef, cut up in small pieces, but not minced. Add pepper, salt,
a dust of spices, or an onion with three or four cloves in it, and a half
bottle of good red wine. Stew all together for at least twenty minutes,
take out the onion and cloves, and serve in the dish it was cooked
in which should be an earthenware pot.

                                                  [_Pour la Patrie._]

A MUTTON SALAD
Cut some slices of cold mutton or lamb, removing every bit of
fat and skin that you can, unless that destroys the firmness of the
slice.
Prepare a salad of lettuce, and if you cannot give a mayonnaise sauce,
add to the lettuce plenty of sliced cucumber, for that keeps the mutton
moist. Put the salad on each slice and roll the meat over as tightly
as you can. Lay the rolls closely together in a dish and sprinkle a very
little salad dressing over them. This way of doing meat is very
useful for taking to picnics, or for taking on a long journey.

[_Pour la Patrie._]

SAUSAGE PATTIES
Half a pound of sausage meat of any kind that you like. Make some
rounds of paste, lay the meat on half of each round and fold over.
Steam for quarter of an hour, or stew in plenty of gravy.

[_Pour la Patrie_.]

SAUSAGE AND POTATOES
Roll some cooked sausage meat in mashed potatoes, making a roll for
each person.

Brush the potatoes over with milk and put them to bake till nicely
browned.

Decorate with gherkins on each roll of butter.

                                             [_Pour la Patrie_.]

RAGOUT OF COLD MEAT
Take any cold meat that you have, free it from fat and skin and cut it
in rounds like a five-franc piece. If you have some lean bacon or ham,
a little of that should be added. I should tell you first of all to
put some rice on to boil in boiling water. Make a sauce of flour and
butter in a pan, adding gravy if you happen to have it, but failing that,
use water and vinegar in equal parts to thin it; season with pepper and
salt and a small spoonful of anchovy sauce.

When the sauce is heating, put in the meat and cover the pan, let
it all heat for twelve minutes and then place meat and sauce in the
middle of a dish.

By this time the rice may be tender. Drain it well and put it as
a border to the stew.

[_Aimee._]

A QUICKLY MADE STEW
Put a piece of butter in a stewpan, with an onion cut in pieces, a
few cloves, salt and pepper, a tablespoonful of shredded parsley,
and if you have it some good gravy or meat juice and water.

                                                       Throw into the sauce some cold meat, preferably underdone, and after
it has simmered for fifteen minutes take a cut onion and rub with
it the bottom of the dish that you are going to use.

Take a good glass of red wine, such as Burgundy and mix it with the
yolk of an egg, stir this into the stew and serve up in a couple of
minutes.

[_Madame Groubet._]

GRENADINES OF VEAL

Take a fireproof dish, and after sprinkling it with breadcrumbs put in
it a layer of roast veal in slices, a layer of mashed potatoes, a
layer of veal kidney, partly cooked, and cut into pieces and lastly
a layer of potato.

Cover the whole with a bechamel sauce into which you have stirred some
grated cheese; put it to bake in the oven. Then make a brown sauce with
any veal or kidney gravy that you have, and cook some mushrooms
in it with pepper and salt; the sauce is to be served with the
grenadine.

HOCHE POT
Slice an onion and fry it in butter till it is brown; add pieces of
pork and of mutton freed from fat and skin; cover them with water and
throw into it any kinds of vegetables that you may have; but
particularly sliced carrots and turnips and green cabbages; put it
in the oven to cook.

                                                       In another saucepan boil some white haricot beans, salt, and pepper,
until they are tender, when they must be added to the stew with a
small quantity of the liquor that they have been boiled in.

PIGEON AND CABBAGE ROLLS
Take two pigeons, two cabbages, four slices of fried bacon, an ounce
of butter, a large wineglassful of sherry, and some gravy. Truss your
pigeons and cook them in butter for ten minutes in a fireproof
dish. Then take them out, cut them into neat pieces. Meanwhile have the
cabbages boiled in salted water. Drain them. Cut them in small pieces
and roll some up in each slice of bacon; lay the pigeons on top, pouring
over them the liquor they were cooked in and half the wine. Put all in
the oven for ten minutes--pour in the rest of the wine and leave for
another ten minutes before serving. If you have stock to add to this it
is an improvement, or put half a teaspoonful of meat extract to half a
pint of water.

[_Une refugiee_.]

REMAINS OF SAUSAGE
If you have a few inches of a big sausage cut it into as thick slices as
you can--fry them and lay them in a circle on a dish with a poached
egg on each.

Little dinner breads are good when soaked in milk, stuffed with sausage
meat, and fried. It can be used to stuff cucumber, or eggplants, but you
should then crumble up the meat and bind it with the yolk of a raw
egg.

[_Mme.

                                                                  Georgette._] 

SHOULDER OF LAMB A LA BEIGE
Braise your shoulder of lamb; that is, put it in a closely covered
stewpan, in a good brown sauce or gravy with the vegetables, to be
served with it.

It is the lid being closed that makes the meat take some flavor from
the vegetables. To do it in the Belgian way, take some good white
turnips, wash them and scrape them, put small ones in whole, large ones
cut in half. Take some small cabbages, trim off without leaves, cut
them in half, remove the stalk, make a hollow in the center and
fill it with forcemeat of any kind; but sausage meat is good. Place the
stuffed cabbages round the meat to cook gently at the same time.

[_Madame Vershagen._]

                                                     FILLET OF BEEF À LA BRABANCONNE
Take a whole fillet of beef, trim it neatly and set it in a braising
pan to cook very slowly in some good brown sauce to which you have
added a pint of stock.

Put in neatly shaped carrots and turnips and some balls made of mashed
potato already fried. Keep hot in two sauceboats a puree of Brussels
sprouts and a puree of onions. These are prepared by cooking the vegetables
in water, then chopping fine, and rubbing through a sieve with cream,
or with a little good milk, pepper, and salt. To serve the fillet, lay
it on a dish with the carrots and turnip, potato cakes round; pour
over it the rest of the brown sauce from the pan; then add in heaps
the onion puree and the sprouts puree.

[_Madame Vershagen._]

STEWED BEEF
An inferior part of beef may be made to taste excellent if it is braised;
that is, simmered with the cover on slowly, in company with onions (already
fried) and well washed pieces of carrots and whole turnips. Put on also
some small cabbages cut in halves, and if you can give it, a glass
of good red wine.

[_Une refugiee._]

BEEF AND APRICOTS
Stew your beef, say three pounds of steak, in some gravy, adding
to a pint of liquor a level teaspoonful of white sugar.

Throw in a handful of the dried apricots, but be sure you wash them
well first. This dish is generally accompanied by leeks, first
blanched for a few moments, and then put in the stew. Flavor with
salt, pepper, and the rind of half a lemon which remove before you
serve the stew. For English taste the sugar could be omitted.
[_Seulette._] 

FOR AN INVALID
This must be begun at least three hours before it will be required.
Take two ounces of pearl barley, wash it well, and put it in cold
water enough to cover it, for an hour. Take a pound of good steak,
shred it in small pieces, and put it in an enameled saucepan with
a quart of cold water and a sprinkle of salt. Strain the water from
the barley and add this last to the meat, and let it simmer for two
hours. Then strain off the liquor and pound the meat and barley in
a mortar, rub it through a sieve; when it is a smooth puree put it
back into the pan with its liquor and a gill of cream. Let it simmer
again for a moment and serve it in a cup with a lid to it.
[_Madame A. F._] 

INVALIDS' EGGS
Cut out some rounds of bread a good deal larger than a poached egg
would be. While these are frying, make a puree of Brussels sprouts.
Boil them till tender, squeeze in a cloth. Rub them through a sieve
and make into a very thick puree with cream, pepper and salt. Poach
a fresh egg for each crouton, and slip it on, very quickly, put
some of the green puree round, and serve under a hot cover.
A SWEET FOR THE CHILDREN
If you have some little breads over, cut each one in four, soak the
pieces in milk sweetened and flavored with vanilla, for three hours.
When they are well soaked roll them for a moment in grated and dried
breadcrumbs, and dip them for a moment in boiling fat, just as you
would do croquettes. Sift some white sugar over them and serve very
hot.

[_Madame M._] 

QUINCE CUSTARD
When you have quince preserves by you this is a quickly prepared
dish.
Make a good custard with a pint of rich milk, four eggs and a little
essence of almonds and two ounces of powdered sugar. Put your quince
preserve at the bottom of a fireproof circular dish and fill up
with custard. Put it to bake for half or hour or till set. When set
add some more quince (heated) on the top with some chopped almonds
and serve hot.
The same dish can be done with apples, which should be stewed,
flavored with the rind of a half lemon, and passed through a sieve.
Apple puree is put on the top in the same way, and it is decorated
with some thin lemon peel cut into stars.
[_Chef reconnaissant._] 

YELLOW PLUMS AND RICE
Put half a pound of rice in hot milk till it has absorbed all it
can and is tender. Beat lightly the yolks of three eggs, beating
in a lump of fresh butter the size of a pullet's egg; add powdered
sugar and the whites of the eggs well beaten. Put the rice into
this mixture and place all in a mold. Cook it gently for twenty-five
minutes. Meanwhile take some very perfect yellow plums, skin and
stone them and heat them in half a bottle of light white wine that
you have seasoned with a little spice.
Turn out the rice, put the yellow plums on the top and pour round
the sauce, strained through muslin. Very good cold.
BRABANT PANCAKE
Butter first of all your pancakes, and you should have proper pancake
saucers fit to go to table. Heat half a pint of sweetened milk and
melt a quarter of a pound of salt butter with it.[Variety in Unity]

But even in the ornamental treatment of diverse forms, as the mediæval
heraldic designers were well aware, they can be brought into
decorative harmony by following a similar principle to the one already
laid down in regard to the designing of sprigs and sprays: that is to
say, that in designing an animal or figure for heraldry or introduction
into a pattern, one should arrange it so that it should fall within the
boundary of some geometric or foliated form, square, circular,
elliptical or otherwise, as might be desirable. To this, however, I
hope to return in a future chapter.

[Illustration (f029): Sketch to Show How a Pattern of Diverse Elements
May Be Harmonized by Unity of Inclosing and Intermediary Lines.]

                                                          [Counterbalance]

We may here consider another important principle in designing with line
and mass, that of _counterbalance_.

[Illustration (f030): The Principle of Counterbalance in Different
Systems of Design.]

Take any defined space as a panel, tile, or border to be filled with
design: you place your principal mass, and instantly feel that it must
be balanced by a corresponding mass, or some equivalent. The gelatine is
of course melted in the fruit puree and all turned into a mold.
You can make your own green coloring in this way. Pick a pound of
spinach, throwing away the stalks and midrib. Put it on in a pan
with a little salt and keep the cover down.If on a
symmetrical arrangement, you find your centre (say of a panel), and you
may either throw the chief weight and mass of the design upon the
central feature (as a tree), and balance it by smaller forms or wings
each side, or _vice versâ_; or, adopting a diagonal plan, you place your
principal mass (say it is a tile) near the top left-hand corner (suppose
it is a pomegranate), connecting it with a spiral diagonal line (the
stem); the place of the counterbalancing mass (the second pomegranate)
is obviously near the bottom right-hand corner of the square. You may
then feel the necessity for additional smaller forms, and so add to it
(the leaves), completing the design. (See preceding page.)

                                                            [Linear Logic]

On the same principle one may design upon various other plans. The exact
choice of the distribution of the counterbalancing masses must always be
a matter of personal feeling, judgment, and taste, controlled by the
perception of certain logical necessities: as it seems to me that
designing is a species of linear reasoning,* and might almost be
worked in its elementary stages on the principle of the syllogism,
consisting of two propositions and a conclusion. A spiral curve is a
harmonious line, says the designer: repeat it, reversed, and you
prolong the harmony; repeat it again, with variations, and you complete
the harmony. Or, harmonious effect is produced by recurring form and
line. Here is a circular form; here is a meandering line: combine and
repeat them, and you get a logical and harmonious border motive.

  [*] I recall here a saying of Sir E. Burne-Jones, that "a bad
      line can only be answered by a good line."

[Illustration (f031): Border Units and Border Motive.]

                                                 [Recurring Line and Form]

The everlastingly recurring egg and dart moulding and the volute are
instances of the harmonious effect of very simple arrangements of
recurring line and form. We also get illustrated in these another linear
quality in design--that up-and-down movement which gives a pleasant
rhythm to the simplest border, and is of especial consequence in all
repeating border and frieze designs. The borders of early, ancient, and
classical art might be said to be little besides rhythmical and logical
arrangements of line. The same rhythmical principle is found in the
designs of the classical frieze in all its varieties, culminating in the
rhythmic movement of the great Pan-Athenaic procession in that
master-frieze of the Parthenon, which, though full of infinite variety
and delicate sculptured detail, is yet controlled by a strictly
ornamental motive, and constructed upon the rhythmic recurrence of pure
line.

[Illustration (f032): Recurring Line and Form in Border Motives.]

                                              [The Principle of Radiation]

Another great linear principle in design is what is known as the
_radiating_ principle, which gives vitality and vigour alike to both
arrangements of line and delineations of form. It is emphatically and
abundantly illustrated in natural forms, from the scallop shell upon the
sea-shore to the sun himself that radiates his light upon it. The
palm-leaf in all its graceful varieties demonstrates its beauty, its
constructive strength combined with extraordinary lightness, which
becomes domesticated in that fragile sceptre of social influence and
festivity, the fan, and which again spreads its silken, or gossamer,
wing as a suggestive field for the designer. We find the principle
springing to life again in the fountain jet, and symbolical of life as
it has ever been; by means of the same principle applied to construction
the Gothic architects raised their beautiful vaults, and emphasized the
structural principle and the beauty of recurring line by moulding the
edges of their ribs; while we have but to look at the structure of the
human frame to find the same principle there also, in the fibres of the
muscles, for instance, the radiation of the ribs, and of the fingers and
toes.

[Illustration (f033): Radiating Principle of Line in Natural Form.]

In truth, as I have said, if there can be said to be one principle more
than another, the perception and expression of which gives to an
artist's work in design peculiar vitality, it is this principle of
radiating line. One may follow it through all stages and forms of
drawing and design, and it is equally important in the design of the
figure, in the structure of a flower, in the folds of drapery, and alike
in the controlling lines of pictorial composition and decorative plan,
whether the lines radiate from seen or from hidden centres, which in all
kinds of informal design are perhaps the most important.

[Illustration (f034): Radiating Lines of the Pectoral Muscles & Ribs]

                                                   [Range and Use of Line]

We see, therefore, that line possesses a constructive and controlling
function, in addition to its power of graphic expression and decorative
definition. It is the beginning and the end of art. By means of its
help we guide our first tottering steps in the wide world of design;
and, as we gain facility of hand and travel further afield, we discover
that we have a key to unlock the wonders of art and nature, a method of
conjuring up all forms at will: a sensitive language capable of
recording and revealing impressions and beauties of form and structure
hidden from the careless eye: a delicate instrument which may catch and
perpetuate in imperishable notation unheard harmonies: a staff to lean
upon through the journey of life: a candid friend who never deceives us:
perchance a divining rod, which may ultimately reveal to us that Beauty
and Truth are one--as they certainly are, or ought to be, in the world
of art.

[Illustration (f035): Radiating Line in Architectural Construction:
Vaulting of Chapter House, Westminster.]


                               CHAPTER III

    Of the Choice and Use of Line--Degree and Emphasis--Influence of
    the Photograph--The Value of Emphasis--The Technical
    Influence--The Artistic Purpose--Influence of Material and
    Tools--Brush-work--Charcoal--Pencil--Pen.


Recognizing the great range and capacity of line as a means of
expression, and also the range of choice it presents to the designer and
draughtsman, the actual exercise of this choice of line, with a view to
the most expressive and effective use in practice, becomes, of course,
of the first consequence.

In this matter of choice we are helped by natural bias, by personal
character and preferences, for which it would, as I have said, be
difficult fully to account; but beyond this a kind of evolution goes on,
arising out of actual practice, which controls and is controlled by it.
Draw simply a succession of strokes with any point upon paper, and we
find that we are gradually led to repeat a particular kind of stroke, a
particular degree of line, partly perhaps because it seems to be
produced with more ease, and partly because it appears to have the
pleasantest effect.

                                                          [Choice of Line]

By a kind of "natural selection," therefore, influenced no doubt by many
small secondary causes, such as the relation of the particular angle of
the hand and pencil-point to the surface--the nature of the point
itself and the nature of the surface--we finally arrive at a choice of
line. This choice, again, will be liable to constant variation, owing
to the nature of the object we are about to draw, or the kind of design
we want to make.

                                                             [Use of Line]

The kind of line which seems appropriate to representing the delicate
edges of a piece of low-relief sculpture, for instance, would require
greater force and firmness if we wanted to draw an antique cast in the
round, and in strong light and shade. The character of our line should
be sympathetic with the character of our subject as far as possible, and
sensitive to its differences of character and surface, since it is in
this sensitiveness that the expressive power and peculiar virtue of
line-drawing consists.

[Illustration (f036): Lines of Characterization.]

A feather, a lily, a scallop shell, all show as an essential principle
of their form and construction the radiating line; but what a different
quality of line would be necessary to express the differences of each:
for the soft, yet firm, smooth flowing curves of the feather fibres no
line would be too delicate; and the lily would demand no less delicacy,
and even greater precision and firmness of curve, while a slight
waviness, or quiver, in the lines might express the silken or waxy
surface of the petals; while a crustier, more rugged, though equally
firm line would be wanted to follow the rigid furrows and serrated
surface of the shell. The leaves of trees and plants of all kinds, which
perhaps afford the best sort of practice in line-drawing at first,
present in their varieties of structure, character, and surfaces
continual opportunities for the exercise of artistic judgment in the
choice and use of line.

The forms and surfaces of fruits, again, are excellent tests of line
draughtsmanship, and their study is a good preparation for the more
subtle and delicate contours of the human form--the greatest test of
all. Here we see firmness of fundamental structure (in the bones) and
surface curve (of sinew and muscle), with a mobile and constantly
changing surface (of flesh and sensitive skin). To render such
characteristics without tending to overdo either the firmness or the
mobility, and so to become too rigid on the one hand, or too loose and
indefinite on the other, requires extraordinary skill, knowledge, and
practice in the use of line. I do not suppose the greatest master ever
satisfied himself yet in this direction.

[Illustration (f037): Pen Drawing of Fruit.]

                                                     [Degree and Emphasis]

When we have settled upon our quality of line and its _degree_--thick or
thin, bold or fine--we shall be met with the question of _emphasis_, for
upon this the ultimate effect and expression of our drawing or design
must largely depend. In the selection of any subject we should naturally
be influenced by the attractiveness of particular parts, characters, or
qualities it might possess, and we should direct our efforts towards
bringing these out, as the things which impress us most. That is the
difference between the mind and hand working together harmoniously and
the sensitized plate in the photographic camera, which, uncontrolled in
any way by human choice (and even under that control as it always is to
some extent), mechanically registers the action of the light rays which
define the impress of natural forms and scenes through the lens focussed
upon the plate. So that, as we often see in a photograph, some
unimportant or insignificant detail is reproduced with as much
distinctness (or more) as are the leading figures or whatever form the
interesting features or the motive of the subject. The picture suffers
from want of emphasis, or from emphasis in the wrong place. It is, of
course, here that the art of the photographer comes in; and, although he
can by careful selection, arrangement, and the regulation of exposure,
largely counteract the mechanical tendency, a photograph by its very
nature can never take the place of a work of art--the first-hand
expression, more or less abstract, of a human mind, or the creative
inner vision recorded by a human hand.

                                             [Influence of the Photograph]

Photography does wonders, and for certain qualities of light and shade,
and form and effect without colour, no painting or drawing can approach
it; but it has the value and interest of science rather than of art. It
is invaluable to the student of natural fact, surface effect, and
momentary action, and is often in its very failures most interesting and
suggestive to artists--who indeed have not been slow to avail themselves
of the help of photography in all sorts of ways. Indeed the wonder is,
considering its services to art in all directions, how the world could
ever have done without it.

But a photograph cannot do everything. It cannot make original designs,
and it cannot draw in line. You can design in the solid, and make your
groups in the studio or the open air; you can select your point of view,
and the photograph will reproduce. You can make your drawing in line,
and it will copy it; and we know its sphere of usefulness in this
direction is enormous, since it can bring before our eyes the whole
range of ancient art.

In short, photography is an excellent servant and friend, but a
dangerous master. It may easily beguile us by its seductive
reproductions of surface relief and lighting to think more of these
qualities than any other, and to endeavour to put them in the wrong
places--in places where we want colour planes rather than shadow planes,
flatness and repose rather than relief, for instance, as mostly in
surface decoration.

But one way of learning the value of emphasis is to draw from a
photograph, and it will soon be discovered what a difference in
expression is produced by dwelling a little more here, or a little less
there.

                                                   [The Value of Emphasis]

In designing, the use of emphasis is very important; and it may be said
that drawing or designing without emphasis is like reading without
stops, while awkward emphasis is like putting your stops in the wrong
place.

By a difference in emphasis the same design may be given quite a
different effect and expression.

[Illustration (f038): Effect of Different Emphasis in the Treatment of
the Same Design.]

Suppose, for instance, we were designing a vertical pattern of stem,
leaves, and fruit in one colour. By throwing the emphasis upon the
leaves, as in No. 1, we should gain one kind of effect or decorative
expression. By throwing the emphasis upon the fruit, and leaving the
leaves in outline, we should get quite a different effect out of the
same elements, as in No. 2. While by leaving stem, leaves, and fruit all
in outline, and throwing the emphasis upon the ground, we should get,
again, a totally distinct kind of effect and expression.

Similar differences of effect and expression, owing to differences of
emphasis, might be studied in the drawing and treatment of a head (as in
A, B, and C). The possibilities of such variations of emphasis in
drawing are practically unlimited and co-extensive with the variations
of expression we see in nature herself. The pictorial artist is free to
translate or represent them in his work, controlled solely by the
conditions and purpose of his work.

[Illustration (f039): Different Emphasis in the Treatment of a Head
[examples A, B, C].]

It is these conditions and purposes which really control both choice and
treatment, and determine the emphasis, and therefore the expression of
the work.

No kind of art can be said to be unconditioned, and the simplest and
freest of all, _the art of the point and the surface_, which covers all
the graphic art and flat designing, is still subject to certain
technical influences, and it may be said that it is very much in so far
as these technical influences or conditions are acknowledged and
utilized that the work gains in artistic character.

                                                  [The Technical Influence]

The draughtsman in line who draws for surface printing, for the book or
newspaper, should be able to stand the test of the peculiar conditions;
and, so far from attempting to escape them, and seeking something more
than they will bear, should welcome them as incentives to a distinct
artistic treatment with a value and character of its own, which indeed
all the best work has. It is, for instance, important in all design
associated with type for surface printing, that there should be a
certain harmonious relation between lettering or type and printer's
ornament or picture.

[Illustration (f040): Sketches to Illustrate Effect of Different
Emphasis in the Treatment of the Same Elements in Landscape.]

[Illustration (f041a): Example of Page Treatment to Show Ornamental
Relation Between Text and Pictures.]

[Illustration (f041b): I. Textile Motive: Suggestion for a Carpet
Pattern.]

[Illustration (f041c): II. An Abstract Treatment of the Same on Point
Paper, as Detail of Brussels Carpet.]

A firm and open quality of line, with bright black and white effects,
not only has the most attractive decorative effect with type, but lends
itself to the processes of reproduction for surface printing best,
whether woodcut or one of the numerous forms of so-called automatic
photo-engraving, as well as to the conditions of the printing press.

In all design-work which has to be subjected to processes of engraving
and printing, clearness and definiteness of line is very necessary.
Designs for textile printing of all kinds, for wall-papers, especially,
require good firm drawing and definite colour planes. This does not,
however, mean hardness of effect. A design should be clear and
intelligible without being hard.

For weaving, again, definiteness in pattern designing is very necessary,
since the design must be capable of being rendered upon the severe
conditions of the point paper, by which it is only possible to produce
curves by small successive angles (which sounds like a contradiction in
terms). The size of these angles or points, of course, varies very much
in the different kinds of textile with which pattern is incorporated,
from the fine silk fabric, in which they are almost inappreciable, to
carpets of all kinds, where they are emphatic; so that a certain
squareness of mass becomes a desirable and characteristic feature in
designs for these purposes, and, indeed, I think it should be more or
less acknowledged in all textile design, in order to preserve its
distinctive beauty and character.

                                                    [The Artistic Purpose]

_Beauty and character._--In these lies the gist of all design. While the
technical conditions, if fully understood, fairly met, and frankly
acknowledged, are sure to give _character_ to a design, for whatever
purpose, _beauty_ is not so easy to command. It is so delicate a
quality, so complex in its elements, a question often of such nice
balance and judgment--depending perhaps upon a hair's-breadth difference
in the poise of a mass here, or the sweep of a curve there--that we
cannot weave technical nets fine enough to catch so sensitive a
butterfly. She is indeed a Psyche in art, both seeking and sought, to be
finally won only by devotion and love.

This search for beauty--this Psyche of art--is the purely inspiring
artistic purpose, as distinct from the technical and useful one, which
should, perfectly reconciled and united with it, determine the form of
our work.

In drawing or design we may seek particular qualities in line and form
either of representation or of ornament. We may desire to dwell upon
particular beauties either of object or subject. Say, in drawing from a
cast or from natural form of any kind, we desire to dwell upon beauty of
line or quality of surface. Well, since it is most difficult, if not
impossible, to get everything at once, and nothing without some kind of
sacrifice, we shall find that to give prominence to--to bring out--the
particular quality in our subject (say beauty of line), it becomes
necessary to subordinate other qualities to this. A drawing in pure
outline of a figure may be a perfect thing in itself. The moment we
begin to superadd shading, or lines expressive of relief of any kind, we
introduce another element; we are aiming at another kind of truth or
beauty; and unless we have also a distinctly ideal aim in this, we shall
mar the simplicity of the outline without gaining any compensating
advantage, or really adding to the truth or beauty of the drawing.

In designing, too, unless we can so contrive the essential
characteristics of our pattern that they shall be adaptable to the
method and material of its production, and make its reproduction quite
practicable, it is sure to reappear more or less marred and incomplete.
The thing is to discover what kind of character and beauty the method
will allow of--whether beauty or quality of line, or surface, or colour,
or material; and if to be reproduced in a particular method or material,
the design should be thought out in the method or material for which it
is destined, rather than as a drawing on paper, and worked out
accordingly, using every opportunity to secure the particular kind of
beauty naturally belonging to such work in its completed form.

Thus we should naturally think of _planes of surface_ in modelled work,
and the delicate play of light and shade, getting our equivalent for
colour in the design and contrast of varied surfaces. In stained glass
we should think of a pattern in lead lines inclosing one of translucent
colour, each being interdependent and united to form a harmonious whole.
In textile design we should be influenced by the thought of the
difference of use, plan, and purpose of the finished material; as the
difference between a rich vertical pattern in silk, velvet, or tapestry,
to be broken by folds as in curtains or hangings, and a rich carpet
pattern, to be spread upon the unbroken level surface of a floor. The
idea of the wall and floor should here influence us as well as the
actual technical necessities of the loom. It would be part of the
artistic purpose affecting the imagination and artistic motive, and
working with the strictly technical conditions.

The mind must project itself, and see with the inner eye the effect of
the design as it would appear in actual use, as far as possible.
Invention, knowledge, and experience will do the rest.

                                                              [Brush-Work]

Keeping, however, to strictly pictorial or graphic conditions--to the
art of the point and the surface--with which, as designers and
draughtsmen, we are more immediately concerned, we cannot forget certain
technical considerations strictly belonging to the varieties of point
and of surface, and their relations one to another. The flexible point
of the brush, for instance, dipped in ink, or colour, has its own
peculiar capacity, its own range of treatment, one might say, its own
forms.

The management admits of immense variation of use and touch, and its
range of depicting and ornamental power are very great: from the simpler
leaf forms, which seem to be almost a reflection or shadow of the moist
pointed brush itself, to the elaborate graphic drawing in line or light
and shade.

[Illustration (f042): Brush Forms.]

In forming the leaf shape one begins with a light pressure, if at the
point, and proceeds to increase it for the middle and broader end. On
the same principle of regulation of pressure any brush forms may be
built up. It is essential for freedom in working with the brush not to
starve or stint it in moisture or colour. For ornamental forms a full
brush should be used: otherwise they are apt to look dragged and meagre.
For a rich and flowing line also a full brush, however fine, is
necessary. It is quite possible, however, to use it with a different
aim, and to produce a sort of crumbling line when half dry, and also in
colour-work for what is called dragging, by which tone, texture, or
quality may be given to parts of a drawing. One should never lose
sight, in using the brush as a drawing tool, of its distinctive quality
and character, and impart it to all work done by its means.

[Illustration (f043): Direct Brush Expression of Animal Form.]

The direct touch with the full brush--to cultivate this is of enormous
advantage to all artists, whatever particular line of art they may
follow, since it may be said to be of no less value in design than it is
in painting pure and simple. We can all feel the charm of the broad
brush washes and emphatic brush touches of a master of water-colour
landscape such as De Wint. This is mastery of brush and colour in one
direction--tone and effect. A Japanese drawing of a bird or a fish may
show it equally in another--character and form. A bit of Oriental
porcelain or Persian tile may show the same dexterous charm and
full-brush feeling exercised in a strictly decorative direction.

[Illustration (f044): Japanese Drawing of a Bird. From "The Hundred
Birds of Bari."]

The empire of the brush, if we think of it in all its various forms and
directions, is very large; and it commands, in skilled hands, both
_line_ and _form_, in all their varieties, and leaves its impress in all
the departments of art, from the humble but dexterous craftsman who puts
the line of gold or colour round the edges of our cups and saucers, to
the highly skilled and specialized painter of easel pictures--say the
academician who writes cheques with his paint-brush!

                                                     [Charcoal and Pencil]

Then we have the ordinary varieties of the firm point: charcoal, pencil,
pen. Charcoal, being halfway between hard and soft--a sort of halfway
house or bridge for one passing from the flexible brush to the firm and
hard points of pencil and pen--is first favourite with painters when
they take to drawing. Its softness and removability adapts it as a tool
for preliminary and preparatory sketching in for all purposes, and both
for designer and painter; but it lends itself to both line and tone
drawing, or to a mixture of both. It is therefore a very good material
for rapid studies (say from the life) and the seizing of any effect of
light and shade rapidly, since the masses can be laid in readily, and
greater richness and depth can be obtained in shorter time, perhaps,
than by any other kind of pencil.

Charcoal is also very serviceable for large cartoon-work, since it is
capable of both delicacy and force, and bears working up to any extent.
A slight rubbing of the finger gives half tones when wanted, and is
often serviceable in giving greater solidity and finish to the work.

Then there is the lead pencil--the point-of-all-work, as it might be
called--more generally serviceable than any other, whether for rapid
sketches and jottings in the note-book, or careful and detailed
drawings, or sketching in for the smaller kinds of design-work. It is
also, of course, used for drawings which are afterwards "inked in." I do
not think, however, that pen-work done in this way is so free or
characteristic as when done direct, or at any rate quite freely, upon a
mere scaffolding of preliminary lines, used only to make the plans for
the chief masses and forms.

Pencil drawing is capable of being carried to a greater pitch of
delicacy and finish, and has a silvery quality all its own. It has not
the force or range of charcoal, but in its own technical range it
possesses many advantages. Its gray and soft line, however charming in
itself, does not fit it for work where sharpness and precision of line
and touch are required, as may be said to be the case with all work
intended to be reproduced by some process of handicraft or manufacture,
except some sorts of photo-engraving or lithography. We must therefore
look to another implement to enable us to obtain these qualities,
namely, the brush, the use and qualities of which I have already touched
upon.

                                                                 [The Pen]

There remains yet another point of the firm and decisive order, the pen,
which enables us to get firmness and sharpness of line and precise
definition, as well as considerable range of treatment and freedom of
touch.

The pen seems to bear much the same relation to the brush as the lead
pencil does to charcoal--not capable of such full and rich effects or
such flowing freedom of line, but yet possessing its own beauty and
characteristic kinds of expression. Its true province is in
comparatively small scale work, and its natural association is with its
sister-pen of literature in the domain of book-design and decoration,
and black and white drawing for the press. Its varieties are endless,
and the ingenuity of manufacturers continually places before us fresh
choice of pen-points to work with; but though one occasionally meets
with a good steel pen, I have found it too often fails one just when it
is sufficiently worn to the right degree of flexibility. One returns to
the quill, which can be cut to suit the particular requirements of one's
work. For large bold drawing the reed-pen has advantages, and a pleasant
rich quality of line.

But with whatever point we may work, the great object is to be perfectly
at ease with it in drawing--to thoroughly master its use and capacities,
so that in our search for that other command, of line and form, we may
feel that we have in our hands a tool upon which we can rely, a trusty
spear to bear down the many difficulties and discouragements that beset,
like threatening dragons, the path of the art-student.


                                CHAPTER IV

    Of the Choice of Form--Elementary Forms--Space-filling--Grouping--
    Analogies of Form--Typical Forms of Ornament--Ornamental Units--
    Equivalents in Form--Quantities in Design--Contrast--Value of
    Variations of Similar or Allied Forms--Use of the Human Figure
    and Animal Forms in Ornamental Design.


We were considering the choice and use of Line in the last chapter: its
expressive characters and various methods. We now come to the no less
important question to the designer and draughtsman--_The Choice of
Form_.

If Line may be said to be the bone and sinew of design, Form is the
substance and the flesh, and both are obviously essential to its free
life and development.

                                                        [Elementary Forms]

The _cube_ and the _sphere_ give us the fundamental elements, or primal
types from which are derived the multifarious, ever varying, and complex
forms, the products of the forces and conditions of nature, or the
necessitous inventiveness of art, just as we may take the square and the
circle to be the parents of linear and geometric design.

[Illustration (f045a): Elementary Forms: Pyramid, Sphere, Cube, Hexagon,
Cone.]

The cube and the sphere, the ellipse, the cone, and the pyramid, with
other comparatively simple forms of solid geometry, present themselves
to the student as elementary tests of draughtsmanship--of the power,
that is, of representing solid bodies upon a plane surface. Such forms
being more simple and regular than any natural forms, they are supposed
to reduce the problem of drawing to its simplest conditions. They
certainly afford very close tests of correctness of eye, making any
fault in perspective or projection at once apparent.

[Illustration (f045b): Use of Elementary Forms in Architecture.]

To avoid, however, falling into mechanical ways, and to maintain the
interest and give vitality to such studies, the relation of such forms
to forms in nature and art should be borne in mind, and no opportunity
missed of comparing them, or of seeking out their counterparts,
corresponding principles, and variations, as well as their practical
bearing, both functional and constructive; as in the case of the typical
forms of flowers, buds, and seed-vessels, for instance, where the cone
and the funnel, and the spherical, cylindrical, and tubular principles
are constantly met with, as essential parts of the characters and
organic necessities of the plant: the cone and the funnel mostly in buds
and flower-petals for protection and inclosure of the pollen and seed
germs, the tube for conducting the juices; the spherical form to resist
moisture externally, or to hold it internally, or to avoid friction, and
facilitate close storage, as in the case of seeds in pods. The
seed-vessel of the poppy, for instance, has a curious little pent-house
roof to shield the interstices (like windows in a tower) till the seed
is ripe and the time comes for it to be shaken out of the shell or pod.
A further practical reason for the prevalence of spherical form in seeds
is that they may, when the outer covering or husk perishes, more readily
roll out and fall into the interstices of the ground; or when, as in the
case of various fruits, such as the apple and orange, the envelope
itself is spherical and intended to carry their flat or pointed seeds to
the ground, where it falls and rolls when ripe.

[Illustration (f046): Poppyheads.]

The cube and the various multiple forms may be found in crystals and
basaltic rocks, as well as in organic nature, as, for instance, in the
honeycomb of bees, where choice of form is a constructive necessity: the
cube is in every sense of the word the corner-stone in architecture, and
without squaring and plumbing no building could be constructed, while
the cylindrical and conical principles of form are illustrated in towers
and roofs, spires and pinnacles. In architectural ornament and carved
decoration the cube and sphere again form the basis, both forming
ornaments themselves by mere recurrence and repetition, and also forming
constructional bases of ornament.

[Illustration (f047): Apple Cut to Show Position of Seeds.]

                                                      [Dog-Tooth Ornament]

[Illustration (f048b): Dog-tooth Formed From Cube.]

A very simple but effective form of carved ornament characteristic of
early Gothic work is what is known as the dog-tooth. This is formed
simply by cutting a cube of stone into a pyramid, depressing the sides,
and cutting them into geometric leaves, leaving the sharp angles of the
pyramid from the base to the apex standing out in bold relief. In
ground-plan this is simply composed geometrically of a rectangle divided
diagonally into four equal parts, and by striking four semicircles from
the centres of the four sides of the rectangle. Still higher up we find
the "Tech" Glee Club practising, and this large room adjoining is
filled with those who are learning vocal music. The building seems a
very hive--something going on everywhere.

Let us now descend to the basement. The gymnasium is here in full blast.

Men in every kind of costume and in every possible and, to many
persons, impossible position, while the superintendent is intently
watching each to see that he is properly _developing_; every kind
of bath and many of them are right at hand, and dressing-rooms with
boxes for eight hundred persons.

And this great building and all these appliances are the gift of the
citizens of Boston to the young men from the country.

                                                       Many of the donors remember the time when they came lonely to the
city, and determined, if they could prevent it, that no young man,
to-day, in the same position, should be without a place where all
of which they so greatly felt the need is supplied.

These needs are thus supplied. Early in the history of the Association,
a circular was sent to every evangelical pastor in New England,
asking him to give information of each young man coming to the city, that
he might be met at the station or received at the rooms.

Let us sketch a case: We have received word that John ---- is to
arrive from G---- by such a train. During the journey, thoughts of the
dear ones he has left crowd upon him. He is already sick for home,
as he looks about him and sees no familiar face. He has left harbor for
the first time. All before him is uncertain: all about him strange.
He reaches the city; friends are there at the station to welcome
this and that one of his fellow-travelers. He knows no one. No one cares
for his coming. No one? Yes, there is a young man scanning closely
the faces which pass. Suddenly his eye encounters our traveler, and at
once the question: "Are you John ----? 'Tis well. I am from the Association.
We are expecting you." Together they go to the building, and, even
before reaching it, our stranger is not quite a stranger. One man at
least is interested in him. "This is the building." "What, this fine place
ready to welcome me? Why, this is grand!" Here, too, is the electric
light, but not baneful this, no wrecker's false gleam, but like the
light upon the pier, showing safe entrance and anchorage.

"This is our secretary.

Mr. D., this is John ----." "Glad to see you. Had you a pleasant
journey?
What can we do for you? You want a boarding-place! Well, here is the book.
What can you pay? Very well, Mrs. B. has a vacancy and it is just the
place you want. I will send some one with you there. Your
recommendation was such that we have found a situation for you,
and they will be ready to see you to-morrow.

We have an entertainment this evening, and I shall be glad to
introduce you to several young men."

                                                            Imagine, if you can, what such an introduction to city life is to
a young man, and what is his coming to the city without it.

He is no stranger now. He has found comfort, companionship, sympathy,
occupation.
His heart goes home indeed, but it is in thankfulness that he writes and
describes his surroundings, and glad is he at the close of the evening
to join with others in, prayer and thanksgiving to his mother's God,
for the blessings of the Association; and later, in the quiet of
his own room, he renews his thanks, sleeps peacefully, and, full of
hope, takes hold of work in the morning. He is directed to the church
of his choice and is introduced to the pastor. Thus, at the very
first, he is surrounded by good influences in a city where thousands
are on the watch with every allurement to tempt just such strangers
to destruction of both soul and body. Should John ---- be ready, in
his turn, to help others, work enough can be found for him in one
of the several departments of social or spiritual life.

Should he fall sick, a committee of the Association visit and care for
him, and, if necessary, watch with him. There have been many cases where
young men have been carefully tended during a long illness, and a
few where even the funeral expenses have been borne by the Association,
and even burial given to the body in the Association lot at Forest
Hills Cemetery.

This is no fancy sketch. Many, many actual Johns are here pictured,
and many souls will, by-and-by, be found thanking God that he put it
into the hearts of his servants to establish the Young Men's Christian
Association.

But whence this well-appointed building? Within the first year of its life,
a building fund was projected, and, as far as we know, this was absolutely
the first step in this direction taken by any Association, either in this
country or elsewhere. A library fund was also started at the same time.

A few subscriptions towards a building were obtained, which, in
1858, amounted to $1,200 
In 1859-60 were added 1,644
In 1873 (for altering and furnishing), 5,700 
In 1873-74, 4,400
In 1874-75, 7,800 
In 1882, the estate of Daniel P.

Stone gave 25,000
Inspired by this, a meeting of citizens was held at the Brunswick, where
committees on finance were appointed, and the result was a
subscription of 175,000 $220,744
_By will have been bequeathed_:
By Charles H. Cook, 300 " Miss Nabby Joy, 5,000 " J. Sullivan Warren,
13,059 " Dr.

                                                George E.

Hatton, 5,000 23,359
_And by subscriptions in connection with, Fairs_:

1859--Chinese Fair, 4,787 1873--Bazaar of Nations, 12,246 17,033 --------
$261,136
We have mentioned "Fairs." These have been three in number; each
being held in the Music Hall, and owed their success, not only to the
energy of the young men, but to the hearty sympathy and untiring
exertions of the ladies of the Boston churches.

The first was held in 1858, and netted $9,650 The second was called
the Chinese Fair, all the decorations being Chinese,--a pagoda
reaching fifty-six feet to the very height of the hall, which netted
33,000
The third was the most elaborate--the Bazaar of the Nations; the
Music Hall being made to represent a street of foreign houses,
where, by persons in costume, the goods of the different nations
were sold.

It came in the spring and immediately after the fire, but netted 28,673
-------- $71,323
It is certainly to the credit of the Association that up to 1882, when
the large subscription of $200,000 was secured, the amount raised through
the exertions of the young men and the ladies exceeded by more than
$10,000 all moneys subscribed.

[Illustration: IN THE GYM]
The influence of the Boston Association has not been merely local.
Through Mr. L.P. Rowland, long its general secretary, and now the
veteran secretary of the United States, in his capacity of corresponding
secretary of the international committee, the first State work was
done and Associations formed in all parts of Massachusetts. The present
Boston building is now the headquarters of the Massachusetts committee,
where the State secretary may always be reached. The secretary of the
Association is a member of the State committee, a present member of the
board, and an ex-president is now chairman of the same.

In national matters, also, the Boston Association has responded to
every call.

                                                                In the early days of the war a drill-club was organized by one of
its board, and he, as well as a large number of his men, went into
service.

And at the call of Mr.

Stuart, of Philadelphia, the committee of the Christian Commission
was represented by an ex-president and an army committee formed in
the Association, which sent the large sum in money of $333,237.49, and
immense stores of all kinds to the field.

The same committee acted as almoners at the time of Chicago's great
fire, and also when the Western woods fires caused such
suffering.

Without boasting, for much more might have been done, the Boston
Association has no cause to be ashamed of its history. Beginning
with all ready to criticize, and many disapproving, the Association has
worked itself into the confidence of the community; and the Reverend
Joseph Cook, who was introduced as a lecturer to Boston under its
auspices, thus speaks of the Association at the close of its
quarter-century.

He says:--

"First, That there is a vast amount of work which should be done for
young men in cities, and that, as the proportion of the American
population living in cities had increased since the opening of this
century from one twenty-fifth to one fifth, the importance is great and
growing.

                                                     "Second, That neither individual churches taken separately, nor
individual denominations taken separately, can do this work easily
or adequately.

"Third, That all the evangelical denominations united in a city can do
this work easily by the organization of a Young Men's Christian
Association as their representative."

A short time ago a committee of conference, made up of eight
leading city clergymen and as many laymen, two of each denomination,
unanimously passed the following resolutions:--
"_Resolved_, That the great and peculiar dangers to which young men
are exposed in this, as in other cities, clearly calls, for the
work of the Young Men's Christian Association.

"_Resolved_, That the Association represents the Church working through
its young men for the redemption of young men, and, therefore, it is
entitled to the continued confidence, support, and co-operation
of the churches."

    After long years of patient and steady work, the Boston Young Men's
Christian Association has secured the confidence of the Christian
community to the extent of more than $300,000, in the palpable form
of stone and brick, which beautifies one of the finest sites in our
city.

It stands also as a monument of the liberality of Christian Boston and
her appreciation of this great work for young men in the Master's
name.

* * * * *
THE OHIO FLOODS.

BY THE HON. GEORGE E. JENKS.

Several causes are assigned for the excessive rise of water in the Ohio
valley. This water-shed is accredited with an area of two hundred
thousand square miles, and it lies upon the border-line of hot and
cold temperatures.

It is subject to heavy storms, and sometimes, in winter, to large
accumulations of snow.

It is presumable also, the rainfall is greater than the average of
the country.

When, following great deposits of snow, warm, heavy, and prolonged rains
occur, excessive floods must be the result. Add to these coincidents
the fact that forests, once existing, are now so nearly annihilated
that little protection is offered against a rapid dissolution of the
snow, and the sudden freezing of the earth in an interval of the
late storm preventing absorption of rain falling thereafter.

                                                       The waters thus produced fall into the main streams without hindrance,
like rain from roofs of buildings.

An aggregation of waters in this valley, rising from fifty to seventy-one
feet, is of annual occurrence, intensified according to excesses and
completeness of coincidents.

The damage arising from the Ohio flood of 1882 has been estimated at
twelve millions of dollars; that of 1883 at thirty-five to forty millions
of dollars. If these estimates are approximately correct, what must have
been the damage from the flood of 1884!

                                               

There are other causes for the floods in the Ohio valley, and in all
Southern streams, that have been but little considered, which exercise
undoubted and immense influence in solving the peculiarities of the
question under consideration, and afford striking contrasts in different
sections of this country.

There are two water systems presented in North America. North of
about the forty-first degree of latitude probably the southern limit
of the once glacial region--a _reservoir system_ prevails toward the
headwaters of all the streams. It includes New England, New York, Michigan,
Wisconsin, Minnesota, Dakota, and to the Rocky Mountains divide, and
all of the British Provinces to the Arctic Circle. It also somewhat
occurs on the western slope of the Rockies. This region is notable for
the great lake system, and the immense number of smaller lakes and
ponds--natural inland reservoirs, supposed to be largely of glacial
formation to hold back considerable portions of the cumulative
waters upon any given water-shed, and serving to restrain the
outflow, even after they are filled.

These basins exercise a happy and protective influence in many
ways.

South of the forty-first parallel, the rivers have no _reservoirs_ to hold
any part of the flow from their water-shed. Within this vast area few
lakes or ponds exist. The superabundance of water has no restraint, but
at once takes to the bottom lands. To this southern system the Ohio
River notably belongs, with all its tributaries. Within its two hundred
thousand square miles of area, scarcely a natural reservoir is to be
found. No other part of the country is so devoid of basins. Its
feeders drain the western slopes of the Alleghany and Cumberland
Mountains--Western Pennsylvania and West Virginia, representing sixty
thousand square miles, the southern portions of Ohio, Indiana, and
Illinois, and most of Kentucky and Tennessee. These States are
without lakes or ponds. Nothing intervenes to hold back any
portion of the vast flow from these coincidents of nature before spoken
of, and therefore the excessive floods of last year and this. Such
results must continue to follow.

                                                        During the summer droughts the other extreme prevails.

For lack of a reservoir system to withhold and control the flow of water,
the river falls from flood-tide--seventy-one feet--to points so low as
to seriously impede or prevent navigation. Sometimes even the smallest
steamers and barges fail to pass between Pittsburgh and Cincinnati, and
coal famines have not been unfrequent, resulting from difficult
navigation. An equable flow of this stream is impossible. It will
always be subject to these extremes. Nothing but an extensive method
of filling or diking is likely to prevent the inundation of cities and
villages that are not seventy feet above low-water mark, with attending
suffering and destruction of life and property. All Southern rivers
are liable to like extremes.

In contrast, it may be noted that the St. Lawrence River but slightly
varies its flow, above Montreal, because of the restraining power of
the Great Lakes, its feeders.

The upper Mississippi rises not to excess because of the thousands of
lakes and lakelets in Wisconsin, Minnesota, and Dakota, its sources.

                                                     The floods occur in its southern portion, chiefly below St.

Louis. But for this reservoir system its navigation in the upper portion
would be seriously impeded in summer seasons.

Disastrous floods can scarcely occur on the St. John's, St. Croix,
Penobscot, Kennebec, Androscoggin, Saco, Piscataqua, Merrimack,
Connecticut, or Hudson Rivers, except from damming of the ice in winter
or springtime (and that cause is of rare occurrence), such is the
elaborate system of reservoirs about the headwaters of these streams.
This northern country is greatly benefited by these excavations occurring
from geological causes.

The Merrimack River has a water-shed of about four thousand square miles
miles--one fiftieth part of that of the Ohio. It has the Winnipiseogee,
Squam, and Newfound Lakes, and hundreds of ponds to fill, that store a
large amount of water, before any considerable rise can take place in
the river, and then they restrain the flow. No excess of water comes
through the Winnipiseogee River, though it is the outlet of a water-shed
nearly as great as of the Pemigewasset. The freshets of the Merrimack
come chiefly from the last-named stream and minor tributaries. Without
these reservoirs, the manufacturing establishments at Lawrence, Lowell,
and Manchester, would cease to be operated by water-power during the
summer droughts.

The highest flow of water in the Merrimack known in forty-six years, as
measured at the Lowell dam, was thirteen and seven-twelfths feet.

                                                    This occurred in 1852.

Only a few times have freshets exceeded ten feet rise over that dam.

The greatest fall of water and rise of the freshet, in this valley,
known at Concord, New Hampshire, occurred in August, 1826. This storm
notably caused the land-slide in the Saco valley, which buried the
Willey family. The next was in early October, 1869, which caused
the slide of seventy-five acres of land on the western side of Tri-Pyramid
Mountain into Mad River, in Waterville.

Messrs. Rand, McNally, and Company, of Chicago, in their Atlas of the
World, give data to illustrate the two river systems of the country
spoken of.

Names of sixty-seven lakes are given in Maine, and beside these are
ponds almost innumerable. By census statistics given, her reservoir and
land areas are as 1 to 13. New Hampshire is accredited with three
hundred and sixty-two lakes and ponds, being as 1 acre to 41 of land.
Vermont has forty-one lakes and ponds, including Lake Champlain, being
as 1 acre to 24 of land. Massachusetts, forty-seven lakes and ponds;
Rhode Island, forty-seven; Connecticut, eighteen; New York, two hundred
and sixty, beside her great lakes; New Jersey, ten; Pennsylvania (chiefly
northeastern portion), fifty-eight; Michigan, ninety-eight lakes, and
ponds in great number; Wisconsin, seventy-two lakes, and a large
number of ponds; Minnesota, one hundred and forty-two lakes, and
ponds innumerable; Dakota, fifteen lakes, and a great number of
ponds; and Iowa, forty-eight lakes.

In contrast, Virginia has only Lake Drummond--really a part of the Dismal
Swamp; West Virginia, Ohio, Kentucky, and Tennessee, none; Indiana,
eleven lakes, and Illinois, eight,--all on northern water-shed.

The Carolinas, Georgia, and Alabama have no reservoirs. Lagoons exist
in the States bordering the Mississippi River and the Gulf,
which are filled by the overflow of the rivers.

A consultation of any good atlas of our country will confirm these
statements.

The two sections are thus contrasted. The Northern States have reason to
be very thankful for their more equable system, for the motive power its
reservoirs furnish, and for exemption from disastrous floods, as
well as from cyclones and tornadoes.

* * * * *

THE BOSTON TEA-PARTY.

[This account of the Boston Tea-Party is taken, _verbatim_, from
"The Boston Evening Post, Monday, December 20, 1773.

                                                                Thomas and John Fleet, at the Heart and Crown, in Cornhill, Messi'rs
Printers."

It adds another link in the chain of evidence to prove that the patriots
were disguised as Indians.--ED.]

Having accidentally arrived at Boston upon a visit to a Friend the
evening before the meeting of the Body of the People on the 29th
of November, curiosity, and the pressing invitations of my most
kind host, induced me to attend the Meeting.

I must confess that I was most agreeably, and I hope that I shall be
forgiven by the People if I say so unexpectedly, entertained and instructed
by the regular, reasonable and sensible conduct and expression of the
People there collected, that I should rather have entertained an idea
of being transported to the British senate than to an adventurous and
promiscuous assembly of People of a remote Colony, were I not
convinced by the genuine and uncorrupted integrity and manly hardihood
of the Rhetoricians of that assembly that they were not yet corrupted
by venality or debauched by luxury.

The conduct of that wise and considerate body, in their several
transactions, evidently tended to preserve the property of the East India
Company. I must confess I was very disagreeably affected with the
conduct of Mr.

Hutchinson, their pensioned Governor, on the succeeding day, who
very unseasonably, and, as I am informed, very arbitrarily (not
having the sanction of law), framed and executed a mandate to
disperse the People, which, in my oppinion, with a people less
prudent and temperate would have cost him his head.

The Force of that body was directed to effect the return of the Teas to
Great Briton; much argument was expended. Much entreaty was made use
of to effect this desirable purpose. Mr. Rotch behaved, in my estimation,
very unexceptionably; his disposition was seemingly to comport with
the desires of the People to convey the Teas to the original proprietors.
The Consignees have behaved like Scoundrels in refusing to take the
consignment, or indemnify the owner of the ship which conveyed
this detestable commodity to this port.
Every possible step was taken to preserve this property. The People being
exasperated with the conduct of the administration in this affair, great
pains were taken and much policy exerted to procure a stated watch
for this purpose.

                                               [A]

[Footnote A: This watch consisted of 24 to 34 Men, who served as
volunteers 19 Days and 23 Hours.]
The body of the People determined the Tea should not be landed; the
determination was deliberate, was judicious; the sacrifice of their
Rights, of the Union of all the Colonies, would have been the effect
had they conducted with less resolution: On the Committee of
Correspondence they devolved the care of seeing their resolutions
seasonably executed; that body, as I have been informed by one of
their members, had taken every step prudence and patriotism could
suggest, to effect the desirable purpose, but were defeated.

The Body once more assembled, I was again present; such a collection
of the people was to me a novelty; near seven thousand persons from
several towns, Gentlemen, Merchants, Yeomen, and others,
respectable for their rank and abilities, and venerable for their age
and character, constituted the assembly; they decently,
unanimously and firmly adhered to their former resolution, that the
baleful commodity which was to rivet and establish the duty should
never be landed; to prevent the mischief they repeated the desires
of the Committee of the Towns, that the owner of the ship should
apply for a clearance; it appeared that Mr.

Rotch had been managed and was still under the influence of the opposite
party; he resisted the request of the people to apply for a clearance
for his ship with an obstinacy which, in my opinion, bordered on
stubbornness--subdued at length by the peremptory demand of the
Body, he consented to apply, a committee of ten respectable gentlemen
were appointed to attend him to the collector; the Body meeting the
same morning by adjournment, Mr.

                                    Rotch was directed to protest in form, and then apply to the Governor
for a Pass by the Castle; Mr.

Rotch executed his commission with fidelity, but a pass could not be
obtained, his Excellency excusing himself in his refusal that he should
not make the precedent of granting a pass till a clearance was obtained,
which was indeed a fallacy, as it had been usual with him in ordinary
cases,--Mr. Rotch returning in the evening reported as above; the Body
then voted his conduct to be satisfactory, and recommending order and
regularity to the People, dissolved. Previous to the dissolution,
a number of Persons, supposed to be the Aboriginal Natives from
their complection, approaching near the door of the assembly, gave
the War Whoop, which was answered by a few in the galleries of the
house where the assembly was convened; silence was commanded, and
prudent and peaceable deportment again enjoined.

The Savages repaired to the ships which entertained the pestilential
Teas, and had began their ravage previous to the dissolution of
the meeting--they apply themselves to the destruction of the commodity
in earnest, and in the space of about two hours broke up 342 chests
and discharged their contents into the sea.

A watch, as I am informed, was stationed to prevent embezzlement and
not a single ounce of Teas was suffered to be purloined by the
populace. One or two persons being detected in endeavouring to pocket a
small quantity were stripped of their acquisitions and very roughly
handled. It is worthy remark that, although a considerable quantity of
goods of different kinds were still remaining on board the vessels, no
injury was sustained; such attention to private property was observed
that a small padlock belonging to the Captain of one of the ships being
broke another was procured and sent to him. I cannot but express my
admiration of the conduct of this People.
Uninfluenced by party or any other attachment, I presume I shall not
be suspected of misrepresentation. The East India Company must console
themselves with this reflection, that if they have suffered, the
prejudice they sustaine does not arise from enmity to them.
[Influence of Controlling Lines, etc.]

Now it is possible to regard such spaces or panels as more or less
unrelated, and simply as the boundaries of an individual composition or
picture of some kind. Yet even so considered a certain sense of
geometric control would come in in the selection of our lines and
masses, both in regard to each other and in regard to the shape of the
inclosing boundary. We seem to feel the need of some answering line or
re-echo in the character of the composition to the shape of its
boundary, to give it its distinctive reason for existence in that
particular form--just as we should expect a shell-fish to conform to the
shape of its shell. Such a re-echo or acknowledgment might be ever so
slight, or might be quite emphatic and dominate as the leading motive,
but for perfectly harmonious effect it must be there.

[Illustration (f064): Relation of Design to Boundary: Simple Linear
Motives and Pattern Bases.]

A strictly simple and logical linear filling of such spaces might be
expressed in the most primitive way, as in the illustration on p.
109[f064].

By these means certain primitive types of ornament are evolved, such as
the Greek volute and the Greek key or fret, the logical ornament of a
logical people.

Such arrangements of line form simple linear patterns, and a decorative
effect of surface is produced simply by their repetition, especially if
the principle of alternation be observed. This principle may be
expressed by taking, say, a series of squares or circles, and placing
them either in a line as for a border arrangement, or for extension
vertically and laterally over a surface, and filling only the alternate
square or circle, leaving the alternate ones, or dropping them out
altogether (see illustration, p. 111[f065]).

[Illustration (f065): Use of Intervals in Repeating the Same Ornamental
Units.]

When we desire to go beyond such primitive linear ornaments, however,
and introduce natural form, we should still be guided by the same
principles, if we desire to produce a strictly decorative effect, while
varying them in application to any extent.

It matters not what forms we deal with, floral, animal, human; directly
we come to combine them in a design, to control them by a boundary, to
inclose them in a space, we shall feel this necessity of controlling
line, which, however concealed, is yet essential to bring them into that
harmonious relation which is the essence of all design (see
illustration, p. 112[f066]).

[Illustration (f066): Designs of Floral, Human, and Animal Forms,
Governed by Shape of Inclosing Boundary.]

We may take it as a general rule that the more purely ornamental the
purpose of our design, and the more abstract in form it is, the more
emphatically we may carry out the principle of correspondence of line
between that of the inclosing boundary and that of the design itself;
and, _vice versâ_, as the design becomes more pictorial in its appeal
and more complex and varied in its elements, the more we may combine the
leading motive or principle of line with secondary ones, or with
variations, since every fresh element, every new direction of line,
every new form introduced, demands some kind of re-echo to bring it into
relation with the other elements of the design, or parts of the
composition, whatever may be its nature and purpose.

Now, if we seek further the meaning and origin of this necessity of the
control of geometric lines and spaces in design, I think we shall find
it in the constructive necessities of architecture: for it is certainly
from architecture that we derive those typical spaces and panels the
designer is so often called upon to fill.

[Illustration (f067): The Parthenon: Sketch to Show Spaces Used for
Decorative Sculpture in Greek Architecture.]

                                   [Origin of Geometric Decorative Spaces]

Lintel architecture--the Egyptian and the Greek--gave us the frieze,
both continuous, as in that of the Cella of the Parthenon, or divided by
triglyphs, which represented the ends of the beams of the primitive
timber construction; and the interstices left between these determined
the shape of the sculptured panel or slab inserted, and influenced the
character of its masses and the lines of its design, which was under the
necessity of harmonizing with the whole building (see illustration, p.
114[f067]).

[Illustration (f068): Tower of the Winds Athens BC 50]

The same may be said of the pediments. The angle of the low-pitched roof
left another interstice for the sculptor at each end of the building;
and I have elsewhere* pointed out the influence of the inclosing space
and the angles of the pediment of the Parthenon upon the arrangement of
the groups within it, and even upon the lines taken by some of the
figures, especially the reclining figures near the acute angles.

   [*] See "Bases of Design."

Certain lines become inseparably associated with constructive
expression, and are used to emphasize it, as the vertical flutings of
the Doric column, by repeating the lines of the column itself, emphasize
its constructive expression of supporting the weight of the horizontal
lintels, the lines of which, repeated in the mouldings of the frieze and
cornice, are associated with level restfulness and secure repose.

As examples of design which, while meeting the structural necessities
and acknowledging the control of space and general conditions, as the
form of the slabs upon which they are sculptured, yet expresses
independent movement, the figures of the octagonal tower of the winds at
Athens are interesting (see illustration, p. 115[f068]).

Quite a different feeling, corresponding to differences in conception
and spirit in design, comes in with the Roman round _arch_ its allied
forms of _spandril_ and _vault_, _lunette_ and _medallion_, presenting
new spaces for the surface designer, and new suggestions of ornamental
line (see illustration, p. 117[f069]). It is noticeable how, with the
round-arched architecture under Roman, Byzantine (see illustration, p.
118[f070]), and Renaissance forms, the scroll form of ornament
developed, the reason being, I think, that it gave the necessary element
of recurring line, whether used in the horizontal frieze in
association with round arches, or in spandrils of vaults and arcades,
and on marble mosaic pavements.

[Illustration (f069): Sketch of Part of the Arch of Constantine to Show
Spaces for Decorative Sculpture in Roman Architecture.]

[Illustration (f070): Byzantine (Mosaic) Treatment of Architectural
Structural Features: Apse, S. Vitale Ravenna.]

                                             [Value of the Recurring Line]

The development of Gothic architecture, with its new constructive
features and the greater variety of geometric spaces, forms, and
interstices which, as a consequence, were available for the designer of
associated ornament, whether carved work, mosaic, stained glass, or
painting, naturally led to a corresponding variety in invention and
decorative adaptation; and we may trace the same principle at work in
other forms--I mean the principle of corresponding, counterbalancing,
and recurring line--Gothic ornament being indeed generally an essential
part of the structure, and architectural features being constantly
repeated and utilized for their ornamental value, as in the case of
canopies and tabernacle work.

We see, for instance, in the Decorated period the acute gable moulding
over the arched recess, niche, doorway, or tomb, lightened and vivified
by a floriated finial springing into vigorous curves from a vertical
stem, forming an emphatic ogee outline which re-echoes the ogee line of
the arch below, and is taken up in variations by the crockets carved
upon the sides of the gable; and their spiral ascending lines lead the
eye up to the finial which completes the composition. We may trace the
same principle in the carved fillings of the subsidiary parts, such as
the trefoiled panels, the secondary mouldings, and the cusps of the
arches, which continue the line-motive or decorative harmony to the last
point (see illustration, p. 120[f071]). The elegance and lightness of
the pinnacles is increased in the same way, and further emphasized by
the long vertical lines of the sunk panels upon their sides.

[Illustration (f071): From Canopy of Tomb of Gervaise-Alard 1303. Temp
ED^wd^ I^st^ Winchelsea]

In church doorways we may see certain voussoirs of the arch allowed to
project from the hollow of the concave moulding, and their surfaces
carved into bosses of ornament; while, again, the doorway is emphasized
by the recurring lines of the mouldings, with their contrasting planes
of light and shadow, and the point of their spring is marked by a
carved lion, controlled in the design of its contour by the squareness
of the block of stone upon which it is carved (see illustration, p.
121[f072]).

[Illustration (f072): Structural Control of Line in Architectural
Enrichments West Door Walberswick Ch. Suffolk]

The carvings of miserere seats in our cathedral choirs often afford
instances of ingenious design and arrangement of elements difficult to
combine, yet always showing the instinct of following the control of the
dominating form and peculiar lines of the seat itself. There is an
instance of one from St. David's Cathedral--apparently a humorous
satire--a goose-headed woman offering a cake to a man-headed gull (?),
or perhaps they are both geese! I won't pretend to say, but it evidently
is intended to suggest cupboard love, and there is a portentously large
pitcher of ale in reserve on the bench. But note the clever arrangement
of the masses and lines, and how the lines of the seat and the curves
of the terminating scroll are re-echoed in the lines of the figures and
accessories.

[Illustration (f073): C. 1460-1480 Wood Carving Miserere Seat Choir
Stalls St. David's Cathedral. Controlling Line in Design of Subsidiary
Architectural Decoration.]

A stone-carving from the end of a tomb in the same cathedral--that of
Bishop John Morgan, 1504--of a griffin with a shield shows an emphatic
repetition of the inclosing line of the arched recess in the curves of
the wings which follow it.

[Illustration (f074): Recessed Panel Carved Stone From the Tomb of
Bishop John Morgan D. 1504, St. David's Cathedral.]

There is also a charming corbel of a half-figure of an angel, which,
though somewhat defaced, shows the architectural sense very strongly in
its design--the vertical droop of the wing-feathers inclosing the figure
repeating and continuing the vertical lines of the shafts and the
subsidiary mouldings of the arrangement of the drapery, and its
termination in crisp foliated forms, which pleasantly counterbalance the
set of the scale feathers of the wings and break the semicircular
mouldings of the base of the corbel, repeating those of the shafts
above.

[Illustration (f075): Constructive Line Reechoed in Architectural
Ornament. Corbel, Bishop Vaughan's Chapel, St. David's 1509-]

                                                  [Adaptability in Design]

[Illustration (f076): Gothic Tile Pattern S. David's Cath^l.]

Adaptation to spaces upon a flat surface is also illustrated in some
tile patterns from the same place. They are simple and rude but very
effective bits of spacing, and show a thorough grasp of the principles
we have been considering--if, indeed, it is so far conscious work at
all. But whether or not the outcome of a tradition which seemed to be
almost instinctive with mediæval workmen--a tradition which yet left the
individual free, and under which design was a thing of life and growth,
ever adapting itself to new conditions, and grafting freely new
inventions to flower in fresh phantasy upon the ancient stock--the
movement in art in the Middle Ages, exhibiting as it does a gradual
growth and a constant vitality, always accompanying and adapting itself
to structural changes, to life and habit, was really more analogous to
the development of mechanical science in our own day, where each new
machine is allied to its predecessors, though it supplants them. The one
law being adaptability, the one aim to apply means to ends, and more and
more perfectly, inessentials and superfluities are shed, and invention
triumphs. It is, too, a collective advance, since each engineer, each
inventor, builds upon the experience of both his forerunners and his
fellow-workers, and everything is brought to an immediately practical
test.

We are not yet in the same healthy condition as regards art, and art can
never be on the same plane as science, though art may learn much from
science, chiefly perhaps in the direction of the inventive adaptation of
analogous principles. But in art the question is complicated by human
feeling and association, and her strongest appeal is to these, and by
these, and as yet we do not seem to have any terms or equivalents
precise enough to describe, or any analysis fine enough to discover
them.

                                                               [Extension]

The next consideration in spacing we may term _extension_. This bears
upon all surface design, but more especially upon the design of patterns
intended to repeat over a large surface, and not specially designed for
particular spaces. It is a great question whether any design can be
entirely satisfactory unless it has been thought out in relation to some
particular extent of surface or as adapted to some particular wall or
room. Modern industrial conditions preclude this possibility as a rule,
and so the only sure ground, beyond individual taste and preference, is
technical adaptability to process or material. We should naturally want
to give a different character to a textile pattern, whether printed or
woven, and intended to hang in folds, from one for flat extension as a
wall-paper; and a different character again to such designs intended for
extension horizontally from those intended for vertical space alone.
Floor patterns, parquets and carpets, for instance, naturally demand
different treatment from wall patterns, as those orders of plants in
nature which cling and spread on the flat ground differ from those which
grow high and maintain themselves in the air, or climb upon trees. The
rule of life--_adaptability_--obtains in art as in nature, and, beneath
individual preference and passing fashion, works the silent but real law
of relation to conditions. This again bears upon the choice of scale,
and differentiates the design of dress textiles from furniture textiles,
and the design of varied surfaces and objects, which, while demanding
their own particular treatment, are brought into general relation by
their association with use and the wants of humanity.

[Illustration (f077a): Extension: Surface Pattern Motives Derived from
Lines of Structure.]

                                        [Geometric Structural Plans, etc.]

The law governing extension of design over surface is again geometric,
and our primal circle and square are again the factors and progenitors
of the leading systems which have governed the design of diapers and
wall patterns and hangings of all kinds. Nay, the first weaver of the
wattled fence discovered the principle of extension in design, and
showed its inseparable association with construction; and the builder
with brick or stone emphasizes it, producing the elements of linear
surface pattern, from the mechanical necessity of the position of the
joints of his structure. At a German railway station waiting-room I
noticed an effective adaptation of this principle as a wall decoration
in two blues upon a stone colour (see illustration, p. 128[fig077a]). We
may build upon such emphatic structural lines, either incorporating them
with the design motive, as in all rectangular wall diapers, or we may
suppress or conceal the actual constructive lines by placing the
principal parts or connections of our pattern over them, but one cannot
construct a satisfactory pattern to repeat and extend without them; for
these constructive lines or plans give the necessary organic life and
vigour to such designs, and are as needful to them as the trellis to the
tendrils of the vine (see illustration, p. 129[f077b]).

[Illustration (f077b): Surface Extension: Repeating Patterns Built Upon
(1) Square and (2) Circular Basis.]

The same principle is true of designs upon the curvilinear plan. The
mere repetition of the circle by itself gives us a simple geometric
pattern, and we are at liberty to emphasize this circular plan as the
main motive; or, as in the case of the rectangular plans, to treat it
merely as a basis, and develop free scroll motives upon it; or follow
it through its principal variations, as in the ogee, formed by dropping
out two intermediate semicircles; or the various forms of the scale
arrangement. These simple geometric plans are the most generally useful
as plans of designs intended for repetition and extension over space,
and they are always safe and sound systems to build upon, since a
geometric plan is certain to join comfortably if our measurements are
right.

[Illustration (f078): Surface Extension: Plan of a Drop Repeat.]

We may, however, often feel that we want something bolder and freer, and
start with a motive of sweeping-curves, non-geometric, but even then a
certain geometric relation will be necessary, or an equivalent for it,
since each curve must be counterbalanced in some way, though not
necessarily symmetrically, of course; and even where a square of
pattern--say to a wall-paper repeat of twenty-one inches--has been
designed, not consciously upon a geometric base, but simply as a
composition of lines and masses to repeat, the mechanical conditions of
the work when it comes to be printed will supply a certain geometric
control, since it necessarily begins in the process of repetition a
series of squares of pattern in which the curves are bound to recur in
corresponding places. Without a geometric plan of some sort, however, we
may easily get into difficulties with awkward leading lines, gaps, or
masses, that tumble down, and are only perceived when the paper is
printed and hung.

The designer should not feel at all restricted or cramped by his
geometric plan, but treat it as an aid and a scaffolding, working in as
much variety and richness of detail as he likes, bound only by the
necessity of repeating or counterbalancing his forms and lines. In the
diagram (p. 131[f078]) the plan of making a repeat less obvious by means
of what is termed "a drop" is given, and this system also increases the
apparent width of a pattern.

                                                        [Frieze and Field]

The feeling which demands some kind of contrast or relief to a field of
repeating pattern, however interesting in itself, seems now almost
instinctive. It is felt, too, in the case of plain surfaces, where the
eye seeks a moulding to give a little variety or pattern-equivalent in
play of light and shadow upon different planes, lines, or concavities
and convexities. The common plaster cornice placed to unite walls and
ceiling, in our ordinary houses, is a concession (on the part even of
the jerriest of builders) to the æsthetic sense. We get the decorated
frieze in architecture in obedience to the same demand, though
originally a necessary feature of lintel construction, as we have seen,
from the days of the festal garland hung around the eaves of the classic
house, to its perpetuation in stone in so many varieties.* The carved
garland depending in a series of graceful curves, or contrasted with
pendants, or their rhythm punctuated, as it were, by ox-heads, as on the
temple of the Sibyls, Tivoli, formed the needed contrast to the plane
masonry of the wall below. Sculptured figures, with the added interest
of story, as on the choragic monument of Lysicrates, fulfilled the same
decorative function in a more complex and elaborate way.

   [*] "Bases of Design."

To satisfy the same feeling we place a frieze above the patterned field
of our modern wall-papers. Such a frieze may be considered as a
contrasting border to the pattern of the field, much as the border of a
carpet, allowing for difference of material and position; or the frieze
may assert itself as the dominant decoration of the room. In this case
it would be greater in depth than the simpler bordering type. The
interest of the field filling would then be subsidiary, and lead up to
the frieze. In wall-paper friezes the difficulty in designing is to
think of a motive which will not tire the eye in the necessarily
frequent repeats of twenty-one inches. Longer ones have occasionally
been produced, the limit being sixty inches. It is often a good plan to
recur in the main lines or forms of the frieze to some variation of the
lines or forms of the field. If, for instance, the main motive in the
field was a vertical scroll design, a _horizontal_ scroll design upon a
large scale used for the frieze would answer, the field being kept flat
and quiet; or the fan, or radiating shell form, used as a frieze, above
a pattern on the scale plan, would be quite harmonious. Relation and
balance of line and mass, and arrangement of quantities in such designs,
are the chief considerations.

With painting or modelling an artist is freer, as he is at liberty to
design a continuous frieze of figures, and introduce as much variety as
he chooses.

A painted frieze of figures above plain oak-panelling has a good effect
in a large and well-proportioned room, and is perhaps one of the
pleasantest ways of treating interior walls.

[Illustration (f079): Sketch Designs to Show Relation Between Frieze
and Field in Wall-paper.]

                                                      [Ceiling Decoration]

Ceiling decoration, again, presents problems of extension in designing,
and the large flat plaster ceilings of modern rooms are by no means easy
to deal with satisfactorily. The simplest way is to resort to
wall-paper, and here, restricted in size of repeat and the usual
technical requirements of the work, the designer must further consider
appropriateness of scale, and position in regard to eye, relation to the
wall, and so forth.

The natural demand is for something simpler in treatment than the
walls--a re-echo, in some sort, of plans agreeable to the floor, yet
with a suggestion of something lighter and freer: here we may safely
come back to rectangular and circular plans again for our leading lines
and forms.

Painting and modelling, again, offer more elaborate treatment and
possibilities, and we know that beautiful works have been done in both
ways; but art of this kind seems more appropriate to lofty vaulted
chambers and churches, such as one sees in the palaces of Italy, at
Genoa and Venice, at Florence and Rome.

I remember a very striking and bold treatment of a flat-beamed ceiling
in the Castle of Nuremberg, where a huge black German eagle was painted
so as to occupy nearly the whole field of the ceiling, but treated in an
extremely flat and heraldic way, the long feathers of the wings
following the lines of the beams and falling parallel upon them and
between them; and upon the black wings and body of the eagle different
shields of arms were displayed in gold and colours, the eagle itself
being painted upon the natural unpainted wood--oak, I think. The work
belonged to the thirteenth or fourteenth century, I believe. It seemed
the very antithesis of Italian finesse and fancy, but the fitness of
such decoration entirely depends upon its relation to its surroundings,
which in this case were perfectly appropriate.

                                                   [Co-operative Relation]

That is the great point to bear in mind in all design--the sense of
relation; nothing stands alone in art. Lines and forms must harmonize
with other forms and lines: the elements of any design must meet in
friendly co-operation; it is not a blind struggle for existence, a
fierce competition, or a strife for ascendency between one motive and
another, one form and another, or a war of conflicting efforts. There
may be a struggle _outside_ the design, in the mind of the designer. He
may have tried hard against difficulties to express what he felt, and
have only reached harmony through discord and strife, but the work
itself should be serene; we should feel that, however various its
elements, they are not without their purpose and relation one to
another, that all is ordered and organized in harmonious lines, that
everything has its use and place, that, in short, it illustrates that
excellent motto, whether for art or life: "Each for all, and all for
each."


                                CHAPTER VI

    Of the Fundamental Essentials of Design: Line, Form,
    Space--Principles of Structural and Ornamental Line in Organic
    Forms--Form and Mass in Foliage--Roofs--The Mediæval
    City--Organic and Accidental Beauty--Composition: Formal and
    Informal--Power of Linear Expression--Relation of Masses and
    Lines--Principles of Harmonious Composition.


We may take it, then, from the principles and examples I have
endeavoured to put before you in the previous chapters, that there are
three fundamental elements or essentials of Design--Line, Form, Space.

                                        [Fundamental Essentials of Design]

Line we need, not only for our ground-plan and framework, but also to
define or express our forms. Form we need to give substance and mass,
interest and variety; and it is obvious that Space is required to
contain all these elements, while Space asserts its influence, as we
have seen, upon both Line and Form in combination upon it, whether
object or surface, by the shape of its boundary, the extension of its
plane, and the angle and position of its plane in regard to the eye, as
well as from the point of view of material and use.

Questions of the character of line and form, and their combination and
disposition in or over spaces, are questions of composition. They demand
the most careful solution, whatever our subject and purpose may be,
from the simplest linear border up to the most elaborate figure design.
But although the three essentials to composition must be always present,
it is always possible to rely more upon the qualities of one of them for
our main motive and interest, keeping the other two subsidiary. We might
centralize the chief interest of our composition upon _Line_, for
instance, and make harmonious relation or combination of lines our
principal object (as in line-design and ornament), or we might rather
dwell upon the contours, masses, and contrasts and relationships of
_Form_: as in pictorial design, figure compositions of all kinds, and
modelling and sculpture: or, again, we might choose that the peculiar
character given by the control of certain inclosing spaces should
determine the interest of our design, as the due filling of particular
panels and geometric shapes; or seek the interest of aerial perspective
in the pictorial and atmospheric expression of space.

Taking combinations of Line first, and bearing in mind what has been
said regarding its capacities for expression, whether of emotion,
direction of force, movement, rest, as well as of facts of structure and
surface, let us see if we can trace the principle of harmonious
composition, of which these things may be considered as parts.

                                                   [Line in Organic Forms]

Look at any of the systems of line in the organic structures of nature:
the radiating ribs of the scallop shell, or the spiral of many other
varieties; the set of the feathers upon the expanded wing of a bird; the
radiation of the sun's rays; the flowing line of the wave movement; the
lines of structure in flowers and leaves; the scales of a fish; the
scales of a pine-cone or an artichoke. We feel that any of these
combinations of lines are harmonious and beautiful, and we know that
they are essential to the character and structure. They are organic
lines, in short. They mean life and growth. In principle they are
radiating and recurring lines; in each form they repeat each other in
varying degrees of direction and declension of curve. No two lines are
alike, yet there is no contradiction and no unnecessary line, and
variety is combined with unity. Each affords a perfect instance of
harmonious composition of line, and gives us definite principles upon
which to work (see illustration, p. 140[f080]).

Do the same with the second half moon, so that they both stick up, not
unlike wings.

Fill the space between with a thick mixture of chopped almonds rolled in
honey, and place two strips of angelica poking forward to suggest antennae.
A good nougat will answer instead of the honey.

[_Pour la Patrie_.]

CHERRY AND STRAWBERRY COMPOTE
Take half a pint of rich cream and mix with it a small glassful of
Madeira wine or of good brandy. Pick over some fine cherries and
strawberries, stoning the cherries, and taking out the little
center piece of each strawberry that is attached to the stalk. Lay your
fruit in a shallow dish and cover it with the liquor and serve with the
long sponge biscuits known as "langues de chat" (Savoy fingers).

[_Amitie aux Anglais._]

CHOCOLATE CUSTARD
To make a nice sweet in a few minutes can be easily managed if you
follow this recipe.

Make a custard of rich milk and yolks of eggs, sweeten it with sugar,
flavored with vanilla, and if you have a little cream add that also.
Then grate down some of the best chocolate, as finely as you can,
rub it through coarse muslin so that it is a fine powder.

Stir this with your custard, always stirring one way so that no
bubbles of air get in.

When you have got a thick consistency like rich cream, pour the mixture
into paper or china cases, sprinkle over the tops with chopped
almonds. There is no cooking required.

GOOSEBERRY CREAM WITHOUT CREAM
Take your gooseberries and wash them well, cut off the stalk and
the black tip of each.

Stew them with sugar till they are tender, just covered in water. Do
not let them burn. If you have not time to attend to that put them in
the oven in a shallow dish sprinkled with brown sugar.
When tender rub them through a fine sieve at least twice.

                                                Flavor with a few drops of lemon juice, and add sugar if required.

Then beat up a fresh egg in milk and add as much arrowroot
or cornflour as will lie flat in a salt spoon. Mix the custard with the
gooseberries, pass it through the sieve once more and serve it
in a crystal bowl.

[_Mdlle. B-M._]

CHOCOLATE PUDDINGS
Make some Genoese cake mixture as you would for a light
cake, and pour it into greased molds like cups.

You can take the weight of one egg in dried flour, butter, and
rather less of sugar.

Beat the butter and sugar together to a cream, sprinkle in the flour,
stirring all the time, a pinch of salt, and then the beaten egg.
When your little cakes are baked, turn them out of the molds and when
cool turn them upside down and remove the inside, leaving a deep
hole and a thin crust all round. Fill up this hole with the custard
and chocolate as above, and let it grow firm. Then turn the cases
right way up and pour over the top a sweet cherry sauce.
You may require the yolks of two eggs to make the custard firm.

[_Mdlle. B-M._]

INDEX
Anchovy Biscuits " Patties " Rounds " Sandwiches Anchovies " Mock Apples,
a new dish of Apples and Sausages Artichokes a la Vedette Artichokes,
Brussels Asparagus a l'Anvers Asparagus, To Cook Aubergine or Egg
Plant
Banana Compote Beans, a Dish of Haricot " Broad, in Sauce Beef a
la Bourguignonne Beef a la Mode Beef, Blankenberg " Caretaker's "
Fillet of, a la Brabanconne " Roast Rump of, Bordelaise Sauce "
Roasted Fillet of " Stewed Beef and Apricots Beef Squares Brussels
Sprouts Boeuf a la Flamande Bouchees a la Reine Brabant Pancake
Burgundy, Hot Butterflies
Cabbage, Red Cabbage and Potatoes Cabbage with Sausages Cabbages,
Harlequin Cake, Mocha Calf's Liver a la Bourgeoise Carbonade, Flemish
Carbonade of Flanders Carbonades done with Beer Carrots, Belgian "
Brussels " Flemish " Stuffed Carrots and Eggs Cauliflower a la Reine
Elizabeth Cauliflower and Shrimps Cauliflower, Dressed " Stuffed
Celeris au Lard Cheese Fondants Cheese Limpens Cherry and Strawberry
Compote Cherries, Madeline Chicken a la Max Chicory Chicory a la
Ferdinand Chicory and Ham with Cheese Sauce Chicory, Stuffed
Children's Birthday Dish, The Chinese Corks Chou-Croute Cod, Remains
of " The Miller's Cordial, Hawthorn Cream, Chocolate " Rum " Vanilla
Creme de Poisson à la Roi Albert Croquettes of Boiled Meat Croquettes
of Veal Croquettes, Cheese " Potato Cucumber à la Laeken Cucumbers
and Tomatoes Custard, Chocolate Cutlets, Imitation[German Roofs]

Very pretty and varied effects are produced in the old roofs of
southern Germany by the use of different coloured glazed tiles--red,
green, and yellow--arranged in simple patterns. One of the old towers at
Lindau has such a roof, and the colour effect is very rich and striking.

But I must not be led into a disquisition upon roofs further than in so
far as they illustrate the subject of composition of line and form, and
from the painter's point of view they frequently do in a very
delightful and instructive way.

[Illustration (f084): Albert Dürer: St. Anthony.]

What, for instance, can be more varied and charming than the
compositions we constantly meet with in the rich backgrounds of Albert
Dürer? Those steep barn roofs, and those quaint German towns inclosed in
walls with protecting towers--nests of steep tiled gables of every
imaginable degree--which give so much character and interest to his
designs, as in the background of his copper-plates "The Prodigal Son"
and "St. Anthony" here given. Their prototypes still exist here and
there in Germany, in such towns as Rothenburg, practically unchanged
since the sixteenth century, and give one an excellent idea of what such
houses were like. A visit there is like a leap back into the Middle
Ages. Every street is a varied and interesting composition. No two
houses are alike. They were built by the citizens to really pass their
lives in. The town is strongly placed upon the crest of a hill, with a
river at its foot, and well fortified and protected by massive
encircling walls and towers and deep gates, which give it so strong and
picturesque a character, while the timber and tile-roofed gallery for
the warders still exists along the inside of the walls. Such cities
arose by the strength of the social bond among men--the necessity for
mutual help in the maintenance of a higher standard of life, and mutual
protection against the ravages of sinister powers.

                                                       [The Mediæval City]

Strong externally, internally they were made as home-like and full of
the varied delight of the eyes, as if the people had reasoned, "Since we
must live close together in a small place, let us make it as delightful
and romantic as we can." We know that the idea of Paradise and the New
Jerusalem to the imagination of the Middle Ages was always the fair
walled garden and the fenced city. The painters embodied the idea of
security and protection from the savage and destructive forces of nature
and man--a sanctuary of peace, a garden of delight.

[Illustration (f085): Roof-lines: Rothenburg.]

We have in modern times turned rather from the city as a complete and
beautiful thing, to the individual home, and to the interior of that,
and, in the modern competitive search for the necessary straws and
sticks to make our individualist-domestic composition of comfort and
artistic completeness, bowers are too often built upon the ruins of
others, or are fair by reason of surrounding degradation. The common
collective comfort and delight of the eyes is too often ignored, so that
it comes about that, if our modern cities possess any elements of beauty
or picturesqueness, it is rather owing to accidents and to the
transfiguring effects of atmosphere than to the beauty or variety of
architectural form and colour. We have to seek inspiration among the
fragments of the dead past in monuments and art schools.

                                           [Organic and Accidental Beauty]

The modern development of the municipality and extension of its
functions may, indeed, do something, as it has done, and is doing,
something to protect public health and further public education; but we
have yet to wait for the full results, and everything must finally
depend upon the public spirit and disinterestedness of the citizens, and
in matters of art upon a very decided but somewhat rare and peculiar
sympathy and taste, as well as enthusiasm.

The absence of beauty of line, form, and proportion from the external
aspects of daily life in towns has probably a greater effect than we are
apt to realize in deadening the imagination, and it certainly seems to
produce a certain insensibility to beauty of line and composition, since
the perception must necessarily be blunted by being inured to the
commonplace and sordid. The instinct for harmony of line and form
becomes weakened, and can only be slowly revived by long and careful
study in art, instead of finding its constant and most vital stimulus in
every street.

For all that, however, an eye trained to observe and select may, even in
the dullest and dingiest street, find artistic suggestions, if not in
the buildings, then in the life. And where there is life, movement,
humanity, there is sure to be character and interest. Groups of children
playing will give us plenty of suggestions for figure composition.
Workpeople going to and from their work, the common works going on in
the street, the waggons and horses, the shoal of faces, the ceaseless
stream of life--all these things, whether we are able to reproduce them
as direct illustrations of the life of our time, or are moved only to
select from them vivid suggestions to give force to ideal conceptions,
should all be noted--photographed, as it were, instantaneously upon the
sensitive plate of the mind's vision. We can only learn the laws of
movement by observing movement--the swing and poise of the figure, the
relation of the lines of limbs and drapery to the direction of force and
centre of gravity, so important in composition. We must constantly
supplement our school and studio work by these direct impressions of
vivid life and movement, and neglect no opportunity or despise no source
or suggestion.

There are still in England to be found such old-world corners as the
quaint street of Canterbury (p. 153[f086]), which forms an excellent
study in the composition of angular and vertical lines.

[Illustration (f086): St. Margaret St Canterbury Aug: 27 1894]

                                                      [Formal Composition]

We may perceive that there are at least two kinds of composition, which
may be distinguished as:

     I. Formal.
    II. Informal.

I. Under the head of Formal may be classed all those systems of
structural line with which I started, and which are found either as
leading motives or fundamental plans and bases throughout ornamental
design. Yet even these may be used in composition of figures and other
forms where the object is more or less formal and decorative, as
governing plans or controlling lines.

The radiating ribs of a fan, for instance, might be utilized as the
natural boundaries and inclosing lines of a series of vertical figures
following the radiating lines. A strictly logical design of the kind
would be a series of figures with uplifted arms, forming radiating lines
from the shoulders, somewhat in the position of Blake's well-known and
beautiful composition of the Morning Stars in the Book of Job, already
illustrated.

Using the overlapping vertical scale plan we should get relative
positions for a formal composition of three figures, although they need
not necessarily be formal in detail. A typical design of three
associated ideas treated emblematically would be the most natural use of
such an arrangement--as Faith, Hope, and Charity; Liberty, Equality,
Fraternity; Science, Art, and Industry; or the three goddesses Heré,
Pallas, and Aphrodite, as choice and purpose might decide. 
The square piano fully possesses the tone of a grand--it sounds
really marvelously; the ample sound, the extension, the even tone, the
sweetness, the power, are combined in these pianos as in no piano I have
ever seen.

The grand piano unites in itself all the qualities which you can demand
of a concert piano; in fact, I do not hesitate to say that this piano
is far better than all the English pianos which I have seen at the
Exhibition," &c.

The "_Paris Constitutionel_" says: "In the piano manufacture the palm
don't belong to the European industry this year, but to an American
house, almost unknown until now, Messrs.

STEINWAY & SONS, of New York, who have carried off the first prize
for piano-fortes," &c.

WAREROOMS, Nos. 82 & 84 WALKER ST., near Broadway, New York.

* * * * *

[Illustration]
WITH CONTENTS FOR THE TIMES COMPRISING An Illustrated Poem of Liberty AND
"THE SONG OF THE FREE," WITH ORIGINAL MUSIC, On Spreading Sheet,
convenient for the Piano-Forte or Organ.

_Also, a Record of Events, Family Recipes, Home Miscellany, Calendars
for the whole Country, Memoranda Pages, etc._
IN FINE BINDING, WITH GILT EDGES.

PRICE, 25 CENTS.

THE LADIES' ALMANAC--We have seen the advance sheets of this elegant
little annual for 1853, and can assure its patrons that, in point
of interest, it exceeds the best of its predecessors.

                                                    Its grand feature is a spirited and timely poem by Geo.

Coolidge, Esq., the editor, upon the absorbing topic, "FREEDOM," which he
has treated in a manner that eloquently and feelingly appeals to the
reader. The poem is illustrated by some fine designs that in themselves
convince, and give added power to the text they embellish. The work of
the Almanac is fully up to its old degree of excellence, and in
all respects creditable.

--_Boston Gazette._
ISSUED BY GEO. COOLIDGE, 17 Washington St., Boston. NEW YORK: SOLD
BY HENRY DEXTER.

* * * * *
THE BOSTON ALMANAC FOR 1863, ISSUED IN DECEMBER, WILL CONTAIN The Continued
List of Massachusetts Volunteers, BY REGIMENTS AND COMPANIES, AS MUSTERED
INTO SERVICE, COMPRISING The last two Calls of the President for
600,000 Troops, and giving about 40,000 Massachusetts Names.

PRICE, 25 CENTS
Issued by GEORGE COOLIDGE, 17 Washington St., Boston, And sent by
mail, post-paid, on receipt of price. Sold at all usual places.

MRS. COY'S PHARMAKON.

This Medicine is admitted by all who have tried it to be the best article
for COLDS, COUGHS, ASTHMA, PHTHISIC, and ALL IRRITATIONS OF THE
THROAT.

It is strictly vegetable, and perfectly safe for the most delicate
constitution. Unlike other preparations, it will not brace up the
patient, but will heal the disease as by magic.

For more than twenty years Mr. Coy was afflicted with a Cough, with
Asthma combined, and at times was laid up for months, unable to
do any thing--given over by his physician, who said that his lungs
were badly effected.

After a perseverance of three months in the use of the PHARMAKON,
he is entirely restored to health. Many references could be given, but
the medicine is its own best evidence, for it only needs to be tried
to be appreciated.

We, the undersigned, residents of Boston, have known Mr. Coy for a
number of years, and can testify that he has had a very severe
disease of the lungs since our acquaintance with him, and have no
hesitation in saying that we believe he has been cured by the
PHARMAKON, and we most cordially recommend the same as an excellent
medicine for all diseases of the Lungs, Throat, and Liver, and all
impurities of the blood.

SAMUEL NEWELL, 36 HANOVER ST., JOHN L. FILLER, 92 CARVER ST., CHAS. W.
LYMAN. 3 RIVER ST., THOS. R. HOLLAND, 12 SCHOOL ST., CHAS. FULLER, 12
SOUTH CEDAR ST., A. P. SHUTE, 21 HURD ST., Chelsea.

Prepared only by Mrs. E. G. COY, Sole Proprietor. [**arrow hand]
Observe her written signature on the label, without which none is
genuine.

PRICE, ONE DOLLAR PER BOTTLE. Sold at Wholesale and Retail by
GEO. COOLIDGE, Gen.

Agent, 17 Washington St., Boston, Office of "Boston Almanac,"
"Lady's Almanac," etc.

* * * * *
FRIENDS AND RELATIVES OF THE BRAVE SOLDIERS AND SAILORS.

[Illustration]
HOLLOWAY'S PILLS AND OINTMENT

All who have friends and relatives in the Army or Navy should take
especial care that they be amply supplied with these Pills and Ointment;
and where the brave Soldiers and Sailors have neglected to provide
themselves with them, no better present can be sent them by their
friends.

They have been proved to be the Soldier's never-failing-friend in the
hour of need.

COUGHS AND COLDS AFFECTING TROOPS
will be speedily relieved and effectually cured by using these admirable
medicines, and by paying proper attention to the Directions which are
attached to each Pot or Box.

SICK HEADACHES AND WANT OF APPETITE, INCIDENTAL TO SOLDIERS.

These feelings which so sadden us usually arise from trouble or annoyances,
obstructed perspiration, or eating and drinking whatever is unwholesome,
thus disturbing the healthful action of the liver and stomach. These
organs must be relieved, if you desire to be well. The Pills, taken
according to the printed instructions, will quickly produce a healthy
action in both liver and stomach, and, as a natural consequence, a
clear head and good appetite.

WEAKNESS OR DEBILITY INDUCED BY OVER FATIGUE
will soon disappear by the use of these invaluable Pills, and the
Soldier will quickly acquire additional strength.

Never let the bowels be either confined or unduly acted upon.

It may seem strange, that Holloway's Pills should be recommended for
Dysentery and Flux, many persons supposing that they would increase the
relaxation. This is a great mistake, for these Pills will correct the
liver and stomach, and thus remove all the acrid humors from the system.
This medicine will give tone and vigor to the whole organic system, however
deranged, while health and strength follow, as a matter of course.
Nothing will stop the relaxation of the bowels so sure as this famous
medicine.

VOLUNTEERS, ATTENTION! THE INDISCRETIONS OF YOUTH.

Sores and Ulcers, Blotches and Swellings, can with certainty be radically
cured, if the Pills are taken night and morning, and the Ointment
be freely used as stated in the printed instructions. If treated in any
other manner, they dry up in one part to break out in another. Whereas,
this Ointment will remove the humors from the system and leave the
patient a vigorous and healthy man. It will require a little perseverance
in bad cases to insure a lasting cure.

* * * * *
JOSEPH GILLOTT

                                    respectfully invites the attention of the public to the following
Numbers of his 
PATENT METALLIC PENS 
WHICH FOR
QUALITY OF MATERIAL, EASY ACTION, AND GREAT DURABILITY,
WILL ENSURE UNIVERSAL PREFERENCE.

FOR LADIES' USE.--For fine neat writing, especially on thick and highly-finished
papers, Nos. 1, 173, 303, 604. IN EXTRA-FINE POINTS.

FOR GENERAL USE.--Nos. 2, 164, 166, 168, 604. IN FINE POINTS.

                               FOR BOLD FREE WRITING.

    --Nos. 3, 164, 166, 168, 604. IN MEDIUM POINTS.
    
    FOR GENTLEMEN'S USE.--FOR LARGE, FREE, BOLD WRITING.--The Black
    Swan Quill, Large Barrel Pen, No. 808. The Patent Magnum Bonum,
    No. 263. IN MEDIUM AND BROAD POINTS.
    
    FOR GENERAL WRITING.--No. 263, IN EXTRA-FINE POINTS. No.
    810, New Bank Pen, No. 262, IN FINE POINTS, Small Barrel. No.
    840, The Autograph Pen.
    
    FOR COMMERCIAL PURPOSES.--The celebrated Three-Hole Correspondence
    Pen, No. 382. The celebrated Four-Hole Correspondence
    Pen, No. 202. The Public Pen, No. 292.

The Public Pen, with Bead, No. 404. Small Barrel Pens, fine and free,
Nos. 392, 405, 603.

MANUFACTURERS' WAREHOUSE,
91 JOHN STREET, Cor. of GOLD.

HENRY OWEN, Agent.

                                      * * * * *

NINE ARTICLES
THAT EVERY FAMILY SHOULD HAVE!!

The Agricultural Societies of the State of New York, New Jersey, and Queens
County, L.

I., at their latest Exhibitions awarded the highest premiums (gold medal,
silver medal, and diplomas), for these articles, and the public
generally approve them.

1st.

--PYLE'S O. K. SOAP, The most complete labor-saving and economical soap
that has been brought before the public. Good for washing all kinds of
clothing, fine flannels, silks, laces, and for toilet and bathing purposes.
The best class of families adopt it in preference to all others--Editors
of the TRIBUNE, EVENING POST, INDEPENDENT, EVANGELIST, EXAMINER,
CHRONICLE, METHODIST, ADVOCATE AND JOURNAL, CHURCH JOURNAL, AMERICAN
AGRICULTURIST, and of many other weekly journals, are using it in
their offices and families.

We want those who are disposed to encourage progress and good articles
to give this and the following articles a trial.

2d.--PYLE'S DIETETIC SALERATUS, a strictly pure and wholesome article;
in the market for several years, and has gained a wide reputation among
families and bakers throughout the New England and Middle States;
is always of a uniform quality, and free from all the objections
of impure saleratus.

3d.

--PYLE'S GENUINE CREAM TARTAR, always the same, and never fails
to make light biscuit.

Those who want the best will ask their grocer for this.

4th.--PYLE'S PURIFIED BAKING SODA, suitable for medicinal and culinary
use.

5th.--PYLE'S BLUEING POWDERS, a splendid article for the laundress, to
produce that alabaster whiteness so desirable in fine linens.

                                       6th.

--PYLE'S ENAMEL BLACKING, the best boot polish and leather preservative
in the world (Day and Martin's not excepted).

7th.--PYLE'S BRILLIANT BLACK INK, a beautiful softly flowing ink, shows
black at once, and is anti-corrosive to steel pens.

8th.

--PYLE'S STAR STOVE POLISH, warranted to produce a steel shine on iron
ware. Prevents rust effectually, without causing any disagreeable smell,
even on a hot stove.

9th.

--PYLE'S CREAM LATHER SHAVING SOAP, a "luxurious" article for gentlemen
who shave themselves. It makes a rich lather that will keep thick and
moist upon the face.

THESE ARTICLES are all put up full weight, and expressly for the
best class trade, and first-class grocers generally have them for
sale.

Every article is labelled with the name of
JAMES PYLE, 350 Washington St., cor. Franklin, N. Y.

* * * * *

LAW NOTICE.

ROBERT J. WALKER,
LATE SECRETARY OF THE TREASURY, AND
FREDERIC P.

STANTON,
LATE CHAIRMAN OF THE NAVAL AND JUDICIARY COMMITTEES OF CONGRESS,
PRACTISE LAW
in the SUPREME and CIRCUIT Courts at Washington, COURTS MARTIAL, the
COURT OF CLAIMS, before the DEPARTMENTS and BUREAUS, especially in
LAND, PATENT, CUSTOM HOUSE, AND WAR CLAIMS.

Aided by two other associates, no part of an extensive business will
be neglected.

Address,
WALKER & STANTON,
Office, 295 F STREET, WASHINGTON CITY, D.

C.

DUNCAN S. WALKER & ADRIEN DESLONDE will attend to PENSIONS, BOUNTIES,
PRIZE, PAY, and SIMILAR CLAIMS. WALKER & STANTON will aid them, when
needful, as consulting counsel. Address WALKER & DESLONDE, same office,
care of WALKER & STANTON.

* * * * *
WARD'S TOOL STORE. (LATE WOOD'S,) Established 1831.

47 CHATHAM, cor. North William St., & 513 EIGHTH AV.

                                                       a general assortment of 
TOOLS, CUTLERY, AND HARDWARE,
ALWAYS ON HAND.

Maker of Planes, Braces & Bits, and Carpenters' & Mechanics' Tools,

IN GREAT VARIETY AND OF THE BEST QUALITY.

N. B.--PLANES AND TOOLS MADE TO ORDER, AND REPAIRED.

This widely-known Establishment still maintains its reputation for the
unrivalled excellence of its OWN MANUFACTURED, as well as its FOREIGN
ARTICLES, which comprise
Tools for Every Branch of Mechanics and Artizans.

MECHANICS' AND ARTIZANS', AMATEURES' AND BOYS'
TOOL CHESTS IN GREAT VARIETY,
ON HAND, AND FITTED TO ORDER WITH TOOLS READY FOR USE.

    The undersigned, himself a practical mechanic, having wrought at
    the business for upwards of thirty years, feels confident that
    he can meet the wants of those who may favor him with their
    patronage.
    
    SKATES. I have some of the finest Skates in the city, of my own as
    well as other manufactures. Every style and price.
    
    [Illustration] Skates made to Fit the Foot without Straps. WILLIAM
    WARD, Proprietor.
    

* * * * *
ARTIFICIAL LEGS 
[Illustration]
(BY RIGHT, PALMER'S PATENT IMPROVED)
Adapted to every species of mutilated limb, unequaled in mechanism
and utility. Hands and Arms of superior excellence for mutilations
and congenital defects. Feet and appurtenances for limbs shortened
by hip disease. Dr. HUDSON, by appointment of the Surgeon General
of the U> S>
Army, furnishes limbs to mutilated Soldiers and Marines.
REFERENCES--Valentine Mott, M.D., William Parker, M.D., J. M.
Carnechan, M.D., GORDON BUCK, M.D., Wm. H. Van Buren, M.D.
Descriptive pamphlets sent gratis. E. D. HUDSON, M.D., ASTOR PLACE
(8TH St.), CLINTON HALL, UP STAIRS.

* * * * *
THE CONTINENTAL MONTHLY
EDITORS: HON. ROBERT J. WALKER, CHARLES G. LELAND, HON. FRED.
P.
STANTON, EDMUND KIRKE.
The readers of the CONTINENTAL are aware of the important position
it has assumed, of the influence which it exerts, and of the brilliant
array of political and literary talent of the highest order which
supports it. No publication of the kind has, in this country, so
successfully combined the energy and freedom of the daily newspaper
with the higher literary tone of the first-class monthly; and it
is very certain that no magazine has given wider range to its
contributors, or preserved itself so completely from the narrow
influences of party or of faction. In times like the present, such
a journal is either a power in the land or it is nothing. That the
CONTINENTAL is not the latter is abundantly evidenced _by what it
has done_.--by the reflection of its counsels in many important
public events, and in the character and power of those who are its
staunchest supporters.
By the accession of HON. ROBERT J. WALKER and HON. F. P. STANTON
to its editorial corps, the CONTINENTAL acquires a strength and a
political significance which, to those who are aware of the ability
and experience of these gentlemen, must elevate it to a position
far above any previously occupied by any publication of the kind
in America.
Preserving all "the boldness, vigor, and ability" which a thousand
journals have attributed to it, it will at once greatly enlarge its
circle of action, and discuss, fearlessly and frankly, every principle
involved in the great questions of the day. The first minds of the
country, embracing men most familiar with its diplomacy and most
distinguished for ability, are to become its contributors; and it
is no mere "flattering promise of a prospectus" to say, that this
"magazine for the times" will employ the first intellect in America,
under auspices which no publication ever enjoyed before in this
country.
CHARLES GODFREY LELAND, the accomplished scholar and author, who
has till now been the sole Editor of the Magazine, will, beside his
editorial labors, continue his brilliant contributions to its pages;
and EDMUND KIRKE, author of "AMONG THE PINES," will contribute to
each issue, having already begun a work on Southern Life and Society,
which will be found far more widely descriptive, and, in all respects,
superior to the first.
While the CONTINENTAL will express decided opinions on the great
questions of the day, it will not be a mere political journal: much
the larger portion of its columns will be enlivened, as heretofore,
by tales, poetry, and humor. In a word, the CONTINENTAL will be
found, under its new staff of Editors, occupying a position and
presenting attractions never before found in a magazine.
TERMS TO CLUBS.

Two copies for one year, Five dollars.
Three copies for one year, Six dollars.
Six copies for one year, Eleven dollars.
Eleven copies for one year, Twenty dollars.
Twenty copies for one year, Thirty-six dollars.
PAID IN ADVANCE. _Postage, Thirty-six cents a year_, TO BE PAID BY
THE SUBSCRIBER.
SINGLE COPIES. Three Dollars a year, IN ADVANCE.--_Postage paid by
the Publisher._
JOHN F. TROW, 50 Greene St., N. Y. PUBLISHER FOR THE
PROPRIETORS.
[Illustration] As an inducement to new subscribers, the Publisher
offers the following very liberal premiums:
[Illustration] Any person remitting $3, in advance, will receive
the Magazine from July, 1862, to January, 1864, thus securing the
whole of Mr. KIMBALL'S and Mr. KIRKE'S new serials, which are alone
worth the price of subscription. Or, if preferred, a subscriber can
take the Magazine for 1863 and a copy of "AMONG THE PINES," or of
"UNDERCURRENTS OF WALL ST.," by R. B. KIMBALL, bound in cloth (the
book to be sent postage paid).[Illustration (f094b): Decorative Relief: Treatment of Mantling.]

                                             [Use of Diapered Backgrounds]

The principle, too, of counterchange in heraldry answers to our
principle of relief by contrast, and though its chief charm lies in its
ornamental range of form and colour combinations, it can be expressed in
black and white, and it remains a universal principle throughout
decorative art. The decorative effect and charm of the relief of large
and bold forms upon rich and delicate diapers is also an important
resource of the designer. The monumental art of the Middle Ages affords
multitudes of examples of this principle in ornamental treatment. The
miniaturist of the twelfth and thirteenth centuries constantly relieved
his groups of figures upon a diapered ground. The architectural sculptor
relieved the broad masses of flowing drapery and the bold projection of
his effigies and recumbent figures by delicately chiselled diapers upon
the surface of the wall behind them. This treatment may frequently be
seen in the recessed tombs of the fourteenth century.

The incisor of memorial brasses, again, more especially in continental
examples, shows a fondness for the same principle. The long vertical
lines of drapery of ladies and ecclesiastics, the broad masses of the
heraldic surcoat, or armour of the knights, the rich and heavy furred
gowns of the burghers, are often relieved upon beautiful diapered or
arabesque grounds, generally embodying some heraldic device, motto, or
emblem of the person or family whose tomb it ornaments. Such decoration
is strictly linear, yet within its own limits, and perhaps because of
them, we find in this province of design extremely admirable work, no
less for delineation of character and decorative treatment than for
ornamental invention controlled by strict economy of line.

[Illustration (f095): Relief Upon a Diapered Ground: Brass of Martin De
Visch, Bruges, 1452.]

                                        [Relief of Form by Linear Shading]

This brings us to the consideration of our second method of relief by
means of line.

Take any simple allied elements to form a repeating pattern, say spiral
shells, place them at certain rhythmic intervals, and we can unite and
at the same time give them relief by filling in the ground by a series
of waved lines to suggest the ribbed sand. Add a few dots to soften and
vary the effect, and we get a pattern of a certain balance and
consistency (No. 1, p. 177[f096a]).

[Illustration (f096a): Relief in Pattern Design by Means of Simple
Linear Contrasts (1)]

With the more varied and complex floral form, but treated in a very
abstract way, placing the daisies in a line, horizontally, and reversing
the sprig for the alternate row, we have another motive, which is
connected and steadied as well as relieved by the suggestion of grass
blades in groups of three slightly radiated vertical strokes (No. 2,
p. 177[f096b]). A pattern of two elements, again, may be formed in a
still more simple way by linear contrast, as in No. 3, where the
pyramidal trees are formed by a continuous serpentine stroke of the pen
terminating in a spiral stem. The diagonal arrangement of the trees
produces a chequer, the intervals of which can be varied by the
contrasting black masses of the birds.

[Illustration (f096b): Relief in Pattern Design by Means of Simple
Linear Contrasts (2), (3)]

In graphic drawing, lines to express forms in the relief of light and
shade are often needed to give additional force even where no great
degree of realism is desired. A tint formed by horizontal lines is
sufficient to relieve a face from the background and give it solidity,
while local colour may be given to the hair, and at the same time serve
to relieve the leaves of a wreath encircling the head (see illustration,
p. 178[f097a]).

[Illustration (f097a): Relief by Adding Shading Lines to Outline.]

The rich effect of clustered apples growing among their leaves could
hardly be suggested without the use of lines expressive of light and
shade, the interstices of the deepest shade running into solid black (p.
178[f097a]). In adding lines in this kind of way to give relief or extra
richness or force, the draughtsman is really designing a system of lines
upon his outline basis, which may have quite as decorative a quality as
the outline itself. At the same time nothing is more characteristic of
the artist than the way in which such lines are used, and of course the
choice of direction and arrangement of such lines will make all the
difference in the effect of the drawing.

                                                        [Diagonal Shading]

Where the object is to express the figure in broad masses of light and
shade, the use of a series of diagonal lines is an effective, and
probably the most ready and rapid, method when working with the pen (see
p. 179[f097b]). This system of expressing the broad surfaces of shade
was much used by the Italian masters of the Renaissance in their rapid
pen sketches and studies of figures, and a certain breadth and style is
given to their drawings owing in part to the simplicity of this linear
treatment.

[Illustration (f097b): Relief of Form by Diagonal Shading.]

                                                                [Emphasis]

No doubt the simpler the system of line adopted in giving relief to
figures the better, if the particular expression aimed at is
accomplished, and, as a general rule, we should endeavour to get the
necessary force and depth without the use of cross-line, or many
different directions of line in shading a figure: but, given any power
of draughtsmanship, the individuality of the artist is bound to come in,
and it is not likely, nor is it to be desired, that any two artists in
line should give exactly the same account of natural fact, or reproduce
the images in their minds in the same forms, any more than we should
expect two writers to express their ideas in the same terms.

The kind and degree of emphasis upon different parts, the selection of
moment or fact, would all naturally make considerable differences in the
treatment. The three sketches of the skirt dancer are given as instances
of the different effects and expression to be obtained in rendering the
same subject (p. 181[f098]).

[Illustration (f098): Different Method and Different Emphasis in
Relieving Form by Shading Lines.[A, B, C]]

In A the broad relief of the white dress against the tones of the floor
and background, and the darker note of the hair, are the facts chiefly
dwelt upon. In B the form of the figure is brought out in broad light
and shade and cast shadow, and the dress relieved by radiating folds. In
C quicker movement is given, the lines of the successive wave-shaped
folds radiating spirally from the shoulders being the chief means of
conveying this, while the head and arms are thrown into strong relief
against a dark background, the cast shadow being of a lighter tone.

The direction of line used in relieving forms, and expressing modelling
and details, must depend much upon individual taste and feeling as well
as knowledge of form. The element of beauty of design also comes in, and
the question between this and force or literalness--the difference
between a study or direct transcript from nature, and a design with a
purely ornamental aim, or a composition directed mainly to the
expression of a particular idea or emotion.

Such considerations will ultimately determine the choice and use of
line, the degree of relief and emphasis, for these and the direction of
the line itself are the syllables and the words which will convey the
purport of the work to the mind of the beholder.

Study of the masters of line--Dürer, Titian, Mantegna, Holbein--will
inform us as to its capacities and limitations. The limitations, too, of
method and material will be a powerful factor in the determination of
style in the use of line and in the economy of its use.

The bold firm line suitable to the facsimile woodcut, the broad and
simple treatment of line with solid black useful in the plank-cut line
block to be used with colour blocks, the comparatively free and
unconditioned pen-drawing for the surface-printed process block--all
these will finally give a certain character to our work beyond our own
idiosyncrasies in the use of the pen or the brush.

[Illustration (f099): Albert Dürer's Principle in the Treatment of
Drapery: From the Woodcut in the "Life of the Virgin" Series.]

Useful things may be learned by the way, such as Albert Dürer's
principle of giving substance to his figures and details, more
especially seen in his treatment of drapery, when the lines run into
solid black and express the deeper folds and give emphasis and solidity
to the figure (p. 183[f099]). The reproductions here given of sketches
of drapery by Filippino Lippi and Raphael also show the same principle.

[Illustration (f100): Albert Dürer: Pen-Drawing.]

A figure or object of any kind, seen in full light and shade, is
relieved at any of its edges either as dark against light, or as light
against dark, and we recognize it as a solid form in this way; the
boundaries of natural light and shade defining it, and projecting it
from the background upon the vision. There may be infinite modulations,
of course, between the light part, the half-tones, and the darkest
parts; but this broad principle governs all work representing light and
shade.

[Illustration (f101): Filippino Lippi: Study of Drapery.]

It is, in fact, _the principle of the relief of form_ represented upon a
plane surface.

[Illustration (f102): Raphael: Studies of Drapery.]

                                         [Relief by Light and Shade Alone]

If the draughtsman's object be to represent the _appearance_ of a figure
or any object in full natural light and shade with the pen or other
point, he could do so without using outline at all, but by simply
observing this principle and defining the boundaries of light on dark or
half-tone in their proper masses and relations. The pen sketch of the
man with the hoe (p. 188[f103a]) is intended to illustrate this method.

[Illustration (f103a): Relief by Means of Light and Shade Alone, in
Pen-drawing Without Outline.]

There is also the method of representing form in relief by means of
working with white line only upon a dark ground, the modelling and
planes of surface being entirely expressed in this way (as in A, p.
189[f103b]). This may be termed drawing by means of _light_, and may be
contrasted with the opposite method of working by means of black line
only on a light ground, or drawing by means of _shade_ (as in B, p.
189[f103b]).

[Illustration (f103b): Relief of Form: (A) By White Line Only on Dark
Ground, and (B) By Black Line Only on Light Ground.]

Yet another method, and one in which the effect of relief can be
obtained more readily and rapidly, perhaps, is by working on a
half-toned paper, drawing in the form with pencil, chalk, or brush,
blocking in the darker shadows and heightening the highest lights with
touches of white. These white touches, however, should be strictly
limited to the highest lights. This method is represented by the
half-tone blocks used in this book, those which were taken from drawings
made on brown paper and touched with white.

                                         [The Principle of the Photograph]

The definition of form by means of light is strictly the principle of
the photograph, which comprehends and illustrates its complementary of
relief by means of shade, and I think it is due to the influence of the
photograph that modern black-and-white artists have so often worked
on these principles. The drawings of Frederick Walker and Charles Keene
may be referred to as examples. I shall, however, hope to return to this
branch of the subject later.

                                       [Relief in Architectural Mouldings]

So far we have been considering the relief of form by means of line. We
now come to what may be termed the relief of form by actual form and
plane, or modelling in actual light and shade, as in architecture and
sculptors' and carvers' work. Then relief is gained by the contrast of
actually different planes, forms, surfaces, and textures. The simplest
illustrations of the principles of modelled relief are to be found in
architectural mouldings, by means of which buildings are relieved and
enriched, and important structural or functional parts are emphasized,
as in cornices and ribs of vaults, arches, and openings.

Place a concave moulding side by side with a convex one either
horizontally or vertically, and a certain pleasant effect of contrasting
light and shade is the result, reminding one of the recurring concave
and convex of the rolling waves of the sea (A, p. 191[f104]).

A series of flat planes of different widths and at different levels also
produces a pleasant kind of relief useful in a picture frame or the jamb
of a door (B).

All architectural mouldings might be said to be modifications or
combinations of the principles illustrated by these two.

Very different feeling may be expressed in mouldings, and if we compare
the two types, the classical and the Gothic, the comparatively broad and
simple effect of the former (C, D, E, F, G) contrasts with the
richness and variety and the stronger effect of light and shade,
produced by deep undercutting, in the latter (H, I, J, K).

[Illustration (f104): Relief in Architectural Mouldings.]

The Romans, however, produced rich and highly ornate effects in the use
of these types of mouldings, as they reappeared in the Corinthian order,
the ovolo cut into the egg and dart, with the Astralagus beneath, the
Cyma recta above the brackets of the cornice casting a bold shadow, and
both in the cornice and the hollow beneath the dentils enriched with
carving, as seen in the splendid fragment of the Forum of Nerva.

[Illustration (f105): Roman Treatment of Corinthian Order, Forum of
Nerva, Rome.]

When we pass to the more complex problems of figure modelling and
sculpture, it is but carrying on and developing the same principle of
the contrast of planes, of the relief of plane upon plane, of forms upon
one plane, to forms upon forms in many planes. From the contrast of bead
and hollow we come to consider the contrast between the rounded limb and
the sinuous folds of drapery; from the rhythm of the acanthus scroll we
turn to the less obvious but none the less existing rhythm of the
sculptural frieze.

Line, we may say, controls the modeller's and sculptor's composition,
but form and its treatment in light and shade give him his means of
ornament. The delicate contours of faces and limbs contrasted with the
spiral and radiating folds of drapery, or rich clusters of leaves and
fruits, the forms of animals and the wings of birds--these are his
decorative resources.

                                                        [Egyptian Reliefs]

The early stages of sculpture in relief may be seen in the monumental
work of ancient Egypt.

Simple incised work appears to have been the first stage, and the
forms afterwards slightly modelled or rounded at the edges into the
hollow of the sunk outline.

Large figures and tables of hieroglyphic inscription were thus cut upon
vast mural surfaces, and carried across the joints of the masonry,
without disturbing the flatness and repose of the wall surface (p.
195[f106]). The Egyptians, indeed, seem to have treated their walls more
as if they were books for record and statement, symbol and hieroglyphic.

[Illustration (f106): Egyptian System of Sculptured Relief: Thebes.]

Messrs. Perrot and Chipiez, in their "History of Ancient Art in Egypt,"
speak of three processes in the treatment of Egyptian reliefs (vol. ii.,
p. 284):

1. That followed by the Greeks, in which the figures are left standing
out from a smooth bed, sometimes slightly hollowed near the contours
(see illustration, p. 196[fig106]).

2. Where the figures are modelled in relief in a sunk hollow, from an
inch to one and a half inch deep.

3. Where the surface of the figures and the bed or field of relief are
kept on one level (see illustration, p. 196[f107]), the contours
indicated by hollow lines cut into the stone; very little modelling,
little more than silhouette, in which the outline is shown by a hollow
instead of by the stroke of a pencil or brush.

One would be inclined to reverse the order of these three processes, on
the supposition that No. 3 was the earliest process, and that it arose,
as I have conjectured, from the practice of representing forms by
incised lines only.

There is certainly a strong family likeness as to method between the
Egyptian reliefs and the Assyrian, the Persian, and the archaic Greek;
and there is a far greater difference in treatment between archaic Greek
relief sculpture and the work of the Phidian period than between the
archaic work of the three races named.

The strictly mural and decorative conditions which governed ancient
sculpture no doubt gave to Greek sculpture in its perfection a certain
dignity, simplicity, and restraint, and also accounted in a great
measure for that rhythmic control of invisible structural and ornamental
line which asserts itself in such works as the Pan-Athenaic frieze. It
was strictly slab sculpture, and became part of the surface of the wall.

[Illustration (f107): Greek Relief. Eleusis. Egyptian Relief. Denderah.]

                                                        [Gothic Sculpture]

The structural and ornamental feeling also asserts itself strongly in
Gothic sculpture, owing to its close association with architecture, as,
when it was not an integral part of the structure, it was always an
essential part of the expression of the building, and it was this which
controlled its treatment decoratively, in its scale and its system and
degree of relief.

In the porches of the Gallo-Roman churches of France of the twelfth
century, the figures occupying the place of shafts became columnar in
treatment, the sinuous formalized draperies wrapped around the elongated
figures, or falling in vertical folds, as in the figures in the western
door of Chartres Cathedral (p. 199[f108]). The lines of the design of
the sculptured tympanum were strictly related to the space, and the
degree and treatment of the relief clearly felt in regard to the
architectural effect (p. 201[f109]).

[Illustration (f108): Chartres Cathedral: Carving on the West Front.]

[Illustration (f109): Chartres Cathedral: Tympanum of the Central Door
of the West Front.]

                                                 [Architectural Influence]

In the sculptured tombs of the Middle Ages, with their recumbent figures
and heraldic enrichments, again, we see this architectonic sense
influencing the treatment of form and relief, as these monuments were
strictly architectural decorations, often incorporating its forms and
details, and often built into the structure of the church or cathedral
itself, as in the case of the recessed and canopied tombs of the
thirteenth and fourteenth centuries.

As sculptures became detached from the building and wall, and appeared
in full relief in the round, though still, as it were, carrying a
reminiscence of their origin with them in the shape of the moulded
pedestal, architectural control became less and less felt, statues in
consequence being less and less related to their surroundings. The
individual feeling of the sculptor or the traditions of his school and
training alone influenced his treatment, until we get the incidental and
dramatic or sentimental isolated figure or group of modern days.

                                                        [Medals and Coins]

It is noteworthy, however, that even in the smaller works of the
modeller, carver, or sculptor of the Middle Ages or the early
Renaissance, a sense of decorative fitness and structural sense is
always present. We see it in the carved ornaments of seats and
furniture, in the design and treatment of coins and seals and gems and
medals. These latter from the time of the ancient Greeks afford
beautiful examples of the decorative treatment of relief in strict
relation to the object and purpose. The skill and taste of the Greeks
seemed to have been largely inherited by the artists of the earlier
Italian Renaissance, such as Pisano, whose famous medal of the Malatesta
of Rimini affords a splendid instance not only of the treatment of the
portrait and subject on the reverse perfectly adapted to its method and
purpose, but also of the artistic use of lettering as a decorative
feature (see p. 203[f110]).

[Illustration (f110): Medals of the Lords of Mantua, Cesena, and
Ferrara, by Vittore Pisano of Verona (Middle of the Fifteenth Century).]

The treatment and relief of figures and heads upon the plane surfaces of
metals and coins, the composition controlled by the circular form, have
always been a fine test of both modelling and decorative skill and
taste. Breadth is given by a flatness in the treatment of successive
planes of low relief, which rise to their highest projection from the
ground, in the case of a head in profile, about its centre. The delicate
perception of the relation of the planes of surface is important, as
well as the decorative effect to be obtained by arrangement of the light
and shade masses and the contrast of textures, such as hair and the
folds of drapery, to the smooth contours of faces and figures, and the
rectangular forms of lettering.

In gems we see the use made of the concave ground, which gives an
effective relief to the figure design in convex upon it. Bolder
projection of prominent parts are here necessary in contrast to the
retiring planes, the work being on so small a scale, and also in view of
its seal-like character; for, of course, it is the method of producing
form by incision, and modelling by cutting and hollowing out, that gives
the peculiar character to gems and seals; and it is in forming human
figures that the building up of the form by a series of ovals, spoken of
in a previous chapter, becomes really of practical value: the method of
hollowing the stone or metal in cutting the gem or making a die and
the character of the tool leading naturally in that direction.

                                                 [Desiderio di Settignano]

Perhaps the most delicate and beautiful kind of sculptured or modelled
relief is to be found in the work of the Florentine school of the
fifteenth century, more especially that of Donatello and Desiderio di
Settignano, who seem indeed to have caught the feeling and spirit of the
best Greek period, with fresh inspiration and suggestion from nature and
the life around them, as well as an added charm of grace and sweetness.

It is difficult to imagine that marble carving in low relief can be
carried to greater perfection than it is in the well-known small relief
by Desiderio di Settignano of the "Madonna and Child," now in the
Italian Court of the South Kensington Museum. The delicate yet firmly
chiselled faces and hands, the smooth surfaces of the flesh, and the
folds of drapery, emerging from, or sinking into, the varied planes of
the ground, for refinement of feeling and treatment seem almost akin to
the art of the painter in the tenderness of their expression.


                               CHAPTER VIII

    Of the Expression of Relief in Line-drawing--Graphic Aim and
    Ornamental Aim--Superficial Appearance and Constructive
    Reality--Accidents and Essentials--Representation and Suggestion
    of Natural Form in Design--The Outward Vision and the Inner
    Vision.


I have already said that when we add lines or tints of shadow, local
colour or surface, to an outline drawing, we are seeking to express form
in a more complete way than can be done in outline alone. These added
lines or tints give what we call relief. That is their purpose and
function, whether by that added relief we wish to produce an ornamental
effect or simply to approach nearer to the full relief of nature, for of
course the degrees of relief are many.

                                                  [Relief in Line-Drawing]

What may be called the natural principle of relief--that system of light
and shade by which a figure or any solid object is perceived as such by
the eye--consists in each part of the form being thrown into more or
less contrast by appearing as dark on light upon its background, more
especially at its edges. A figure wholly dark, say in black drapery,
appearing against a light ground, might be supposed to be flat if no
cast shadow was seen; the same with the reverse--a light figure upon a
dark ground--except that in this latter case, unless the light was very
level and flat, a certain concentration of light upon the highest parts,
or indicating a modulation of shadow in interstices, might betray its
solidity (see p. 206[f111a]).

[Illustration (f111a): The Two Principles of Contrast in Black and
White.]

But if we place a figure so that the light falls from one side, we
perceive that it at once stands out in bold relief in broad planes of
light and shade, further emphasized by cast shadows (p. 207[f111b]).

[Illustration (f111b): Treatment of the Same Figure in Light and Shade.]

It would be possible to represent or to express a figure or object so
lighted by means of laying in the modulations and planes of shadow only,
or by means of adding the light only on a toned ground. In sketching in
black and white, it is a good plan to accustom oneself to complete as
one goes along, as far as may be, putting in outline and shadow
together; but this needs a power of direct drawing and a correctness of
eye only to be gained by continual practice. A slight preliminary basis
of light lines to indicate the position and proportions, and yet not
strong enough to need rubbing out, is also a good method for those who
do not feel certain enough for the absolutely direct method of drawing.

[Illustration (f112): Expression of Form by Light and Shade: (1) Light
and Shade Without Outline; (2) Light and Shade Enforced by Outline.]

Now in drawing, as I think I have pointed out before, no less than in
all art, there are two main governing principles of working which may be
distinguished.

     I. The graphic aim.
    II. The ornamental or decorative aim.

                                                         [The Graphic Aim]

The graphic aim--the endeavour to represent a form exactly as it
appears--a power always valuable to acquire whatever may be our ultimate
purpose, leaves the draughtsman great freedom in the choice and use
of line, or other means of obtaining relief, local tint, and tone.

In line-work the broad relief of the flat tones of shadow may be
expressed in lines approaching the straight, diagonally sloping from
right to left, or from left to right, as seems most natural to the
action of the hand.

The quality of our lines will depend upon the quality we are seeking to
express. We shall be led to vary them in seeking to express other
characteristics, such as textures and surfaces.

In drawing fur or feathers, for instance, we should naturally vary the
quality and direction of line, using broken lines and dots for the
former, and flowing smooth fine lines for the latter, while extra force
and relief would be gained by throwing them up upon solid black grounds.
Solid black, also, to represent local colour, or material such as
velvet, is often valuable as a contrast in black and white line-drawing,
giving a richness of effect not to be obtained in any other way (see No.
2, p. 213[f114]). Its value was appreciated by the early German and
Italian book-illustrators, and in our own time has been used almost to
excess by some of our younger designers, who have been largely
influenced by Hokusai and other Japanese artists, who are always skilful
in the use of solid blacks.

[Illustration (f113): Linear Expression of Features, Feathers and Fur:
Notes from Nature.]

In line-drawing a very useful principle to observe, to give solidity to
figures and objects, is to let one's lines--say of drapery or
shadow--run into solid blacks in the deepest interstices of the forms,
as when folds of drapery are wrapped about a figure, or in the deeper
folds themselves (No. 1, p. 213[f114]).

[Illustration (f114): Sketches to Illustrate (1) The Graphic and (2) The
Decorative Treatment of Draped Figures.]

                                                      [The Ornamental Aim]

I have spoken of the graphic and the ornamental aims as distinct, and so
they may for practical purposes be regarded; although in some cases it
is possible to combine a considerable amount of graphic force with
decorative effect, and even in purely graphic art there should always be
the controlling influence of the sense of composition which must be felt
throughout all forms of art.

For the simplest ornamental function, however, very little graphic
drawing is needed, over and above the very essential power of definition
by pure outline, and feeling for silhouette; but a sense for the relief
of masses upon a ground or field, and of the proportions and relations
of lines and masses or distribution of quantities, is essential. Now an
ornamental effect may be produced by the simple repetition of some form
defined in outline arranged so as to fall into a rhythmic series of
lines.

A series of birds upon a plan of this kind, for instance, would form a
frieze on simple bordering in abstract line alone, and might be quite
sufficient for some purposes. The same thing would be capable of more
elaborate treatment and different effect by relieving the birds upon a
darker ground, by defining the details of their forms more, or by
alternating them in black or white, or by adopting the simple principle
of counterchange (see p. 215[f115]).

[Illustration (f115): Decorative Treatment of Birds.]

Flowers or figures would be capable of the same simple and abstract
treatment; and almost any form in nature, reduced to its simplest
elements of recurring line and mass, and rhythmically disposed, would
give us distinct decorative motives.

                                                      [The Ornamental Aim]

It is quite open to the designer to select his lines and forms straight
from nature, and, bearing in mind the necessity for selection of the
best ornamental elements, for a certain simplification, and the
rhythmical treatment before mentioned, it is good to do so, as the work
is more likely to have a certain freshness than if some of the
well-known historic forms of ornament are used again. We may, however,
learn much from the ornamental use of these forms, and use similar forms
as the boundaries of the shape of our pattern units and masses.

It is good practice to take a typical shape such as the Persian
radiating flower or pine-apple, and use it as the plan for quite a
different structure in detail, taking some familiar English flower as
our motive. The same with the Indian and Persian palmette type. It is
also desirable, as before pointed out, to draw sprays within formal
boundaries for ornamental use. By such methods we may not only learn to
appreciate the ornamental value of such forms, but by such adaptation
and re-combination produce new varieties of ornament (see p. 217[f116]).

[Illustration (f116): Floral Designs Upon Typical Inclosing Shapes of
Indian and Persian Ornament.]

We may perceive how distinct are the two aims as between simple graphic
drawing, or delineation, and what we call design, or conscious
arrangements of line or form. While planes of relief, varied form and
surface, values of light and shade, and accidental characteristics are
rather the object with the graphic draughtsman, typical form and
structure, and recurring line and mass, are sought for by the
ornamentist. Both series of facts, or qualities, or characteristics, are
in nature.

                                                               [Selection]

Judicious selection, however, is the test of artistic treatment;
selection, that is, with a view to the aim and scope of the work. The
truth of superficial appearance or accidental aspect is _one_ sort of
truth: the truth of the actual constructive characteristics--be they of
figure, flower, or landscape--is _another_. Both belong to the thing we
see--to the object we are drawing; but we shall dwell upon one truth or
set of truths rather than the other, in accordance with our particular
artistic aim, though, whatever this may be, and in whatever direction it
may lead us, we shall find that selection of some sort will be
necessary.

In making studies, however pure and simple, the object of which is to
discover facts and to learn mastery of form, our aim should be to get as
much truth as we can, truth of structure as well as of aspect. But these
(as far as we can make them) exhaustive studies should be accompanied or
followed by analytical studies made from different points of view and
for different purposes.

Studies, for instance, made with a view to arrangements of _line_
only--to get the characteristic and beautiful lines of a figure, a
momentary attitude, the lines of a flower, or a landscape: studies with
a view, solely, to the understanding of structure and form, or again,
with the object of seizing the broad relations of light and shade, or
tone and colour--all are necessary to a complete artistic education of
the eye.

                                                [Accidents and Essentials]

If we are drawn as students rather towards the picturesque and graphic
side of art, we shall probably look for accidents of line and form
more than what I should call the essentials, or _typical_ line and form,
which are the most valuable to the decorative designer.

In both directions some compact or compromise with nature is necessary
in any really artistic re-presentation.

The painter and the sculptor often seek as _complete representation_ as
possible, and what may be called complete representation is within the
range of their resources. Yet unless some individual choice or feeling
impresses the work of either kind it is not a _re-presentation_, but
becomes an _imitation_, and therefore inartistic.

The decorative designer and ornamentist seek to _suggest_ rather than to
_re-present_, though the decorator's suggestion of natural form, taking
only enough to suit or express the particular ornamental purpose, must
be considered also as a re-presentation. How much, or how little, he
will take of actual nature must depend largely upon his resources, his
object, and the limitations of his material--the conditions of his work
in short; but his range may be as wide as from the flat silhouetted
forms of stencils or simple inlays to the highly-wrought mural painting.

Design motive, individual conception and sentiment, apart from material,
must, of course, always affect the question of the choice and degree of
representation of nature. The painter will sometimes feel that he only
wants to suggest forms, such as figures or buildings, half veiled in
light and atmosphere, colours and forms in twilight, or half lost in
luminous depths of shadow.

[Illustration (f117a): Dancing Figure with the Governing Lines of the
Movement.]

[Illustration (f117b): Lines of Floral Growth and Structure: Lily and
Rose.]

                                     [The Outward Vision and Inner Vision]

The decorative designer will sometimes want to emphasize forms with the
utmost force and realism at his command, as in some crisp bit of carving
or emphatic pattern, to give point and relief in his scheme of
quantities.

There is no hard-and-fast rule in art, only general principles,
constantly varied in practice, from which all principles spring, and
into which, if vital, they ought to be capable of being again resolved.

But a design once started upon some principle--some particular motive of
line or form--then, in following this out, it will seem to develop
almost a life or law of growth of its own, which as a matter of logical
necessity will demand a particular treatment--a certain natural
consistency or harmony--from its main features down to the smallest
detail as a necessity of its existence.

We might further differentiate art as, on the one hand, the image of the
_outward vision_, and, on the other, as the outcome or image of the
_inner vision_.

The first kind would include all portraiture, by which I mean faithful
portrayal or transcript whether of animate or inanimate nature; while
the second would include all imaginative conceptions, decorative
designs, and pattern inventions.

The outward vision obviously relies upon what the eye perceives in
nature. Its virtue consists in the faithfulness and truth of its graphic
record, in the penetrating force of observation of fact, and the
representative power by which they are reproduced on paper or canvas,
clay or marble.

[Illustration (f118a): 1 and 2, Mountain and Crag Sculpture: Coast
Lines, Gulf of Nauplia.]

[Illustration (f118b): Lines of Movement in Water: Shallow Stream Over
Sand.]

The image of the inner vision is also a record, but of a different order
of fact. It may be often of unconscious impressions and memories which
are retained and recur with all or more than the vividness of
actuality--the tangible forms of external nature calling up answering,
but not identical, images in the mind, like reflections in a mirror or
in still water, which are similar but never the same as the objects they
reflect.

But the inner vision is not bound by the appearances of the particular
moment. It is the record of the sum of many moments, and retains the
typical impress of multitudinous and successive impressions--like the
composite photograph, where faces may be printed one over another until
the result is a more typical image than any individual one taken
separately.

The inner vision sees the results of time rather than the impressions of
the moment. It sees _space_ rather than landscape: race rather than men:
spirits rather than mortals: types rather than individuals.

The inner vision hangs the mind's house with a mysterious tapestry of
figurative thoughts, a rich and fantastic imagery, a world where the
elements are personified, where every tree has its dryad, and where the
wings of the winds actually brush the cheek.

The inner vision re-creates rather than represents, and its virtue
consists in the vividness and beauty with which, in the language of
line, form, and colour, these visions of the mind are recorded and
presented to the outward eye.

There is often fusion here again between two different tendencies,
habits of mind, or ways of regarding things. In all art the mind must
work through the eye, whether its force appears in closeness of
observation or in vivid imaginings. The very vividness of realization
even of the most faithful portraiture is a testimony to mental powers.

The difference lies really in the _focus_ of the mental force; and, in
any case, the language of line and form we use will neither be forcible
or convincing, neither faithful to natural fact nor true to the
imagination, without close and constant study of external form and of
its structure as well as its aspect.


                                CHAPTER IX

    Of the Adaptation of Line and Form in Design, in various
    materials and methods--Mural Decoration--Fresco-work of the
    Italian Painters--Modern Mural Work--Mural Spacing and pattern
    Plans--Scale--The Skirting--The Dado--Field of the Wall--The
    Frieze--Panelling--Tapestry--Textile Design--Persian Carpets--
    Effect of Texture on Colour--Prints--Wall-paper--Stained Glass.


We have been considering hitherto the choice and use of line and form,
and various methods of their representation in drawing, both from the
point of view of the graphic draughtsman and that of the ornamental
designer.

We now come to consider the subject solely from the latter standpoint
(the point of view of ornamental design); and it will be useful to
endeavour to trace the principles governing the selection of form and
use of line as influenced by some of the different methods and
conditions of craftsmanship, and as adapted to various decorative
purposes.

                                                        [Mural Decoration]

The most important branch of decorative art may be said to be mural
decoration, allied as it is with the fundamental constructive art of
all--architecture, from which it obtains its determining conditions and
natural limitations.

Its history in the past is one of splendour and dignity, and its record
includes some of the finest art ever produced. The ancient Asiatic
nations were well aware of its value not only as decoration but as a
record.

[Illustration (f119): Giotto: "Chastity" (Lower Church, Assisi).]

The palace and temple and tomb-walls of ancient Egypt, Persia, and
Assyria vividly illustrate the life and ideas of those peoples, while
they conform to mural conditions. The painted council halls and churches
of the Middle Ages fulfil the same purpose in a different spirit; but
mural decoration in its richest, most imaginative and complete form was
developed in Italy, from the time of Giotto, whose famous works at the
Arena Chapel at Padua and Assisi are well known, to the time of Michael
Angelo, who in the sublime ceiling of the Sistine Chapel seemed to touch
the extreme limits of mural work, and in fact might be said to have
almost _defied_ them, painting mouldings in relief and in perspective
to form the framework of pictures where figures on different scales are
used. In the Sistine Chapel the series of earlier frescoes on the lower
wall by Botticelli, Lorenzo di Credi, Ghirlandajo, Pinturicchio, and
other Florentine painters of the fifteenth century are really more
strictly mural in feeling, and safer as guides in general treatment,
than the work of the great master himself. They have much of the repose
and richness as well as the quiet decorative effect of tapestry.

                                         [Fresco-Work of Italian Painters]

The frescoes in the Palazzo Publico at Siena, Pinturicchio's work in the
Piccolomini Chapel and the Appartimenti Borgia, the Campo Santo at Pisa
and the Riccardi Chapel of Benozzo Gozzoli at Florence, may be mentioned
as among the gems of mural painting.

                                                       [Modern Mural Work]

We have but little important mural painting in this country. Doubtless,
from various traces discovered under Puritan whitewash, the walls of our
mediæval churches were painted as frequently as in continental
countries, but so completely did artistic tradition and religious
sentiment change after the Reformation that the opportunities have been
few and the encouragement less for mural painting. An attempt to revive
fresco-painting was made in our Houses of Parliament, and various scenes
from our national history have been rendered with varying degrees of
merit; but they have chiefly demonstrated the need of continuous
practice in such work on the part of our painters and the absence of a
true decorative instinct.

[Illustration (f120): Pinturicchio: Mural Painting (Piccolomini Chapel,
Siena).]

It is to the honour of Manchester that her Town Hall contains one of
the most important and interesting pieces of mural painting by one of
the most original of modern English artists--Ford Madox Brown--a work
conceived in the true spirit of mural work, being a record of local
history, as well as a decoration, while distinctly modern in sentiment
and showing strong dramatic feeling, as well as historical knowledge.

The chapel on which Mr. F. J. Shields is engaged in London will probably
be unique in its way as a complete piece of mural decoration by an
English artist of singular individuality, sincerity, and power, as well
as decorative ability.

But unfortunately opportunities for important mural decoration of this
kind are very rare in England. The art is not popularized: we have no
school of trained mural designers, and we have no public really
interested. Our commercial system and system of house tenure are against
it. Our only chance is in public buildings, which indeed have always
been its best field. Yet we neglect, I think, a most important
educational influence. The painted churches and public halls of the
Middle Ages filled in a great measure the place of public libraries. A
painted history, a portrait, a dramatic or romantic incident told in the
vivid language of line, form, and colour, is stamped upon the memory
never to be forgotten. It would be possible, I think, to impart a
tolerably exact knowledge of the sequence of history, of the conditions
of life at different epochs, of great men and their work, from a
well-imagined series of mural paintings, without the aid of books; and
in this direction, perhaps, our school walls would present an
appropriate field.

Watts, of St. Paul's Episcopal Church, was the first president of
this, the _first_ Young Men's Christian Association of the United States.
It is a strange coincidence, easily understood by the Christian, that
on the twenty-fifth of November, one month previous, without any knowledge
on the part of Boston, the first Young Men's Christian Association
of America had been organized at Montreal, in Canada.

The constitution adopted was based upon that of the parent Association,
and provided that, while any young man could be a member and enjoy
all other privileges of the Association, only members of evangelical
churches could hold office or vote.

                                         The reason for this was clear and right.

Those who originated the parent Association, and those who formed
this, believed in the doctrines of the Universal Church of Christ--in
the loss of the soul and its redemption only by the blood of the Lord
Jesus Christ; nor could they be satisfied with any work for young men
which did not at least aim at conversion.

The chairman of the international committee thus speaks, in February last:
"When any Association sinks the religious element and the religious
object which it professes to hold high beneath secular agencies and powers,
it ceases to deserve the name of Young Men's Christian Association.

It belongs then to a class of societies of which we have many, and in
which, as Christian young men looking to the conversion of our fellows
as the supreme object, we have no special or peculiar interest." The
tenth annual report thus speaks upon this point:
"The tie which binds us together is a common faith.

We hold this faith most dearly, and believe it to be essential, and
therefore worthy to be protected by every means.

We cannot be expected, surely, to do so suicidal a thing as to admit to
the right of equal voice in the government of our society those who
are directly opposed to the very essence of our being."
[Illustration: NEW BUILDING.]
The _benefits_ of the Association are for all--its _management_ alone
is restricted.

There are now nearly twenty-five hundred Associations in the world,
all upon what is called the evangelical basis, and in the United States
and British Provinces only Associations upon this basis have
membership or representation in the International Organization,
formulated in Paris, in 1855, thus:--
"The Young Men's Christian Associations seek to unite those young men
who, regarding Jesus Christ as their God and Saviour according to
the Holy Scriptures, desire to be his disciples in their doctrine
and in their life, and to associate their efforts for the extension
of his kingdom among young men."

It is a fact that whenever the attempt has been made, and it often has,
in any Association, to give an equal right in the management to those
who are not of our faith, that Association has either soon adopted
our basis or ceased to exist.

The spiritual benefit of its members having thus always been its
ultimate end, the London Association, during its early years, did no
other work; and no sooner was the Boston Association formed than it, too,
took it up. For a while, it carried on a Bible-class and a weekly
prayer-meeting; but in May, 1857, a daily prayer-meeting was established,
and has been continued almost without intermission to the present time.
The visitation of sick members, the distribution of tracts, and the
conduct of general religious meetings, have been the regular work
of special committees.

These last have been held when and where they seemed to be called for: on
the Common, at the wharves, on board the ships in the harbor, and,
especially during our Civil War, on board the receiving-ship Ohio;
in the theatres, at Tremont Temple, and at the Meionaon, where, at
various times, for weeks, a noon meeting has been held for business
men.

                                                                   The Association has also been the rallying-point and chief
instrumentality in great revival movements, under the direction of
the churches, and especially in that under Mr.

He might want to
emphasize a long, low room by horizontal lines, or to accentuate a lofty
one by verticals.

[Illustration (f122): Diagram to Show (1) How the Apparent Depth of a
Space Is Increased by the Use of Vertical Lines, and (2) How the
Apparent Width Is Increased by the Use of Horizontal Lines.]

By the judicious use of line and scale in design, the designer holds a
certain power of transformation in his hands, not to speak of the
transforming effect of colour of different keys and tones, the apparent
contraction or expansion of surfaces by patterns of different character
and scale.

It would obviously not do to regard any wall merely as so much expanse
of surface available for sketching unrelated groups and figures upon, as
they might be jotted down in a sketch-book, and to offer it as
decoration. In an interior thus treated, we should lose all sense of
repose, dignity, and proportion.

Use and custom, which fix and determine so many things in social life
without written laws, have also prescribed certain divisions of the
wall, which, in regard to the exigencies of life and habit and modern
conditions generally, seem natural enough.

                                                            [The Skirting]

The lower parts of the walls of most modern dwellings being generally
occupied by furniture placed against them, and liable to be soiled or
injured, it would be out of place to put important and elaborate
ornament or figure designs extending to the skirting. The wooden
skirting, of about nine inches or a foot in depth, which is placed along
the foot of the wall in our modern rooms, is the armour-plating to
protect the plaster, which otherwise might be chipped and litter the
floor. It is perhaps the last relic of the more substantial and
extensive wood panelling and wainscotting which, up to the latter part
of the last century, covered the lower walls of the more comfortable
houses, and has been revived in our own day. The decorator may use
panelling, or wainscotting, or a simple chair-rail above plain painting,
wall-paper, dado, or stencilling, or a dado of matting, as methods of
covering, and at the same time decorating, the lower walls of rooms.

The use of the dado of a darker colour and of wainscot is, no doubt, due
to considerations of wear and tear, and so, like the origin of much
ornamental art, may be traced to actual use and constructive necessity.
When the wood-work of a room--the doors and window frames--is of the
same colour and character as the dado, a certain agreeable unity is
preserved, and it forms a useful plain framing to set off the patterned
parts of the wall. This wainscot or dado framing with the wood-work
should be as to colour arranged to suit the general scheme adopted.
Where paint is used, white for the wood-work usually has the best
effect.

                                                       [Field of the Wall]

The largest space of wall occurs above the chair-rail, or dado, and,
according to modern habits and usage, portable property in the shape of
framed pictures, etc., is usually placed here along the eye-line, so
that any decoration on this--the main field of the wall--is regarded as
subsidiary to what is placed upon it; but, of course, pictures can be
used as the central points of a decorative scheme. On the upper part of
a wall, below the plaster cornice, the mural designer has the chance of
putting a frieze, and a frieze usually gives the effect of additional
height to a room, besides enriching the wall.

[Illustration (f123): Decorative Spacing of the Wall: Sketches (to
1/2-in. Scale) to Show Different Treatment and Proportions.]

An effective treatment of a large room, and one which is more reposeful
than cutting up the wall into these portions, as in dado, field, and
frieze, is to carry up wood panelling to the frieze, and let this (the
frieze) be the important decorative feature.

Supposing the room was twelve feet high, one could afford to have eight
feet of panelling, and then a frieze of four feet deep. In this case one
would look for an interesting painted frieze of figures--some legend or
story to run along the four sides of the room, and in such a case it
might be marked with considerable pictorial freedom.

More formal figure design or ornamental work in coloured plaster-work,
stucco, and gesso could also be appropriately used in such a position,
as also on the ceiling.

Now as regards choice of line and form in their relation to the
decoration of such mural spaces. Taking the lower wall, dado, or
panelling, one reason why panelling has so agreeable an effect is, I
think, that the series of vertical and horizontal lines seem to express
the proportions, while they emphasize the flatness and repose of the
wall, and when used beneath a painted frieze they lead the eye upwards,
forming a quiet framing of rectangular lines below to the ornate and
varied design of the frieze. Where we are limited to decorating a wall
by means of plain painting, stencils, or wall-paper, this idea of
reposeful constructive lines and forms on the lower wall should still
dominate upon the field. Subject to our repeating plan we may be freer
both in line and form, using free scrolls, branch-work, fruit, and
flower masses at pleasure, because the space is more extended, and we
shall feel the necessity in a repeating pattern of spreading adequately
over it; but such designs, however fine in detail, should be constructed
upon a more or less geometric base or plan. We are, as regards the main
field of the wall, still unavoidably, though not disadvantageously,
influenced by the tradition of the textile hanging or arras tapestry, no
doubt; and certainly there is no more rich and comfortable lining for
living rooms than tapestry, or, at the same time, more reposeful and
decoratively satisfying. But, of course, where we can afford arras
tapestry (such as the superb work of William Morris and his weavers), we
ought not to allow anything to compete with it upon the same wall. It is
sufficient in itself.

[Illustration (f128): Arras Tapestry: Diagrams to Show the Principle of
Working and Surface Effect: (1) Vertical Position of Warp as Worked in
the Loom and Relief Effect of the Wefts; (2) Enlarged Section of Warp as
Hung (Horizontal); (3) Single Threads of Warp and Weft; (4) Warp and
Weft as in the Loom (Vertical).]

                                                                [Tapestry]

Of what splendour of colour and wealth of decorative and symbolical
invention tapestry was capable in the past may be seen in magnificent
Burgundian specimens of the fifteenth century, now in the South
Kensington Museum.

Tapestry hangings of a repeating pattern and quiet colour could be used
appropriately beneath painted upper walls, or a frieze, as no doubt
frequently was the custom in great houses in the Middle Ages.

                                                     [Appartimenti Borgia]

In the Appartimenti Borgia in the Vatican, for instance, which consists
of lofty vaulted rooms with frescoes by Pinturicchio upon the upper
walls between the spans of the vaulting, and upon the vaulting itself,
we may see, about eleven feet from the floor, along the moulding, the
hooks left for the tapestry hangings, which completed the decoration of
the room. The lower walls are now largely occupied by book-shelves; but
books themselves may form a pleasant background, as one may often
observe in libraries, especially when the bindings are rich and good in
tone: and here, too, we get our verticals and horizontals again.

[Illustration (f125): Pinturicchio: Fresco in the Appartimenti Borgia.]

So long as the feeling for the repose and flatness of the wall surface
is preserved, there are no special limitations in the choice of form. It
becomes far more a matter of _treatment of form and subject_ in
perfectly appropriate mural design. There is one principle, however,
which seems to hold good in the treatment of important figure subjects
to occupy the main wall surfaces as panels: while pictorial realization
of a kind may be carried quite far, it is desirable to avoid large
masses of light sky, or to attempt much in the way of atmospheric
effect. It is well to keep the horizon high, and, if sky is shown, to
break it with architecture and trees.

Still more important is it to observe this in tapestry. It is very
noticeable how tapestry design declined after the fifteenth century or
early years of the sixteenth, when perspective and pictorial planes were
introduced, and sky effects to emulate painting, and thus the peculiarly
mural feeling was lost, with its peculiar beauty, richness, and repose.

[Illustration (f124): Figure of Laura, from the Burgundian Tapestries:
The Triumphs of Petrarch (South Kensington Museum).]

In the translation into tapestry even of so tapestry-like a picture as
that of Botticelli's "Primavera," it is noteworthy how Mr. Morris has
felt the necessity of reducing the different planes, and the chiaroscuro
of the painting, by more leafy and floral detail; making it, in short,
more of a pattern than a picture.

                                                              [The Frieze]

A frieze is susceptible of a much more open, lighter, and freer
treatment than a field. A frieze is one of the mural decorator's
principal means of giving lightness and relief to his wall. In purely
floral and ornamental design the field of close pattern, formal diaper,
or sprigs at regular intervals may be appropriately relieved by bolder
lines and masses, and a more open treatment in the frieze. The frieze,
too, affords a means of contrast in line to the line system of the field
of the wall, its horizontal expression usefully opposing the verticals
or diagonals of the wall pattern below. The frieze may be regarded as a
horizontal border, and in border designs the principle of transposition
of the relation of pattern to ground is a useful one to bear in mind, as
leading always to an effective result. I mean, supposing our field shows
a pattern mainly of light upon dark, the frieze might be on the reverse
plan, a dark pattern on a light ground.

And whereas, as I have said, one would exclude wide light spaces from
our mural field, in the frieze one might effectively show a light sky
ground throughout, and arrange a figure or floral design upon that.

The principle governing the treatment of main and lower wall spaces or
fields, which teaches the designer to preserve the repose of the
surface, may be said to rule also in all textile design, and textile
design has, as we have seen in the form of tapestry, and hangings of all
kinds, a very close association with mural decoration.

                                                          [Textile Design]

Any textile may be considered, from the designer's point of view, as
presenting so much _surface_ for pattern, whether that surface is hung
upon a wall, or curtains a door or a window, or is spread in the form of
carpets or rugs upon floors, or over the cushions of furniture, or
adapts itself to the variety of curve surface and movement of the human
form in dress materials and costume. Textile beauty is beauty of
material and surface, and unless the pattern or design upon it or woven
with it enhances that beauty of material and surface, and becomes a part
of the expression of that material and surface, it is better without
pattern.

[Illustration (f126): Portion of Detail of the Holy Carpet of the Mosque
of Ardebil: Persian, Sixteenth Century.]

To place informal shaded flowers and leaves upon a carpet, for instance,
where the warp is very emphatic, and the process of weaving necessitates
a stepped or rectangularly broken outline, is to mistake appropriate
decorative effect, capacity of material, and position in regard to the
eye. We cannot get away, in a carpet, from the idea of a flat field
starred with more or less formal flowers, and colour arrangements which
owe their richness and beauty, not to the relief of shading, but to the
heraldic principle of relieving one tint or colour upon another. The
rich inlay of colour which a Persian or any Eastern carpet presents is
owing to its being designed upon this principle; and in Persian work
that peculiarly rich effect of colour, apart from fine material, is
owing to the principle of the use of outlines of different colours
defining and relieving the different forms in the pattern upon different
grounds. The rectangular influence arising from the technical conditions
of the work gives a definite textile character to the design which is
very agreeable; besides, as a question of line and form, in a carpet or
rug which is rectangular in shape and laid usually upon rectangular
floors, the squareness of form harmonizes with the conditions and
surroundings of the work in use. The Persian designer, indeed, appears
to be so impressed with this feeling, that he uses a succession of
borders around the central field of his carpet or rug, still further
emphasizing the rectangularity; while he avoids the too rigid effect of
a series of straight lines which the crossing of the threads of the weft
at right angles to the warp might cause, by changing the widths of his
subsidiary borders and breaking them with a constant variety of small
patterns, and inserting narrow white lines between the black lines of
the border.

[Illustration (f127): Sketch to Illustrate Treatment of Borders in a
Persian Rug.]

                                             [Effect of Texture on Colour]

In tapestry the effect of the emphatic warp worked vertically in the
loom, but hung horizontally, has a very important influence upon the
effect. If we took a piece of paper coloured with a flat even tint, and
folded it in ridges, the quality of the tint would be at once changed,
and so in tapestry the passing of the wool of the wefts, which form the
pattern or picture, over the strong lines of the warp--which are broad
enough to take the outlines of the cartoon upon them--produces that soft
and varied play of colour--really colour in light and shade--which, over
and above the actual dyes and artistic selection of tints, gives the
peculiar charm and effect in tapestry.

This sheen and variety are more or less evident in all textiles, and a
good textile pattern only adds to the variety and richness of the
surface. The different thicknesses or planes of surface and the
difference of their texture caused by the different wefts being brought
to the surface of the cloth or silk (from the simplest contrast of
line presented by the simplest arrangements of warp and weft, to the
complexities of many-coloured silk stuffs and brocade) alone give a
value to the surface pattern.

In cut velvet the same principle of contrast of surface is emphasized
still further, the rich deep nap of the less raised parts contrasting
pleasantly with the mat effect of the ground.

In designs for such material one should aim at boldly blocked-out
patterns in silhouette--bold leaf and fruit forms say--designed on the
principle of the stencil.

                                                                  [Prints]

With prints the range is of course freer, the material itself suggesting
something lighter and more temporary. It seems highly probable that
printed cotton was originally a substitute for embroidered linen or more
sumptuous materials. There are certainly instances of very similar
patterns in Indian and Persian work in silk embroidery, and also in
printed cotton. In some cases the print is partly embroidered, which
seems to mark a transitional stage, and recalls the lingering use of
illumination in the early days of the printing press, in another
department of art.

Anything that will repeat as a pattern in what can be produced by line,
dot, and tints of colour, and engraved upon wood-blocks or copper
rollers, can be printed of course; and, as is generally the case with an
art which has no very obvious technical limitations, it is liable to be
caught by the imitative spirit, and cheap and rapid production and
demand for novelties (so-called) generally end in loss of taste and
deterioration of quality, especially in design. From the artistic point
of view we can only correct this by bearing in mind similar
considerations to those which hold good as general principles and guides
in designing for textiles generally, having regard to the object,
purpose, and position--to the ultimate use of the material, and
differentiating our designs, as in the case of other textile design
accordingly.

Thus in the matter of plan and direction of line and character of form
we shall at once find natural distinctions and divisions, as our design
is for hanging, or spreading horizontally, or wearing; and these
different functions will also determine scale and choice and treatment
of form and colour.

There is no doubt that with patterns printed more range may be allowed
than with patterns to be woven, where line and form are both controlled
by the necessities of being reproduced by so many points to the inch. At
the same time the object of all design and pattern work being the
greatest beauty compatible with the material and conditions, one should
seek, not such effects as merely test the capacity or ingenuity of the
machine, but rather such as appear to be most decoratively appropriate
and effective.

There appears to be no _mechanical_ reason why cotton should not be
printed all over with landscapes and graphic sketches, and people clothe
themselves with them as with Christmas numbers, or turn their couches,
chairs, and curtains into scrap albums, but there is every reason _on
the score of taste_ why these things should not be done.

[Illustration (f129): (1) Contrasting Surfaces of Warp and Weft in
Woven Silk Hanging; (2) Stencil Principle.]

With any textile, as I have said, we are as designers dealing with
surface. It is surface ornament that is wanted also in printed cotton.
Now good line and form and pure tints have the best effect, because they
do not break the surface into holes, and give a ragged or tumbled
appearance, which accidental bunches of darkly-shaded flowers in high
relief undoubtedly do. If small rich detail and variety are wanted, we
should seek it in the inventive spirit of the Persian and Indian, and
break our solid colours with mordants or arabesques in colour of
delicate subsidiary pattern instead of using coarse planes of light and
shadow, or showing up ragged and unrelated forms upon violent grounds.

[Illustration (f130): Indian Printed Cotton Cover: South Kensington
Museum.]

The true idea of a print pattern is of something gay and fanciful:
bright and fresh in colour, and clear in line and form: a certain
quaintness is allowable, and in purely floral designs there is room for
a considerable degree of what might be called naturalism, so far as good
line-drawing and understanding of flower form goes, emphasis of colour
being sought by means of _planes of colour_, rather than by planes of
shadow.

I had intended to touch upon other provinces of design, but I have taken
up so much space with those I have been discussing already that I can
only now briefly allude to these.

                                                              [Wall-Paper]

Of wall-paper, which may be regarded in the light of more or less of a
substitute for mural painting, and also textile wall-hangings, much the
same general principles and many of the same remarks apply as have been
already used in regard to mural decoration. The designer has much
freedom as to motive, and his ingenuity is only bounded by or
concentrated in a square of twenty-one inches. If he has succeeded in
making an agreeable pattern which will repeat not too obviously over an
indefinite space, to form a not obtrusive background, and which can be
printed and sold to the ordinary citizen, he is supposed to have
satisfied the conditions.

But he may be induced to go further and attempt the design of a complete
decoration as far as dado, field, frieze, and ceiling go; and this would
involve all the thought necessary to the mural painter, narrowed down to
the exigencies of mechanical repeat.

Allied to the wall is the window, and in glazing and the art of the
glass-painter we have another very distinct and beautiful sphere of line
design. In plain leading the same law of covering vertical surface holds
good as to selection of plan and system of line: almost any simple
geometric net is appropriate, if not too complex or small in form to
hold glass or to permit lead to follow its lines. Leaded panels of
roundels (or "bull's eyes") of plain glass have a good effect in
casements where a sparkle of light rather than outward view is sought
for.

                                                           [Stained Glass]

When we come to designing for stained glass we should still bear in mind
the fundamental net of lead lines which forms the basis of our pattern,
or glass picture, as it were: and the designer's object should be to
make it good as an arrangement of line independently of the colour,
while practical to the glazier.

[Illustration (f131): (1) Stained Glass Treatment: Inclosure of Form and
Colour by Lead Lines; (2) Sections.]

Although lead is very pliable, too much must not be expected of it in
the way of small depressions and angles: the boundary lines of the
figures, which should be the boldest of all, should be kept as simple as
possible, not only on this account, but because complex outlines cannot
well be cut in glass. A head, for instance, is inclosed in sweeping
line, and the profile defined within the lead line by means of painting.
A hand would be defined on the same principle. Each different colour
demands a different inclosure of lead, although in the choice of glass
much variation of tint can be obtained, as in the case of pot metal
running from thin to thick glass, which intensifies the colour, and many
kinds of what is called flashed. Yet to the designer, from the point of
view of line, glass design is a kind of translucent mosaic, in which the
primal technical necessity of the leading which holds the glory of the
coloured light together, really enhances its splendour, and in affording
opportunities for decoration and expressive linear composition imparts
to the whole work its particular character and beauty.

This after all is the principle to cling to in all designing, to adapt
our designs to the particular distinctive character and beauty of the
material for which they are destined, to endeavour to think them out in
those materials, and not only on paper. Whatever the work may
be--carving, inlays, modelling, mosaic, textiles--through the whole
range of surface decoration, we should think out our designs, not only
in relation to the limitations of their material, but also in their
relation to each other, to their effect in actual use, and even to their
possible use in association together, which, of course, is of paramount
importance in designing a complete room or any comprehensive piece of
decoration.

And when we leave plane surfaces and seek to invent appropriate, that is
to say, _expressive_ ornament allied to concave and convex surfaces, to
the varied forms of pottery for instance, metal-work, and glass vessels,
furniture, and accessories of all kinds, we shall find the same laws and
principles hold good which should guide us in all design--to adapt
design to the characteristics and conditions of the material, to its
structural capacity, its use and purpose, as well as to use or invention
in line, both as a controlling plan or base of ornament, as well as a
means of the association and expression of form.


                                CHAPTER X

    Of the Expression and Relief of Line and Form by _Colour_--Effect
    of same Colour upon different Grounds--Radiation of Colour--White
    Outline to clear Colours--Quality of Tints relieved upon other
    Tints--Complementaries--Harmony--The Colour Sense--Colour
    Proportions--Importance of Pure Tints--Tones and Planes--The Tone
    of Time--Pattern and Picture--A Pattern not necessarily a Picture,
    but a Picture in principle a Pattern--Chiaroscuro--Examples of
    Pattern-work and Picture-work--Picture-patterns and Pattern-pictures.


Perhaps the most striking means of the expression of relief of line and
form, certainly the most attractive, is by colour. By colour we obtain
the most complete and beautiful means of expression in art.

                                       [Relief of Line and Form by Colour]

Our earliest ideas of form are probably derived through the different
colours of objects around us, by which they are thrown into relief upon
the background, or against other objects; and, as I mentioned in the
first chapter, we reach outline by observing the edges of different
masses relieved as dark or light upon light or dark grounds, so now, in
my last, we come again to the consideration of the definition of line
and form by colour, and their relief and expression upon different
planes or fields of colour.

There is first the colour of the object itself--the local colour--and
then the colour of the ground upon which it is relieved, both of which
in their action and reaction upon each other will greatly affect the
value of the local colour and the degree of relief of the form upon it.

One of the best and simplest ways to ascertain the real value of a
colour and its effect upon different grounds or fields is to take a
flower--say a red poppy, and place it against a white paper ground,
blocking in the local colour as relieved upon white, as near as may be
to its full strength, with a brush, and defining the form as we go
along. Then try the same flower upon grounds of different tints--green,
blue, yellow--and it will be at once perceived what a different value
and expression the same form in the same colour has upon different
tinted grounds. A scarlet poppy would appear clearest and darkest upon
white; it would show a tendency upon a blue ground to blend or blur at
its edges, and also on yellow and green to a less extent.

[Illustration (f132): Sketch to Show Effect of the Same Colour and Form
upon Different Coloured Grounds.]

It is this tendency to lose the edges of forms owing to the radiation of
colours, and to mingle with the colour of the background, which makes a
strong outline so constantly a necessity in decorative work. One may use
a black on a white, a brown, or a gold outline (as in cloisonné), the
nature of the outline being generally determined by the nature of the
work. In stained glass the outline must be black, and this black is of
the greatest value in enhancing by opposition the brilliance of the
colours of the glass it incloses, stopping out the light around it as it
does in solid lead when placed in the window.

[Illustration (f133): (1) Principle of the Effect of the Blending or
Blurring of Colours at Their Edges; (2) Use of Black and White Outline
to Clear the Edges of Coloured Forms upon Different Coloured Grounds.]

                                                 [Clearing Coloured Forms]

A white outline produced by a resist or a mordant in a printed
textile, where the colours used are full and rich, often has a good
effect, lightening the effect while giving point and definition to
certain leading forms. Instances of the use of white outlines may be
found in Eastern carpets, where the main colours, being dark blue and
yellows on rich red, are relieved in parts by a dull white outline. Also
in Persian carpets of the sixteenth or seventeenth century, the
scrollwork in red is often relieved by an ivory white outline on blue.

It is always a good practice in blocking in flowers, either from nature
or as parts of a design, to leave a white outline at the junctions--that
is to say, where one petal overlaps another, or where there is a joint
in the stem, or a fold in the leaf--and to show the ribbings, markings,
and divisions of flower and leaf.

By judiciously changing the quality of our tints it is possible to make
different colours in a pattern tell clearly. To relieve red upon blue,
for instance, one would use an orange red upon greenish blue, or scarlet
upon a gray blue--the general principle being apparently a kind of
compensating balance between colours, so that in taking from one you
give to another.

A full red and blue used together, as we have seen, would show a
tendency to purple, unless separated by outlines; so that if the blue
was full and rich, the red would have to approach brown or russet; or if
the red was a full one--a crimson red--the blue would have to approach
green.

                                                                 [Harmony]

This may be because of the necessary complements in colours, which we
see in nature, and which prepossess the eye, and make it demand these
modifications to satisfy the sense of harmony.

When daylight struggles with candle- or lamp-light, one may notice that
upon the white cloth of a dinner-table the light is blue and the shadows
yellow or orange--the orange deepening as with the fading daylight the
blue grows deeper, until the colour of the light and the shadow change
places. The same principle may be noticed in firelight, but the redder
the flame the greener will be the shadows.

Harmony in colour may be said to consist--apart from the general
acknowledgment of the law of complementaries, in giving quality to the
raw pigments by gradation, by a certain admixture or infusion of other
colours.

--_Washington Times._
Not the "_George_ Washington Times," you'll note.

* * * * *
MEN AND THINGS OF THE MOMENT.

[Mr.

Punch cannot hold himself responsible for the views expressed in the
following correspondence.]
THE MALLABY-DEELEY EMPORIUM.

                                                        DEAR MR.

PUNCH,--I want you to use your influence with that great philanthropist,
Mr. MALLABY-DEELEY. I know that he is too modest to claim to be a
benefactor of the race, but I am at least right in calling him "Mr.,"
for that is how he describes himself on his shop-window, and he would
never have done that if he had not desired to avoid confusion with
the common tradesman. Well, I want you to enlist his powerful sympathy
in the cause of the struggling middle classes, to which body I
belong.

I refer particularly to our crying need for dinner-jackets at reasonable
prices. I am one of those who spend their holidays at seaside hotels,
where people make a point of dressing for dinner in the hope of giving
their fellow- guests the impression that this is their daily habit
in the home circle.

In view of the early advent of Spring I approached my tailor, the other
day, with inquiries as to the cost of an abbreviated dinner-suit.
His prices were as follows:--jacket £10 10s. 0d.; waistcoat £3 3s. 0d.;
trousers £4 10s. 0d.; total £18 3s. 0d. I am old enough to recall the
time when the most _élite_ tailors of Savile Row charged no more
than £10 10s. 0d. for a complete evening costume, uncurtailed.

I am all for the cheap supply of "gentlemen's lounge-suits" for the
so-called working-classes to lounge in. I know of no surer antidote to
the spirit of Bolshevism. But let us not forget the claims of the middle
classes, who are the backbone of the Empire. If Mr. MALLABY-DEELEY
cannot help us in the direction I have indicated, then let Mr.
KENNEDY JONES, on behalf of the Middle Class Union, put a hyphen to his
name and open a shop for the sale of evening wear at demi-popular
prices.

Yours faithfully, SURBITONIAN.

* * * * *
DEAR MR. PUNCH,--It would be a thousand pities if Mr. MALLABY-DEELEY'S
beneficent scheme should fail for lack of advertisement. Could you
not persuade your colleagues of the Press to publish from day to
day the route of his car's progress from his private residence (or
the terminus from which he debouches) to his place of business, as
in the case of the new Member for Paisley?

My only fear is that the Coalition Government might be suspected of
adopting the Wee Free methods of publicity for political ends; but this
would surely be an unworthy suspicion in the case of a movement designed
for the benefit not of a party, but of mankind.

Yours faithfully, STAGE MANAGER.

* * * * *
THE DECLINE OF LEARNING.

                                                DEAR SIR,--I look for your sympathy when I say that I regard the
abolition of compulsory Greek at Oxford as tantamount to the collapse
of the last bulwark of British Culture.

It is idle for the advocates of this act of vandalism to protest that
the spirit of Ancient Hellas can be adequately conveyed in the form of
translations, and to illustrate this futile argument by reference to the
authorised version of the Hebrew Scriptures.
Admirable as that version may be, is it for a moment to be supposed that
it can take the place of the original as a source of spiritual education?
or that our appreciation of Holy Writ would not be a hundred-fold increased
if it were fortified by a knowledge of the first principles of
Hebraic syntax and by an elementary acquaintance with Hebraic
composition.

It is impossible to estimate the influence of such knowledge in tending
to endear the Bible to our youth. To me indeed it has always been
incomprehensible that our Prelates, who presumably have the welfare
of the Church at heart, have never insisted on making Hebrew a compulsory
subject for Responsions.

And now Greek has gone and Oxford is the home of one more lost cause.

The gods (of the gallery) may be with the winners, but it is the losing
side that still appeals to
Yours incorruptibly, CATO.

* * * * *
"_THE TIMES'_ FLIGHT."
DEAR MR. PUNCH,--His many friends (among whom I take leave to count
myself) will heartily sympathise with Dr. CHALMERS MITCHELL on the
engine troubles he has passed through, culminating in the enforced
curtailment of his scientific expedition.

                                                        It is gratifying to think that the pure and lofty spirit of research
which animated the great newspaper-proprietor who sent him forth
on this mission has been vindicated by the Doctor's discovery of
an unmapped volcano.

Regrettably the conditions under which he observed it precluded him
from making an expert survey of it, and even from securing specimens
of its geological structure. The possibility of such an unfortunate
contingency, which may have escaped the consideration of the
promoter of the expedition, was recognised by other scientists. But it
was confidently expected by his Zoological _confrères_ that his voyage
of exploration would add largely to our knowledge of the habits
and customs of the fauna of Africa, and notably of the giraffe, as
coming, by the exceptional development of its neck, within closest
range of his vision as he flew through the vast inane.

Even better opportunities for the observation of animal life would, it
was thought, occur during the occasional intervals spent on _terra
firma_ for purposes of repose or repair. And indeed one is greatly
intrigued by the following terse and airmanlike entry in the log for
February 20th: "Much disturbed by lions."

Nothing is said of the actual capture of one of these interesting
denizens of the jungle, but reference to such a feat might well
have been omitted out of regard for brevity. Is it too much to hope that
the enterprise of _The Times_ may yet be rewarded by the addition of a
live lion to the Zoological Gardens?

In any case, by the exceptional opportunities he enjoyed for a
careful study of leaking cylinder jackets, insulating tape, red-leaded
joints and missing engines the intrepid Doctor must have added
largely to his knowledge of mechanical science, to say nothing of
the botanical discoveries he made when his machine came within a
few inches of contact with a banana-tree.

I, for one, look forward eagerly to his return, when he will be able to
narrate his experience with a fulness and freedom of language
impossible in cabled despatches.

Yours faithfully, STANLEY LIVINGSTONE JONES.

* * * * *
A "MALADE IMAGINAIRE"?

"Bath-chair wanted, small lady good condition."--_Ladies' Paper._
* * * * *
A CHOICE OF SINECURES.

                                                     "LADY-NURSE-HELP; three girls (12, 10, eight); two maids kept;
month's holiday (fortnightly); salary £40."

--_Daily Paper._
"WANTED, a Housemaid, wages 27s. 6d., no duties."--_New Zealand Paper._

* * * * *
"Lady would like to Join jolly Family for Dinner every night."

--_Advt.

in Daily Paper._
Yes, but how long would they remain jolly?

* * * * *
"Windsor Castle Niggers, from His Majesty's Chapel Royal, gave an excellent
programme."--_Local Paper._
The programme merely announced them as "Windsor Castle Singers," but this
no doubt was to give the audience a greater surprise

.

* * * * *

"The revival of the Hunt Ball, and the intelligence that the Race Ball
is also to be re-introduced next month, has restored the ---- dance
season to its pre-war brilliance. The Hunt event passed off with
_éclair_."--_Local Paper._
Supper seems to have been all right, anyhow

.

* * * * *
[Illustration: A CONVERTED SPIRIT.

GENIUS OF ALCOHOL. "AND TO THINK THAT I WAS ONCE REGARDED AS AN IMPEDIMENT
TO LOCOMOTION!"]
* * * * *
[Illustration: _Mayfair Copper._ "NOW THEN, GET A MOVE ON, TARZAN. THIS
AIN'T A MONKEY NEIGHBOURHOOD

."]
* * * * *
WON ON THE POSTS.

(_With the British Army in France._)
The decisive victory of the Racing Club de Petiteville--late the _deuxième
équipage_ of the Sportif Club de Petiteville--over the _troisième
équipage_ of the Société Athlétique de Pont Neuf would not appear
to have any bearing on the washing of Percival's collars and pyjamas;
but, according to Elfred Fry, there was a poignant connection between
the two.

                                                             When the Sportif Club received the challenge they doubted whether
to accept it, as the Société Athlétique was rumoured to include
several veterans approaching fifteen years of age and of tremendous
physique.

On being conceded the choice of ground, however, they took up the gage and
trained and practised with such vigour that two days before the date of
the match Georges Darré, right back, punted his toe through a previously
suspected weak spot in the ball and irreparably ruined it. The Société
Athlétique was informed of the disaster and asked to supply a ball,
but they answered that no known authority or precedent existed for
visiting teams providing the accessories.

There was also an insinuation that the story of the burst ball was a
fabrication, designed to give the Sportif Club a loophole of escape
from a contest that spelt certain defeat.

Stung to the quick, the _deuxième équipage_ made an urgent appeal to
the _premier équipage_ of the Sportif Club, who replied that this
was the first intimation they had had of the existence of a _deuxième
équipage_, and recommended a tourney at marbles or a combat of peg-tops
as being more suitable to their tender years.

Naturally this insult could not be brooked, and it was decided to break
away from the parent body and reorganise under the title of the
Racing Club de Petiteville; but this did not help them to solve the
question of a new ball.

Then it was that Théo Navet, left half, and son of the _blanchisseuse_
in the rue Napoléon, had an inspiration, and Percival's pyjamas
became linked up with the destinies of the club

                                                       .

* * * * *
"It wouldn't surprise me, Sir," said Elfred on the evening when
Petiteville was ringing with the news of the Racing Club's victory
by 4 _buts_ to 2, "if you are the only officer in Mess to-night
with a reelly clean collar."

"And why am I singled out for so much honour?" asked Percival, taking the
slacks which Elfred produced from between the mattresses. "Has the
Washer-women's Union handed in notices and made a complimentary
exception in my case?"
"Well, Sir, you _'ave_ been favoured, but it weren't a strike," explained
Elfred. "You know, Sir, there's been an alarming short ration of coal
an' fuel down in the village for a long time, an' two days ago Madame
Navet, who does the orficers' washing, came up an' said she was bokoo
fashay but the washing was napood for the week, becos she couldn't
buy, beg, borrer nor steal enough fuel to keep her copper biling....
Do we wear the yaller boots to-night, Sir, or the _very_ yaller
ones?"
"The light pair," said Percival, "to give tone to the clean collar. But
go on."
"Well, I put it to Madame as my orficer was a very partickler gent, an'
she'd gotter do our washing even if she 'ad to light 'er fire with
the family dresser. She said she was desolated; she 'adn't sufficient
coal to take the chill off a mouchoir.

I thought of trying to borrer a sack for 'er from the quarter bloke,
but our relations 'ave never been the same since the time I
took my weekly ration of 'Pink Princesses' back an' arsked 'im to
change 'em for cigarettes with a bit o' tobacco in.

                                                                "After she'd gone I took a kit inventory 'an found we was down to
our last clean collar, an' we looked like bein' a bit grubby in the
matter of pyjamas.

I went a walk to the canteen to think it over, an' on my way Madame's lad
came up an' said 'is team 'ad an important match for two days later an'
could I possibly oblige 'em with a football. Being a sportsman--I take
a franc chance in the camp football sweep every week--I
said I'd try what I could do, knowin' of a ball which me an' the
other batmen punt about in our rare hintervals of leisure.

But then the thought of that washing that wasn't washed came into
my mind.

"'See 'ere, Meredith,' I says. 'Je voo donneray a ball si votre mère
does our washing toot sweet.'"
"'E looked blue at this an' said they couldn't get fuel nohow.

"'Compree scrounge?' says I.

"It seems 'e did. It seems scrounging for fuel 'ad reached such a pitch
in the village that people took their backyard fences in at night, 'an
they 'ad posted a policeman on the station to prevent 'em sawing away
the waiting-room. But our washing 'ad to be done, 'an I thought if I got
the whole of this football team scrounging they might find something
as everyone else 'ad overlooked. So I pretended to be indifferink.

"'Very well,' says I. 'San fairy ann. Napoo washing--napoo ball.'

"That set 'em to work. Next day little boys were scraping the village
over like fowls in a farmyard, getting a chip 'ere an' a shaving there,
an' making themselves such a nuisance that there was talk of calling the
gendarmerie out. They would 'ave done, too, only he'd laid down for a nap
an' left strict orders 'e wasn't to be disturbed. Then they
slipped into the Camp, trying to lay nefarious 'ands on empty ration
boxes, but the Camp police spotted 'em an' chivied them off.

                                                        I never seen our police so exhausted as they were at the end of
that day.

"'I can't think what's taken the little varmints,' said the Provost-
Sergeant. 'It ain't the Fifth of November.'
"On the whole it wasn't a good day's 'unting, but this morning I was
waited on by a deputation wearing striped jerseys, which they appeared
to 'ave put on at early dawn. They said the fire was lit under the
copper, 'an could they 'ave the ball?

"'Doucemong!' says I. 'Allay along, an' let's see the fire first.'
"Yes, it were lit, but only just. The water was lukewarm an' the
fuel 'ad nearly all burned away, an' Madame was standing looking at it
hopelessly.

"'Pas bong,' says I to the lads. 'Pas assay chaud. Voo scroungerez ongcore.'

"They was frantic, becos it was nearly match time. I felt inclined
to give 'em the ball, but the thought of you, Sir, in a dirty
collar--"
"You may keep the pair of old riding-breeches you borrowed without
permission," interrupted Percy.

                                                              "Thank you, Sir.

Then all at once the lads 'ad a confab an' went away, an' in a few minutes
they was back with some lovely straight planed props of timber, an'
they chopped 'em up in a jiffy 'an got the fire roaring 'ot, an' I gave
'em the ball, an' your collars is done an' the rest of your things
is out drying an' will be finished to-morrow."

"Of course I'm grateful," said Percival. "You might tell your young
friends I'm willing to be a vice-president of their club--on the usual
terms.

What's the name of it?"
"They tell me it's called 'The Racing Club,'" said Elfred.

"But I think, Sir, you'd better give your subscription to the other club
in the village--'The Sportif Club.' You see, Sir, they 'ad a match on
to-day as well, an' when they arrived on the ground they found
someone 'ad been and scrounged their goal-posts!"

* * * * *

[Illustration: "I SAY, EXCUSE ME, DEAR OLD TOP, BUT YOU MUSTN'T WEAR
THAT GUNNER TIE NOW YOU'RE DEMOBBED. IT SIMPLY ISN'T DONE!"]
* * * * * 
THE ANNIVERSARY.

Having unexpectedly retained possession of my seat in the Tube the
other evening I over-read myself and ran past my station, so it was
rather late when I reached home.

"Hullo!" I called out cheerily.

"Hullo!" echoed Margaret in a flat sort of voice; "you back?"
I refrained from facetiousness and told her that I was.
"Oh!" she said.
"Well, well, Margaret," I said in a bright and bustling manner, "we
haven't got on very well so far, have we? Can't you think of some
subject on which we can conduct a conversation in words of more
than one syllable? The skilful hostess should so frame her questions
that not even the shyest visitor can fall back on a simple Yes or
No. Now," I continued, spreading myself luxuriously over the
chesterfield, "you know how shy I am. Try to draw me out, dear. I'm
waiting."
I lit a cigarette. Margaret looked reproachfully at me.
"What was yesterday?" she said.
"Tuesday, my dear. We will now have a little chat about Tuesday.
Coming as it does so soon after Monday, it not unnaturally exhibits--"
"Tuesday the 25th of February," said Margaret solemnly.
"Possibly, my dear, possibly. But I cannot say that I find your
remarks very interesting. They may be true, or they may not, but
they certainly seem to me to lack that agreeable whimsicality usually
so characteristic of you."
"Our wedding-day," said Margaret impressively.
"Was it really?" I said in a whisper. "And you let it pass without
reminding me. Oh, how could you?" 
Margaret smiled.The next figure is in scarlet; the next
yellow; and the third man wears pale rose over rich grass-green.

Of the shepherds on the right the first one is in russet and white, the
next steely gray, and the angel is in white with rose and pale green
wings.

The ground is generally warm white and brown, with dark olive-coloured
grass and foliage, so that the pattern of the picture is mainly a ground
of olive, gold, and white, relieved by spots of rose, white, blue,
yellow, and rose-red and scarlet--the colour in the groups of angels
embracing men in front being the deepest in tone.

The first angel in this group (on the left) wears green shot with gold,
with shot green and gold wings, the human being in dark olive and rich
crimson red.

Next is a white angel with pale rose wings; the man in gray with a red
mantle over.

Last is an angel in rose, with rose and red wings, the man being in
scarlet with gray mantle over. All the men hold olive branches, and the
group emphatically illustrates the idea of "on earth peace and goodwill
towards men," thus ending on the keynote both of colour and idea given
in the ring of angels above.

Thus it is not only a lovely picture, but an exquisite pattern.

                                                                 [Holbein]

Another instance of a picture-pattern extremely strong and brilliant in
its realization of the full force and value of bright colour opposed by
the strongest black and white, may be found in Holbein's splendid
"Ambassadors," also in our National Collection.

[Illustration (f137): Holbein: "The Ambassadors" (National Gallery).]

                                                              [Botticelli]

The circular picture of the Madonna and Child, with St. John and an
angel, by Botticelli, is also another beautiful instance of pictorial
pattern, and of design well adapted and adequately filling its space,
while full of delicate draughtsmanship, poetic sentiment, and extremely
ornate in its colour.

[Illustration (f138): Botticelli: "Madonna and Child" (National
Gallery).]

                                                          [Carlo Crivelli]

Still more strictly ornamental in character and aim is Carlo Crivelli's
"Annunciation." Amazingly rich in invention, and beautifully designed
detail, and magnificently decorative in its colour scheme of brick reds
and whites, and pale pinks and steel grays, and yellows, varied with
scarlet and black, green, blue and gold, in the costumes and draperies,
sparkling with jewels, and brightened with rays and patterns of gold.

[Illustration (f139): Carlo Crivelli: "The Annunciation" (National
Gallery).]

                                                                [Perugino]

Hardly less ornamental in its more conscious grace and Renaissance
feeling is Perugino's triptych of the Virgin adoring, with St. Michael
on one wing and St. Raphael and Tobias on the other. It is a splendid
deep-toned harmony of blues, and warm flesh tones and golden hair,
varied by opals, rose red, bronze, green, white, and purple and orange.

[Illustration (f140): Perugino: "The Virgin in Adoration, with St.
Michael and St. Raphael and Tobias" (National Gallery).]

                                                                  [Titian]

Titian's "Bacchus and Ariadne" is, perhaps, more what I have described
as a pattern-picture, and is of a much later type. The full flush of
colour and pagan joy of the Renaissance is here paramount, expressed
with the masterly freedom of drawing and magnificent colour sense of the
great Venetian master. Yet, looking through the life, the movement, the
swing and vitality of the figures, and the power and poetry by which the
story is conveyed, we shall find a fine ornate design, sustaining an
extremely rich and sumptuous pattern of colour. We have a spread of
deep-toned blue sky barred with silvery white and gray clouds, great
masses of brown and green foliage swaying against it, above a band of
deep blue sea, and a field of rich golden brown earth. Warm flesh tones,
deep and pale, break upon this with a gorgeous pattern of flying rose,
blue, scarlet, orange, and white draperies, varied with the spotted
coats of the leopards, the black of the dog, and the copper vessel and
warm white of tumbled drapery.

[Illustration (f141): Titian: "Bacchus and Ariadne" (National Gallery).]

Keats might have had this picture in his mind when he wrote the song in
"Endymion":

    "And as I sat, over the light blue hills
    There came a noise of revellers: the rills
    Into the wide stream came of purple hue.
                  'Twas Bacchus and his crew!

    "The earnest trumpet speaks, and silver thrills
    From kissing cymbals made a merry din--
                  'Twas Bacchus and his kin!

    "Like to a moving vintage down they came,
    Crowned with green leaves, and faces all on flame;
    All madly dancing through the pleasant valley,
                  To scare thee, Melancholy!"

The "Sacred and Profane Love" of the same painter, in the Borghese
Gallery at Rome, is an even more splendid example of colour and tone,
and is probably the finest of all Titian's works.

                                                           [Paul Veronese]

In Paul Veronese we find a cooler key of colour generally, with a
fondness for compositions of figures with classical architecture, the
rich patterned robes and varied heads contrasting pleasantly with the
severe verticals and smooth surfaces of the marble columns--a sumptuous
and dignified kind of picture-pattern, and fully adapted to the
decoration of Venetian churches and palaces of the Renaissance.

                                                          [F. Madox Brown]

Madox Brown's "Christ washing St. Peter's Feet," now in the Tate
Gallery, is a modern picture-pattern, and an extremely fine one.

These are but a few instances out of many, and the subject of colour and
pattern, like the expression of line and form, of which it is a part, is
so large and its sides so multitudinous that to deal with the subject
fully and illustrate it adequately would need, not ten chapters, but
ten hundred, and could only be compassed by the history of art itself.

[Illustration (f142): Madox Brown: "Christ Washing St. Peter's Feet"
(Tate Gallery).]

                                                              [Conclusion]

If anything I have said on the subject, or have been able to show by way
of illustration, has served in any way to clear away obscurities, or to
lighten the labours of students, or to suggest fresh ideas to the minds
of any of my readers in the theory, history, or practice of art, I shall
feel that my work has not been in vain, and, at all events, I can only
say that I have endeavoured to give here the results of my own thoughts
and experience in art.

Some may look upon art as a means of livelihood only, a handmaid of
commerce, or as a branch of knowledge, to be acquired only so far as to
enable one to impart it to others; others may regard it as a polite
amusement; others, again, as an absorbing pursuit and passion, demanding
the closest devotion: but from whatever point of view we may regard it,
do not let us forget that the pursuit of beauty in art offers the best
of educations for the faculties, that its interest continually
increases, and its pleasures and successes are the most refined and
satisfying.


                                  INDEX

Adaptability in design, 124-126.

Animal forms, use of in design, 106;
  governed by inclosing boundaries, 104-106, 110-112.

Architectural mouldings, relief in, 190.

Architecture, spaces for sculpture in, 113-116.

Ardebil, holy carpet of the mosque of, f126.

Athens, the Tower of the Winds, 115-116.


Bari, 10;
  the "Hundred Birds" of, f044.

Birds, Japanese drawing of, 68, f044;
  decorative treatment of, f115.

Blake's Book of Job, "The Morning Stars," 19, f014, 152.

Border motives, recurrence in, f031, f032, f062.

Book decoration, 58, 59, 62;
  example of page treatment, f041.

Botticelli, frescoes in the Sistine Chapel, 226;
  rendering of the "Primavera" in tapestry, 240;
  his "Nativity," 272-275;
  "Madonna and Child," 275-276.

Boundaries, definition of, 2, 3;
  use of in designing sprays, 38, f027;
  in designing animal forms, f063a;
  influence of, 108;
  relation of design to, f064;
  decorative spacing of figures in geometric, f063b, 152-156.

Brush-work, 65-68.


Canterbury, St. Margaret Street, f086.

Ceiling decoration, 136.

Charcoal drawing, 68, 70.

Chartres, carving on the Cathedral, 197, f108, f109.

Chiaroscuro, 267-269.

Chinese porcelain, 101.

Colour, effect of texture on, 244;
  in stained glass, 252;
  expression of relief in line and form by, 256, 258;
  radiation of, 258;
  complements in, 260;
  harmony in, 261;
  colour sense, 261, 262;
  colour proportions, 262;
  importance of pure colour, 263.

Composition, formal, 152-156;
  informal, 157-164.

Constantine, Arch of, sketch of, f069.

Contrast in design, 101;
  use of, in pattern design, 166, _et seq._;
  principles of, in black and white, f111a.

Corinthian order, Roman treatment of, 192, f105.

Counterbalance, 43, 44, 95, f057, f058, 130.

Counterchange, in heraldry, 171-174.

Crivelli, "The Annunciation," 276-278.

Cube, the, 73;
  use of in architecture, f045b, 77, f048a;
  in nature, 76.


Dado, use of the, 234.

De Hooghe, Peter, 267.

Desiderio di Settignano, relief work of, 202;
  "Madonna and Child," at South Kensington, by, 202.

Design, linear basis of, 35;
  technical influence on, 58, 59, 62;
  beauty in, 62, 63;
  influence of material on, 64;
  quantities in, 96-101;
  contrast in, 101;
  living tradition in, 126;
  adaptability in, 124-126;
  extension in, 126-131;
  geometric structural plans in, 130;
  essentials of, 138-139.

De Wint, brush-work of, 68.

Diaper, use of in Middle Ages, 171, 174-175.

Donatello, relief work of, 202.

Drapery, treatment of by the old masters, f099-186.

Drawing in line, methods of, 6, 7;
  calligraphic method, 8;
  tentative method, 9;
  Japanese method, 10;
  oval and rectangular methods, f008, 12.

Dürer, Albert, his "Geometrica," 5;
  roofs in his engravings, 148;
  "The Prodigal Son," f083;
  "St. Anthony," f084;
  principle in the treatment of drapery, f099, f100.


Egyptian sculpture, 192, 194-196.

Emotion, linear expression of, 18-21.

Emphasis, 54;
  value of, 56;
  effects of different emphasis, f038, f039, f040;
  in relief of form, 180.

Equivalents in form, value of, 95, f057.

Extension in design, 126-131.


Figure composition, 160;
  expression of repose and action in, f090.

Figure design, relief in, 204-207;
  graphic and decorative treatment of, f114.

Figure designs, controlled by geometric boundaries, 152-156.

Flaxman's Homer, designs from, f015.

Flowers,
  lines of characterization in design of, 12, 13;
  forms controlled by inclosing boundaries, 110-112.

Foliage, principles of structure in, 143-146.

Form, its relation to line, 27;
  importance of knowledge of, 31;
  choice of, 73, 79;
  elementary forms and their relation to forms in nature and art, 73-77;
  grouping of, 83-87;
  analogies of, 89-91;
  typical forms of ornament, 92-95;
  equivalents in, 95, f057;
  variation of allied forms, 103;
  governed by shape of inclosing boundary, f063b, 106, f066;
  relief of, 165, _et seq._;
  expression of, by light and shade, 205, f112.

Frieze, origin of the, 113, 133;
  and field, 133-135;
  use of the, 236;
  treatment of, 240.

Fruit forms, treatment of, f054, 89.


Gems, engraved, 200.

Geometric forms, elementary, 73;
  structural plans in surface design, 128-133.

Ghirlandajo, 226.

Giotto, "Chastity," f119.

Gozzoli, Benozzo, 226.

Graphic aim, the, in drawing, 29-31, 205, 208-211.

Grouping of forms, 83-87.


Holbein, "The Ambassadors," f137.

Human figure, use of the,
  in design, 104-107;
  decorative spacing of
  within geometric boundaries, 105-106, 107;
  governed by inclosing boundaries, 110, f066;
  principles of line in, f081a.


Indian ornament, typical, 212, 216;
  printed cotton designs, 246, f130.

Inlay work, choice of forms for, 81-83.


Japanese method of drawing with the brush, 10, 68;
  diagonal pattern, f053;
  colour prints, 266.


Keene, Charles, 190.


Landscape, expression of storm and calm in, 158, f089.

Lead pencil, 70.

Letters, formation of, 4;
  Dürer's method, f005a.

Line, methods of drawing in, 6-12;
  quality of, 12-14;
  the language of, 23;
  comparison of style in, 24;
  scale of degrees and qualities of, 24, 25;
  its relation to form, 27;
  question and answer in, 35, f025;
  recurring, f031, f032;
  radiating principle of, 46-50;
  range and use of, 47-49;
  choice of, 51;
  degree and emphasis of, 54;
  influence of technical conditions on, 58-62;
  controlling influence of, as a boundary of design, 106, 108-113;
  value of recurring, 119-124;
  combinations of, 139;
  principles of structural and ornamental line, 140-145;
  selection of, f117a, f117b.

That they make much for the protection of
  beasts the Psalmist[2] testifies,
  _The highest hils are a
  refuge for the
  wilde Goats, and the
  rockes for Conies_.

The Kingly Prophet had learned the safety of these by his owne
experience, when he also was faine to make a mountaine his refuge
from the fury of his Master _Saul_, who persecuted him in the
wildernesse.

[Sidenote 1: _Nat. hist. l. 36. c. 1._]

[Sidenote 2: Psal. 104. v. 18.]

True indeed, such places as these keepe their neighbours poore, as
beeing most barren, but yet they preserve them safe, as being most
strong, witnesse our unconquered _Wales_ and _Scotland_, whose
greatest protection hath beene the naturall strength of their
Countrey, so fortified with Mountaines, that these have alwaies
been unto them sure retraites from the violence and oppression of
others, wherefore a good Authour doth rightly call them natures
bulwarkes cast up at God Almighties owne charges, the scornes and
curbs of victorious armies, which made the Barbarians in _Curtius_
so confident of their owne safety, when they were once retired to
an inaccessible mountaine, that when _Alexanders_ Legate had brought
them to a parley and perswading them to yeeld, told them of his
masters victories, what Seas and Wildernesses hee had passed, they
replyed that all that might be, but could _Alexander_ fly too?

Over the Seas he might have ships, and over the land horses,
  but hee must have wings before he could get up thither.

Pen, the, compared with brush and pencil, 71.

Pencil drawing, 70, 71.

Persian carpets, principle of design in, 242;
  treatment of borders in, f127;
  white outline in, 260.

Persian ornament, typical, 212, f116.

Persian rugs, value of different quantities in, 98-101.

Perugino, National Gallery triptych, f140.

Photograph, influence of the, 55, 56;
  principle of the, 187, 190.

Picture writing, 27, f019.

Pinturicchio, frescoes in the Sistine Chapel, 226;
  mural painting at Siena, 226, f120;
  frescoes in the Appartimenti Borgia, 238, f125.

Pisano, Vittore, medals of, 198, f110.

Poppy, horned study of, f022;
  adaptation of for needlework, f023;
  sketch of on different coloured grounds, f132, 258.

Prints, principles of design for, 246-251.

Procession, lines of movement in a, 160, 162-163.

Pyramid, the, 73;
  use of in architecture, f045b, f048a.


Radiating principle of line, the, 46-50.

Raphael, study of drapery by, f102.

Ravenna, S. Vitale, sketch of apse, f070.

Recurring line and form, f031, f032;
  value of in architecture, 119, 124.

Relief, methods of expressing, 165;
  use of contrast, 166;
  decorative relief, 171;
  on diapered ground, 174-175;
  by simple linear contrasts, 174, 176-178;
  by linear shading, 176, 178;
  by diagonal shading, 176, 178-180;
  value of emphasis in, 180;
  by light and shade alone, 187-190;
  principle of in architectural mouldings, 190;
  modelled, 192;
  in sculpture, 192-199, f109;
  Florentine fifteenth-century work, 202;
  natural principle of, 204, f111b;
  by colour, 256, 258.

Repeating patterns, 36, f026, f077b, f078;
  method of testing, 38, f028.

Rhythm of design, the, 32.

Roofs, German, 146-148.

Rothenburg, roof-lines in, f085.


St. David's Cathedral, carvings in, 122-124;
  Gothic tile pattern in, f074, f076.

Scale, importance of in mural decoration, 230, 232.

Sculpture, relief in, 192;
  Egyptian, 192, 194;
  Grecian, 194, f107, 197;
  Gothics, 197;
  on mediæval tombs, 198.

Selection, the test of artistic treatment, 214.

Shields, F. J., mural decoration, 228.

Silhouette, 2, f010a.

Skirting, the, 234.

Spaces, decorative, in design, 113;
  apparent depth or width increased by use of vertical or horizontal
      lines, 232, f122.

Spacing, mural, 230, f121, f123.

Sphere, the, 73;
  use of in architecture, f045b, f048a;
  in nature, 76.

If you have no pancake saucers, put the apricot preserve on one
half of each pancake and fold it up.

[_Jean O._]

  DELICIOUS SAUCE FOR
  PUDDINGS

To a large wineglassful (say a glass for champagne wine) of new
Madeira add the yolks only of two eggs.Textile designing, 62;
  examples of, f041b;
  value of different qualities in, 97-101;
  principles of, 241, 242;
  colour in, 244.

Textures, linear expression of, 18.

Thebes, sculptured relief at, f106.

Titian, "Bacchus and Ariadne," 278-280;
  "Sacred and Profane Love," 280.

Tivoli, Temple of the Sibyls at, 133.

Trees, effect of wind upon, f011;
  general principles of line and form in foliage, etc., 143-145.

Typical treatment, 31;
  ornament, 92-95.


Valence, Aymer de, tomb of, f094a.

Van Eyck, "Jan Arnolfini and his Wife," 267, f134, 270, 271.

Variation of allied forms, 103.

Variety in design, 40.

Ver Meer, "Lady at Spinet," f135, 270, 272.

VESQUIER, is well ahead, and DAUBINET follows closely at my heels.

Thus we proceed, and if this order is preserved throughout, I feel
that the sensational romance above mentioned will not be written,
at least not on this occasion.

  Water, lines of movement in, f118b.

Watercourse, lines left by a, f091b.

Wave lines, f011, f012.

Westminster, vaulting of chapter house, f035.

Winchelsea, tomb of Gervaise-Alard, f071.




          CHISWICK PRESS: PRINTED BY CHARLES WHITTINGHAM AND CO.
                  TOOKS COURT, CHANCERY LANE, LONDON.