This eBook was produced by Juliet Sutherland, Charles Franks and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team.


MARY LOUISE

By

Edith Van Dyne


Author of
"Aunt Jane's Nieces Series"
"The Daring Twins," etc.


TO YOUNG READERS

You will like Mary Louise because she is so much like yourself. Mrs. Van
Dyne has succeeded in finding a very human girl for her heroine; Mary
Louise is really not a fiction character at all. Perhaps you know the
author through her "Aunt Jane's Nieces" stories; then you don't need to
be told that you will want to read all the volumes that will be written
about lovable Mary Louise. Mrs. Van Dyne is recognized as one of the
most interesting writers for girls to-day. Her success is largely due to
the fact that she does not write DOWN to her young readers; she realizes
that the girl of to-day does not have to be babied, and that her quick
mind is able to appreciate stories that are as well planned and cleverly
told as adult fiction.

That is the theory behind "The Bluebird Books." If you are the girl who
likes books of individuality--wholesome without being tiresome, and full
of action without being sensational--then you are just the girl for whom
the series is being written. "Mary Louise" is more than a worthy
successor to the "Aunt Jane's Nieces Series"--it has merit which you
will quickly recognize.

THE PUBLISHERS.


CONTENTS


 I     JUST AN ARGUMENT

II    GRAN'PA JIM

III   A SURPRISE

IV    SHIFTING SANDS

V     OFFICIAL INVESTIGATION

VI    UNDER A CLOUD

VII   THE ESCAPE

VIII  A FRIENDLY FOE

IX    OFFICER O'GORMAN

X     RATHER QUEER INDEED

XI    MARY LOUISE MEETS IRENE

XII   A CHEERFUL COMRADE

XIII  BUB SUCCUMBS TO FORCE

XIV   A CALL FROM AGATHA LORD

XV    BUB'S HOBBY

XVI   THE STOLEN BOOK

XVII  THE HIRED GIRL

XVIII MARY LOUISE GROWS SUSPICIOUS

XIX   AN ARTFUL CONFESSION

XX    DIAMOND CUT DIAMOND

XXI   BAD NEWS

XXII  THE FOLKS AT BIGBEE'S

XXIII A KISS FROM JOSIE

XXIV  FACING THE TRUTH

XXV   SIMPLE JUSTICE

XXVI  THE LETTER


CHAPTER I

JUST AN ARGUMENT


"It's positively cruel!" pouted Jennie Allen, one of a group of girls
occupying a garden bench in the ample grounds of Miss Stearne's School
for Girls, at Beverly.

"It's worse than that; it's insulting," declared Mable Westervelt, her
big dark eyes flashing indignantly.

"Doesn't it seem to reflect on our characters?" timidly asked Dorothy
Knerr.

"Indeed it does!" asserted Sue Finley. "But here comes Mary Louise;
let's ask her opinion."

"Phoo! Mary Louise is only a day scholar," said Jennie. "The restriction
doesn't apply to her at all."

"I'd like to hear what she says, anyhow," remarked Dorothy. "Mary Louise
has a way of untangling things, you know."

"She's rather too officious to suit me," Mable Westervelt retorted, "and
she's younger than any of us. One would think, the way she poses as
monitor at this second-rate, run-down boarding school, that Mary Louise
Burrows made the world."

"Oh, Mable! I've never known her to pose at all," said Sue. "But, hush;
she mustn't overhear us and, besides, if we want her to intercede with
Miss Stearne we must not offend her."

The girl they were discussing came leisurely down a path, her books
under one arm, the other hand holding a class paper which she examined
in a cursory way as she walked. She wore a dark skirt and a simple
shirtwaist, both quite modish and becoming, and her shoes were the
admiration and envy of half the girls at the school. Dorothy Knerr used
to say that "Mary Louise's clothes always looked as if they grew on
her," but that may have been partially accounted for by the grace of her
slim form and her unconscious but distinctive poise of bearing. Few
people would describe Mary Louise Burrows as beautiful, while all would
agree that she possessed charming manners. And she was fifteen--an age
when many girls are both awkward and shy.

As she drew near to the group on the bench they ceased discussing Mary
Louise but continued angrily to canvass their latest grievance.

"What do you think, Mary Louise," demanded Jennie, as the girl paused
before them, "of this latest outrage?"

"What outrage, Jen?" with a whimsical smile at their indignant faces.

"This latest decree of the tyrant Stearne. Didn't you see it posted on
the blackboard this morning? 'The young ladies will hereafter refrain
from leaving the school grounds after the hour of six p.m., unless
written permission is first secured from the Principal. Any infraction
of this rule will result in suspension or permanent dismissal.' We're
determined not to stand for this rule a single minute. We intend to
strike for our liberties."

"Well," said Mary Louise reflectively, "I'm not surprised. The wonder is
that Miss Stearne hasn't stopped your evening parades before now. This
is a small school in a small town, where everyone knows everyone else;
otherwise you'd have been guarded as jealously as if you were in a
convent. Did you ever know or hear of any other private boarding school
where the girls were allowed to go to town evenings, or whenever they
pleased out of school hours?"

"Didn't I tell you?" snapped Mable, addressing the group. "Mary Louise
is always on the wrong side. Other schools are not criterions for this
ramshackle establishment, anyhow. We have twelve boarders and four day
scholars, and how Miss Stearne ever supports the place and herself on
her income is an occult problem that the geometries can't solve. She
pays little Miss Dandler, her assistant, the wages of an ordinary
housemaid; the furniture is old and shabby and the classrooms gloomy;
the food is more nourishing than feastful and the tablecloths are so
patched and darned that it's a wonder they hold together."

Mary Louise quietly seated herself upon the bench beside them.

"You're looking on the seamy side, Mable," she said with a smile, "and
you're not quite just to the school. I believe your parents sent you
here because Miss Stearne is known to be a very competent teacher and
her school has an excellent reputation of long standing. For twenty
years this delightful old place, which was once General Barlow's
residence, has been a select school for young ladies of the best
families. Gran'pa Jim says it's an evidence of good breeding and
respectability to have attended Miss Stearne's school."

"Well, what's that got to do with this insulting order to stay in
evenings?" demanded Sue Finley. "You'd better put all that rot you're
talking into a circular and mail it to the mothers of imbecile
daughters. Miss Stearne has gone a step too far in her tyranny, as
she'll find out. We know well enough what it means. There's no
inducement for us to wander into that little tucked-up town of Beverly
after dinner except to take in the picture show, which is our one
innocent recreation. I'm sure we've always conducted ourselves most
properly. This order simply means we must cut out the picture show and,
if we permit it to stand, heaven only knows what we shall do to amuse
ourselves."

"We'll do something worse, probably," suggested Jennie.

"What's your idea about it, Mary Louise?" asked Dorothy.

"Don't be a prude," warned Mable, glaring at the young girl. "Try to be
honest and sensible--if you can--and give us your advice. Shall we
disregard the order, and do as we please, or be namby-pambies and submit
to the outrage? You're a day scholar and may visit the picture shows as
often as you like. Consider our position, cooped up here like a lot of
chickens and refused the only harmless amusement the town affords."

"Gran'pa Jim," observed Mary Louise, musingly, "always advises me to
look on both sides of a question before making up my mind, because every
question has to have two sides or it couldn't be argued. If Miss Stearne
wishes to keep you away from the pictures, she has a reason for it; so
let's discover what the reason is."

"To spoil any little fun we might have," asserted Mable bitterly.

"No; I can't believe that," answered Mary Louise. "She isn't unkindly,
we all know, nor is she too strict with her girls. I've heard her remark
that all her boarders are young ladies who can be trusted to conduct
themselves properly on all occasions; and she's right about that. We
must look for her reason somewhere else and I think it's in the pictures
themselves."

"As for that," said Jennie, "I've seen Miss Stearne herself at the
picture theatre twice within the last week."

"Then that's it; she doesn't like the character of the pictures shown. I
think, myself, girls, they've been rather rank lately."

"What's wrong with them?"

"I like pictures as well as you do," said Mary Louise, "and Gran'pa Jim
often takes me to see them. Tuesday night a man shot another in cold
blood and the girl the murderer was in love with helped him to escape
and married him. I felt like giving her a good shaking, didn't you? She
didn't act like a real girl at all. And Thursday night the picture story
told of a man with two wives and of divorces and disgraceful doings
generally. Gran'pa Jim took me away before it was over and I was glad to
go. Some of the pictures are fine and dandy, but as long as the man who
runs the theatre mixes the horrid things with the decent ones--and we
can't know beforehand which is which--it's really the safest plan to
keep away from the place altogether. I'm sure that's the position Miss
Stearne takes, and we can't blame her for it. If we do, it's an evidence
of laxness of morals in ourselves."

The girls received this statement sullenly, yet they had no logical
reply to controvert it. So Mary Louise, feeling that her explanation of
the distasteful edict was not popular with her friends, quietly rose and
sauntered to the gate, on her way home.

"Pah!" sneered Mable Westervelt, looking after the slim figure, "I'm
always suspicious of those goody-goody creatures. Mark my words, girls:
Mary Louise will fall from her pedestal some day. She isn't a bit better
than the rest of us, in spite of her angel baby ways, and I wouldn't be
surprised if she turned out to be a regular hypocrite!"


CHAPTER II

GRAN'PA JIM


Beverly is an old town and not especially progressive. It lies nearly
two miles from a railway station and has little attractiveness for
strangers. Beverly contains several beautiful old residences, however,
built generations ago and still surrounded by extensive grounds where
the trees and shrubbery are now generally overgrown and neglected.

One of these fine old places Miss Stearne rented for her boarding
school; another, quite the most imposing residence in the town, had been
leased some two years previous to the time of this story by Colonel
James Weatherby, whose family consisted of his widowed daughter, Mrs.
Burrows, and his grandchild, Mary Louise Burrows. Their only servants
were an old negro, Uncle Eben, and his wife, Aunt Polly, who were
Beverly bred and had been hired when the Colonel first came to town and
took possession of the stately Vandeventer mansion.

Colonel Weatherby was a man of exceptionally distinguished appearance,
tall and dignified, with courtly manners and an air of prosperity that
impressed the simple villagers with awe. His snow-white hair and
piercing dark eyes, his immaculate dress upon all occasions, the
whispered comments on his ample deposits in the local bank, all
contributed to render him remarkable among the three or four hundred
ordinary inhabitants of Beverly, who, after his two years' residence
among them, scarcely knew more of him than is above related. For Colonel
Weatherby was an extremely reserved man and seldom deigned to exchange
conversation with his neighbors. In truth, he had nothing in common with
them and even when he walked out with Mary Louise he merely acknowledged
the greeting of those he met by a dignified nod of his stately head.

With Mary Louise, however, he would converse fluently and with
earnestness, whether at home during the long evenings or on their
frequent walks through the country, which were indulged in on Saturdays
and holidays during the months that school was in session and much more
often during vacations. The Colonel owned a modest automobile which he
kept in the stable and only drove on rare occasions, although one of
Uncle Eben's duties was to keep the car in apple-pie order. Colonel
Weatherby loved best to walk and Mary Louise enjoyed their tramps
together because Gran'pa Jim always told her so many interesting things
and was such a charming companion. He often developed a strain of humor
in the girl's society and would relate anecdotes that aroused in her
spontaneous laughter, for she possessed a keen sense of the ludicrous.
Yes, Gran'pa Jim was really funny, when in the mood, and as jolly a
comrade as one would wish.

He was fond of poetry, too, and the most severe trial Mary Louise was
forced to endure was when he carried a book of poems in his pocket and
insisted on reading from it while they rested in a shady nook by the
roadside or on the bank of the little river that flowed near by the
town. Mary Louise had no soul for poetry, but she would have endured far
greater hardships rather than forfeit the genial companionship of
Gran'pa Jim.

It was only during these past two years that she had come to know her
grandfather so intimately and to become as fond of him as she was proud.
Her earlier life had been one of so many changes that the constant
shifting had rather bewildered her. First she remembered living in a big
city house where she was cared for by a nurse who was never out of sight
or hearing. There it was that "Mamma Bee"--Mrs. Beatrice Burrows--
appeared to the child at times as a beautiful vision and often as she
bent over her little daughter for a good-night kiss the popular society
woman, arrayed in evening or ball costume, would seem to Mary Louise
like a radiant angel descended straight from heaven.

She knew little of her mother in those days, which were quite hazy in
memory because she was so young. The first change she remembered was an
abrupt flitting from the splendid city house to a humble cottage in a
retired village. There was no maid now, nor other servant whatever.
Mamma Bee did the cooking and sweeping, her face worn and anxious, while
Gran'pa Jim walked the floor of the little sitting room day by day, only
pausing at times to read to Mary Louise stories from her nursery books.

This life did not last very long--perhaps a year or so--and then they
were in a big hotel in another city, reached after a long and tiresome
railway journey. Here the girl saw little of her grandfather, for a
governess came daily to teach Mary Louise to read and write and to do
sums on a pretty slate framed in silver. Then, suddenly, in dead of
night, away they whisked again, traveling by train until long after the
sun was up, when they came to a pretty town where they kept house again.

There were servants, this time, and horses and carriages and pretty
clothes for Mary Louise and Mamma Bee. The little girl was sent to a
school just a block away from her home. She remembered Miss Jenkins
well, for this teacher made much of her and was so kind and gentle that
Mary Louise progressed rapidly in her studies.

But the abrupt changes did not end here. Mary Louise came home from
school one afternoon and found her dear mother sobbing bitterly as she
clung around the neck of Gran'pa Jim, who stood in the middle of the
room as still as if he had been a marble statue. Mary Louise promptly
mingled her tears with those of her mother, without knowing why, and
then there was a quick "packing-up" and a rush to the railway again.

Next they were in the house of Mr. and Mrs. Peter Conant, very pleasant
people who seemed to be old friends of Mamma Bee and Gran'pa Jim. It was
a cosy house, not big and pretentious, and Mary Louise liked it. Peter
Conant and Gran'pa Jim had many long talks together, and it was here
that the child first heard her grandfather called "Colonel." Others
might have called him that before, but she had not heard them. Mrs.
Conant was very deaf and wore big spectacles, but she always had a smile
on her face and her voice was soft and pleasing.

After a few days Mamma Bee told her daughter she was going to leave her
in the care of the Conants for a time, while she traveled to a foreign
country with Gran'pa Jim. The girl was surprised at being abandoned but
accepted her fate quietly when it was explained that she was to go to
school while living with the Conants, which she could not do if she was
traveling with her mother and grandfather, who were making this
arrangement for the girl's best good.

Three years Mary Louise lived with the Conants and had little to
complain of. Mr. Conant was a lawyer and was at his office all day,
while Mrs. Conant was very kind to the girl and looked after her welfare
with motherly care.

At last, quite unexpectedly, Mary Louise's trunk was packed and she was
taken to the station to meet a train on which were her mother and
grandfather. They did not leave the cars except to shake hands with the
Conants and thank them for their care of Mary Louise. A moment later the
train bore away the reunited family to their new home in Beverly.

Mary Louise now found she must "get acquainted" with Mamma Bee and
Gran'pa Jim all over again, for during these last three years she had
developed so fast in mind and body that her previous knowledge of her
relatives seemed like a hazy dream. The Colonel also discovered a new
granddaughter, to whom he became passionately attached. For two years
now they had grown together until they were great friends and cronies.

As for Mrs. Burrows, she seemed to have devoted her whole life to her
father, the Colonel. She had lost much of her former beauty and had
become a thin, pale woman with anxious eyes and an expectant and
deprecating air, as if always prepared to ward off a sudden blow. Her
solicitude for the old Colonel was almost pathetic and while he was in
her presence she constantly hovered around him, doing little things for
his comfort which he invariably acknowledged with his courtly bow and a
gracious word of thanks.

It was through her association with this cultured old gentleman that
Mary Louise had imbibed a certain degree of logic and philosophy unknown
to many girls of fifteen. He taught her consideration for others as the
keynote of happiness, yet he himself declined to mingle with his fellow
men. He abhorred sulking and was always cheerful and pleasant in his
home circle, yet when others approached him familiarly he resented it
with a frown. He taught his granddaughter to be generous to the poor and
supplied her freely with money for charity, yet he personally refused
all demands upon him by churches or charitable societies.

In their long talks together he displayed an intimate acquaintance with
men and affairs, but never referred in any way to his former life.

"Are you really a colonel?" Mary Louise once asked him.

"Men call me so," he replied, but there was a tone in his voice that
warned the girl not to pursue the subject further. She knew his moods
almost as well as her mother did.

The Colonel was very particular as to dress. He obtained his own
clothing from a New York tailor and took a keen interest in the gowns of
his daughter and of Mary Louise, his taste in female apparel being so
remarkable that they were justly considered the best dressed women in
Beverly. The house they were living in contained an excellent library
and was furnished in a quaint, old-fashioned manner that was very
appealing to them all. Mary Louise sincerely hoped there would be no
more changes in their lives and that they might continue to live in
Beverly for many years to come.


CHAPTER III

A SURPRISE


On the afternoon when our story begins Mary Louise walked home from
school and found Colonel Weatherby waiting for her in the garden,
leggings strapped to his gaunt legs, the checked walking-cap on his
head, a gold-headed crop in his hand.

"Let us go for a walk, my dear," he proposed. "It is Friday, so you will
have all day to-morrow in which to get your lessons."

"Oh, it won't take all day for that," she replied with a laugh. "I'll be
glad of the walk. "Where shall we go, Gran'pa Jim?"

"Perhaps to the mill-race. We haven't visited it for a long time."

She ran to the house to put away her books and get her stout shoes, and
presently rejoined him, when together they strolled up the street and
circled round the little town until they came to the river bank. Then
they followed the stream toward the old mill.

Mary Louise told her grandfather of the recent edict of Miss Stearne and
the indignation it had aroused in her girl boarders.

"And what do you think of it, Gran'pa Jim?" she asked in conclusion.

"What do YOU think of it, Mary Louise?"

"It is rather hard on the girls, who have enjoyed their liberty for so
long; but I think it is Miss Stearne's plan to keep them away from the
picture theatre."

"And so?"

"And so," she said, "it may do the girls more good than harm."

He smiled approvingly. It was his custom to draw out her ideas on all
questions, rather than to assert his own in advance. If he found her
wrong or misinformed he would then correct her and set her right.

"So you do not approve of the pictures, Mary Louise?"

"Not all of them, Gran'pa Jim, although they all seem to have been
'passed by the Board of Censors'--perhaps when their eyes were shut. I
love the good pictures, and I know that you do, but some we have seen
lately gave me the shivers. So, perhaps Miss Stearne is right."

"I am confident she is," he agreed. "Some makers of pictures may
consider it beneficial to emphasize good by exhibiting evil, by way of
contrast, but they are doubtless wrong. I've an old-fashioned notion
that young girls should be shielded, as much as possible, from knowledge
of the world's sins and worries, which is sure to be impressed upon them
in later years. We cannot ignore evil, unfortunately, but we can often
avoid it."

"But why, if these pictures are really harmful, does Mr. Welland exhibit
them at his theatre?" asked the girl.

"Mr. Welland is running his theatre to make money," explained the
Colonel," and the surest way to make money is to cater to the tastes of
his patrons, the majority of whom demand picture plays of the more vivid
sort, such as you and I complain of. So the fault lies not with the
exhibitor but with the sensation-loving public. If Mr. Welland showed
only such pictures as have good morals he would gain the patronage of
Miss Stearne's twelve young ladies, and a few others, but the masses
would refuse to support him."

"Then," said Mary Louise, "the masses ought to be educated to desire
better things."

"Many philanthropists have tried to do that, and signally failed. I
believe the world is gradually growing better, my dear, but ages will
pass before mankind attains a really wholesome mental atmosphere.
However, we should each do our humble part toward the moral uplift of
our fellows and one way is not to condone what we know to be wrong."

He spoke earnestly, in a conversational tone that robbed his words of
preachment. Mary Louise thought Gran'pa Jim must be an exceptionally
good man and hoped she would grow, in time, to be like him. The only
thing that puzzled her was why he refused to associate with his fellow
men, while at heart he so warmly espoused their uplift and advancement.

They had now reached the mill-race and had seated themselves on the high
embankment where they could watch the water swirl swiftly beneath them.
The mill was not grinding to-day and its neighborhood seemed quite
deserted. Here the old Colonel and his granddaughter sat dreamily for a
long time, conversing casually on various subjects or allowing
themselves to drift into thought. It was a happy hour for them both and
was only interrupted when Jackson the miller passed by on his way home
from the village. The man gave the Colonel a surly nod, but he smiled on
Mary Louise, the girl being as popular in the district as her
grandfather was unpopular.

After Jackson had passed them by Gran'pa Jim rose slowly and proposed
they return home.

"If we go through the village," said he, "we shall reach home, without
hurrying ourselves, in time to dress for dinner. I object to being
hurried, don't you, Mary Louise?"

"Yes, indeed, if it can be avoided."

Going through the village saved them half a mile in distance, but Mary
Louise would not have proposed it herself, on account of the Colonel's
well-known aversion to meeting people. This afternoon, however, he made
the proposal himself, so they strolled away to the main road that led
through the one business street of the little town.

At this hour there was little life in Beverly's main street. The farmers
who drove in to trade had now returned home; the town women were busy
getting supper and most of their men were at home feeding the stock or
doing the evening chores. However, they passed an occasional group of
two or three and around the general store stood a few other natives,
listlessly awaiting the call to the evening meal. These cast curious
glances at the well-known forms of the old man and the young girl, for
his two years' residence had not made the testy old Colonel any less
strange to them. They knew all about him there was to know--which was
nothing at all--and understood they must not venture to address him as
they would have done any other citizen.

Cooper's Hotel, a modest and not very inviting frame building, stood
near the center of the village and as Mary Louise and her grandfather
passed it the door opened and a man stepped out and only avoided bumping
into them by coming to a full stop. They stopped also, of necessity, and
Mary Louise was astonished to find the stranger staring into the
Colonel's face with an expression of mingled amazement and incredulity
on his own.

"James Hathaway, by all the gods!" he exclaimed, adding in wondering
tones: "And after all these years!"

Mary Louise, clinging to her grandfather's arm, cast an upward glance at
his face. It was tensely drawn; the eyelids were half closed and through
their slits the Colonel's eyes glinted fiercely.

"You are mistaken, fellow. Out of my way!" he said, and seizing the
girl's arm, which she had withdrawn in affright, he marched straight
ahead. The man fell back, but stared after them with his former
expression of bewildered surprise. Mary Louise noted this in a glance
over her shoulder and something in the stranger's attitude--was it a
half veiled threat?--caused her to shudder involuntarily.

The Colonel strode on, looking neither to right nor left, saying never a
word. They reached their home grounds, passed up the path in silence and
entered the house. The Colonel went straight to the stairs and cried in
a loud voice:

"Beatrice!"

The tone thrilled Mary Louise with a premonition of evil. A door was
hastily opened and her mother appeared at the head of the stairs,
looking down on them with the customary anxiety on her worn features
doubly accentuated.

"Again, father?" she asked in a voice that slightly trembled.

"Yes. Come with me to the library, Beatrice."


CHAPTER IV

SHIFTING SANDS


Mary Louise hid herself in the drawing-room, where she could watch the
closed door of the library opposite. At times she trembled with an
unknown dread; again, she told herself that no harm could possibly
befall her dear, good Gran'pa Jim or her faithful, loving mother. Yet
why were they closeted in the library so long, and how could the meeting
with that insolent stranger affect Colonel Weatherby so strongly?

After a long time her mother came out, looking more pallid and harassed
than ever but strangely composed. She kissed Mary Louise, who came to
meet her, and said:

"Get ready for dinner, dear. We are late."

The girl went to her room, dazed and uneasy. At dinner her mother
appeared at the table, eating little or nothing, but Gran'pa Jim was not
present. Afterward she learned that he had gone over to Miss Stearne's
School for Girls, where he completed important arrangements concerning
his granddaughter.

When dinner was over Mary Louise went into the library and, drawing a
chair to where the light of the student lamp flooded her book, tried to
read. But the words were blurred and her mind was in a sort of chaos.
Mamma Bee had summoned Aunt Polly and Uncle Eben to her room, where she
was now holding a conference with the faithful colored servants. A
strange and subtle atmosphere of unrest pervaded the house; Mary Louise
scented radical changes in their heretofore pleasant home life, but what
these changes were to be or what necessitated them she could not
imagine.

After a while she heard Gran'pa Jim enter the hall and hang up his hat
and coat and place his cane in the rack. Then he came to the door of the
library and stood a moment looking hard at Mary Louise. Her own eyes
regarded her grandfather earnestly, questioning him as positively as if
she had spoken.

He drew a chair before her and leaning over took both her hands in his
and held them fast.

"My dear," he said gently, "I regret to say that another change has
overtaken us. Have you ever heard of 'harlequin fate'? 'Tis a very
buffoon of mischief and irony that is often permitted to dog our earthly
footsteps and prevent us from becoming too content with our lot. For a
time you and I, little maid, good comrades though we have been, must
tread different paths. Your mother and I are going away, presently, and
we shall leave you here in Beverly, where you may continue your studies
under the supervision of Miss Stearne, as a boarder at her school. This
house, although the rental is paid for six weeks longer, we shall at
once vacate, leaving Uncle Eben and Aunt Sallie to put it in shape and
close it properly. Do you understand all this, Mary Louise?"

"I understand what you have told me, Gran'pa Jim. But why--"

"Miss Stearne will be supplied with ample funds to cover your tuition
and to purchase any supplies you may need. You will have nothing to
worry about and so may devote all your energies to your studies."

"But how long---"

"Trust me and your mother to watch over your welfare, for you are very
dear to us, believe me," he continued, disregarding her interruptions.
"Do you remember the address of the Conants, at Dorfield?"

"Of course."

"Well, you may write to me, or to your mother, once a week, addressing
the letter in care of Peter Conant. But if you are questioned by
anyone," he added, gravely, "do not mention the address of the Conants
or hint that I have gone to Dorfield. Write your letters privately and
unobserved, in your own room, and post them secretly, by your own hand,
so that no one will be aware of the correspondence. Your caution in this
regard will be of great service to your mother and me. Do you think you
can follow these instructions?"

"To be sure I can, Gran'pa Jim. But why must I---"

"Some day," said he, "you will understand this seeming mystery and be
able to smile at your present perplexities. There is nothing to fear, my
dear child, and nothing that need cause you undue anxiety. Keep a brave
heart and, whatever happens, have faith in Gran'pa Jim. Your mother--as
good a woman as God ever made--believes in me, and she knows all. Can
you accept her judgment, Mary Louise? Can you steadfastly ignore any
aspersions that may be cast upon my good name?"

"Yes, Gran'pa Jim."

She had not the faintest idea what he referred to. Not until afterward
was she able to piece these strange remarks together and make sense of
them. Just now the girl was most impressed by the fact that her mother
and grandfather were going away and would leave her as a boarder with
Miss Stearne. The delightful home life, wherein she had passed the
happiest two years of her existence, was to be broken up for good and
all.

"Now I must go to your mother. Kiss me, my dear!"

As he rose to his feet Mary Louise also sprang from her chair and the
Colonel folded his arms around her and for a moment held her tight in
his embrace. Then he slowly released her, holding the girl at arms'
length while he studied her troubled face with grave intensity. One kiss
upon her upturned forehead and the old man swung around and left the
room without another word.

Mary Louise sank into her chair, a little sob in her throat. She felt
very miserable, indeed, at that moment. "Harlequin fate!" she sighed. "I
wonder why it has chosen us for its victims?"

After an hour passed in the deserted library she stole away to her own
room and prepared for bed. In the night, during her fitful periods of
sleep, she dreamed that her mother bent over her and kissed her lips--
once, twice, a third time.

The girl woke with a start. A dim light flooded her chamber, for outside
was a full moon. But the room was habited only by shadows, save for her
own feverish, restless body. She turned over to find a cooler place and
presently fell asleep again.


CHAPTER V

OFFICIAL INVESTIGATION


"And you say they are gone?" cried Mary Louise in surprise, as she came
down to breakfast the next morning and found the table laid for one and
old Eben waiting to serve her.

"In de night, chile. I don' know 'zac'ly wha' der time, by de clock, but
de Kun'l an' Missy Burrows did'n' sleep heah a-tall."

"There is no night train," said the girl, seating herself thoughtfully
at the table. "How could they go, Uncle?"

"Jus' took deh auto'bile, chile, an' de Kun'l done druv it heself--bag
an' baggage. But--see heah, Ma'y 'Ouise--we-all ain' s'pose to know
nuth'n' bout dat git-away. Ef some imper'nent puss'n' ask us, we ain'
gwine t' know how dey go, nohow. De Kun'l say tell Ma'y 'Ouise she ain'
gwine know noth'n' a-tall, 'bout nuth'n', 'cause 'tain't nobody's
business."

"I understand, Uncle Eben."

She reflected upon this seemingly unnecessary secrecy as she ate her
breakfast. After a time she asked:

"What are you and Aunt Polly going to do, Uncle?"

"Fus' thing," replied the old negro, "Polly gwine git yo' traps all pack
up an' I gwine take 'em ovah to Missy Stearne's place in de wheel-
barrer. Den I gwine red up de house an' take de keys to Mass' Gimble, de
agent. Den Polly an' me we go back to our own li'l' house in de lane
yondeh. De Kun'l done 'range ev'thing propeh, an' we gwine do jus' like
he say."

Mary Louise felt lonely and uncomfortable in the big house, now that her
mother and grandfather had gone away. Since the move was inevitable, she
would be glad to go to Miss Stearne as soon as possible. She helped Aunt
Polly pack her trunk and suit case, afterwards gathering into a bundle
the things she had forgotten or overlooked, all of which personal
belongings Uncle Eben wheeled over to the school. Then she bade the
faithful servitors good-bye, promising to call upon them at their humble
home, and walked slowly over the well-known path to Miss Stearne's
establishment, where she presented herself to the principal.

It being Saturday, Miss Stearne was seated at a desk in her own private
room, where she received Mary Louise and bade her sit down.

Miss Stearne was a woman fifty years of age, tall and lean, with a
deeply lined face and a tendency to nervousness that was increasing with
her years. She was a very clever teacher and a very incompetent business
woman, so that her small school, of excellent standing and repute,
proved difficult to finance. In character Miss Stearne was temperamental
enough to have been a genius. She was kindly natured, fond of young
girls and cared for her pupils with motherly instincts seldom possessed
by those in similar positions. She was lax in many respects, severely
strict in others. Not always were her rules and regulations dictated by
good judgment. Therefore her girls usually found as much fault as other
boarding school girls are prone to do, and with somewhat more reason. On
the other hand, no one could question the principal's erudition or her
skill in imparting her knowledge to others.

"Sit down, Mary Louise," she said to the girl. "This is an astonishing
change in your life, is it not? Colonel Weatherby came to me last
evening and said he had been suddenly called away on important matters
that would brook no delay, and that your mother was to accompany him on
the journey. He begged me to take you in as a regular boarder and of
course I consented. You have been one of my most tractable and
conscientious pupils and I have been proud of your progress. But the
school is quite full, as you know; so at first I was uncertain that I
could accommodate you here; but Miss Dandler, my assistant, has given up
her room to you and I shall put a bed for her in my own sleeping
chamber, so that difficulty is now happily arranged. I suppose your
family left Beverly this morning, by the early train?"

"They have gone," replied Mary Louise, non-committally.

"You will be lonely for a time, of course, but presently you will feel
quite at home in the school because you know all of my girls so well. It
is not like a strange girl coming into a new school. And remember, Mary
Louise, that you are to come to me for any advice and assistance you
need, for I promised your grandfather that I would fill your mother's
place as far as I am able to do so."

Mary Louise reflected, with a little shock of pain, that her mother had
never been very near to her and that Miss Stearne might well perform
such perfunctory duties as the girl had been accustomed to expect. But
no one could ever take the place of Gran'pa Jim.

"Thank you, Miss Stearne," she said. "I am sure I shall be quite
contented here. Is my room ready?"

"Yes; and your trunk has already been placed in it. Let me know, my
dear, if there is anything you need."

Mary Louise went to her room and was promptly pounced upon by Dorothy
Knerr and Sue Finley, who roomed just across the hall from her and were
delighted to find she was to become a regular boarder. They asked
numerous questions as they helped her to unpack and settle her room, but
accepted her conservative answers without comment.

At the noon luncheon Mary Louise was accorded a warm reception by the
assembled boarders and this cordial welcome by her school-mates did much
to restore the girl to her normal condition of cheerfulness. She even
joined a group in a game of tennis after luncheon and it was while she
was playing that little Miss Dandler came with, a message that Mary
Louise was wanted in Miss Stearne's room at once.

"Take my racquet," she said to Jennie Allen; "I'll be back in a minute."

When she entered Miss Stearne's room she was surprised to find herself
confronted by the same man whom she and her grandfather had encountered
in front of Cooper's Hotel the previous afternoon--the man whom she
secretly held responsible for this abrupt change in her life. The
principal sat crouched over her desk as if overawed by her visitor, who
stopped his nervous pacing up and down the room as the girl appeared.

"This is Mary Louise Burrows," said Miss Stearne, in a weak voice.

"Huh!" He glared at her with a scowl for a moment and then demanded:
"Where's Hathaway?"

Mary Louise reddened.

"I do not know to whom you refer," she answered quietly.

"Aren't you his granddaughter?"

"I am the granddaughter of Colonel James Weatherby, sir."

"It's all the same; Hathaway or Weatherby, the scoundrel can't disguise
his personality. Where is he?"

She did not reply. Her eyes had narrowed a little, as the Colonel's were
sometimes prone to do, and her lips were pressed firmly together.

"Answer me!" he shouted, waving his arms threateningly.

"Miss Stearne," Mary Louise said, turning to the principal, "unless you
request your guest to be more respectful I shall leave the room."

"Not yet you won't," said the man in a less boisterous tone. "Don't
annoy me with your airs, for I'm in a hurry. Where is Hathaway--or
Weatherby--or whatever he calls himself?"

"I do not know."

"You don't, eh? Didn't he leave an address?"

"No."

"I don't believe you. Where did he go?"

"If I knew," said Mary Louise with dignity, "I would not inform you."

He uttered a growl and then threw back his coat, displaying a badge
attached to his vest.

"I'm a federal officer," he asserted with egotistic pride, "a member of
the Government's Secret Service Department. I've been searching for
James J. Hathaway for nine years, and so has every man in the service.
Last night I stumbled upon him by accident, and on inquiring found he
has been living quietly in this little jumping-off place. I wired the
Department for instructions and an hour ago received orders to arrest
him, but found my bird had flown. He left you behind, though, and I'm
wise to the fact that you're a clew that will lead me straight to him.
You're going to do that very thing, and the sooner you make up your mind
to it the better for all of us. No nonsense, girl! The Federal
Government's not to be trifled with. Tell me where to find your
grandfather."

"If you have finished your insolent remarks," she answered with spirit,
"I will go away. You have interrupted my game of tennis."

He gave a bark of anger that made her smile, but as she turned away he
sprang forward and seized her arm, swinging her around so that she again
faced him.

"Great Caesar, girl! Don't you realize what you're up against?" he
demanded.

"I do," said she. "I seem to be in the power of a brute. If a law exists
that permits you to insult a girl, there must also be a law to punish
you. I shall see a lawyer and try to have you properly punished for this
absolute insolence."

He regarded her keenly, still frowning, but when he spoke again he had
moderated both his tone and words.

"I do not intend to be insolent, Miss Burrows, but I have been greatly
aggravated by your grandfather's unfortunate escape and in this
emergency every moment is precious if I am to capture him before he gets
out of America, as he has done once or twice before. Also, having wired
the Department that I have found Hathaway, I shall be discredited if I
let him slip through my fingers, so I am in a desperate fix. If I have
seemed a bit gruff and nervous, forgive me. It is your duty, as a loyal
subject of the United States, to assist an officer of the law by every
means in your power, especially when he is engaged in running down a
criminal. Therefore, whether you dislike to or not, you must tell me
where to find your grandfather."

"My grandfather is not a criminal, sir."

"The jury will decide that when his case comes to trial. At present he
is accused of crime and a warrant is out for his arrest. Where is he?"

"I do not know," she persisted.

"He--he left by the morning train, which goes west," stammered Miss
Stearne, anxious to placate the officer and fearful of the girl's
stubborn resistance.

"So the nigger servant told me," sneered the man; "but he didn't. I was
at the station myself--two miles from this forsaken place--to make sure
that Hathaway didn't skip while I was waiting for orders. Therefore, he
is either hidden somewhere in Beverly or he has sneaked away to an
adjoining town. The old serpent is slippery as an eel; but I'm going to
catch him, this time, as sure as fate, and this girl must give me all
the information she can."

"Oh, that will be quite easy," retorted Mary Louise, somewhat
triumphantly, "for I have no information to divulge."

He began to pace the room again, casting at her shrewd and uncertain
glances.

"He didn't say where he was going?"

"No."

"Or leave any address?"

"No."

"What DID he say?"

"That he was going away and would arrange with Miss Stearne for me to
board at the school."

"Huh! I see. Foxy old guy. Knew I would question you and wouldn't take
chances. If he writes you, or you learn what has become of him, will you
tell me?"

"No."

"I thought not." He turned toward the principal. How about this girl's
board money?" he asked. "When did he say he'd send it?"

"He paid me in advance, to the end of the present term," answered the
agitated Miss Stearne.

"Foxy old boy! Seemed to think of everything. I'm going, now; but take
this warning--both of you. Don't gabble about what I've said. Keep the
secret. If nothing gets out, Hathaway may think the coast is clear and
it's safe for him to come back. In that case I--or someone appointed by
the Department--will get a chance to nab him. That's all. Good day."

He made his exit from the room without ceremony, leaving Mary Louise and
Miss Stearne staring fearfully at one another.

"It--it's--dreadful!" stammered the teacher, shrinking back with a moan.

"It would be, if it were true," said the girl. "But Gran'pa Jim is no
criminal, we all know. He's the best man that ever lived, and the whole
trouble is that this foolish officer has mistaken him for someone else.
I heard him, with my own ears, tell the man he was mistaken."

Miss Stearne reflected.

"Then why did your grandfather run away?" she asked.

It was now Mary Louise's turn to reflect, seeking an answer. Presently
she realized that a logical explanation of her grandfather's action was
impossible with her present knowledge.

"I cannot answer that question, Miss Stearne," she admitted, candidly,
"but Gran'pa Jim must have had some good reason."

There was unbelief in the woman's eyes--unbelief and a horror of the
whole disgraceful affair that somehow included Mary Louise in its scope.
The girl read this look and it confused her. She mumbled an excuse and
fled to her room to indulge in a good cry.


CHAPTER VI

UNDER A CLOUD


The officer's injunction not to talk of the case of Colonel Weatherby
was of little avail in insuring secrecy. Oscar Dowd, who owned and
edited the one weekly newspaper in town, which appeared under the title
of "The Beverly Beacon," was a very ferret for news. He had to be;
otherwise there never would have been enough happenings in the vicinity
to fill the scant columns of his little paper, which was printed in big
type to make the items and editorials fill as much space as possible.

Uncle Eben met the editor and told him the Colonel had gone away
suddenly and had vacated the Vandeventer mansion and put Mary Louise
with Miss Stearne to board. Thereat, Oscar Dowd scented "news" and
called on Miss Stearne for further information. The good lady was almost
as much afraid of an editor as of an officer of the law, so under
Oscar's rapid-fire questioning she disclosed more of the dreadful charge
against Colonel Weatherby than she intended to. She even admitted the
visit of the secret service agent, but declined to give details of it.

Oscar found the agent had departed for parts unknown--perhaps to trail
the escaped Colonel--but the hotel keeper furnished him with other wisps
of information and, bunching all the rumors together and sifting the
wheat from the chaff, the editor evolved a most thrilling tale to print
in the Wednesday paper. Some of the material his own imagination
supplied; much else was obtained from irresponsible gossips who had no
foundation for their assertions. Miss Stearne was horrified to find, on
receiving her copy of the Wednesday "Beacon" that big headlines across
the front page announced: "Beverly Harbors a Criminal in Disguise!
Flight of Colonel James Weatherby when a Federal Officer Seeks to Arrest
him for a Terrible Crime!"

Then followed a mangled report of the officer's visit to Beverly on
government business, his recognition of Colonel Weatherby--who was none
other than the noted criminal, James J. Hathaway--on the street in front
of Cooper's Hotel, how the officer wired Washington for instructions and
how Hathaway, alias Weatherby, escaped in the dead of night and had so
far successfully eluded all pursuit. What crime Hathaway, alias
Weatherby, was accused of, the officer would not divulge, and the
statements of others disagreed. One report declared the Colonel had
wrecked a New York bank and absconded with enormous sums he had
embezzled; another stated he had been president of a swindling stock
corporation which had used the mails illegally to further its nefarious
schemes. A third account asserted he had insured his life for a million
dollars in favor of his daughter, Mrs. Burrows, and then established a
false death and reappeared after Mrs. Burrows had collected the
insurance money.

Having printed all this prominently in big type, the editor appended a
brief note in small type saying he would not vouch for the truth of any
statement made in the foregoing article. Nevertheless, it was a terrible
arraignment and greatly shocked the good citizens of Beverly.

Miss Stearne, realizing how humiliated Mary Louise would be if the
newspaper fell into her hands, carefully hid her copy away where none of
the girls could see it; but one of the day scholars brought a copy to
the school Thursday morning and passed it around among the girls, so
that all were soon in possession of the whole scandalous screed.

Mable Westervelt, after feasting upon the awful accusations, cruelly
handed the paper to Mary Louise. The girl's face blanched and then grew
red, her mouth fell open as if gasping for breath and her eyes stared
with a pained, hopeless expression at the printed page that branded her
dearly loved Gran'pa Jim a swindler and a thief. She rose quickly and
left the room, to the great relief of the other girls, who wanted to
talk the matter over.

"The idea," cried Mable indignantly, "of that old villain's foisting his
grandchild on this respectable school while he ran away to escape the
penalty of his crimes!"

"Mary Louise is all right," asserted Jennie Allen stoutly. "She isn't to
blame, at all."

"I warned you that her goody-goody airs were a cloak to hidden
wickedness," said Mable, tossing her head.

"Blood will tell," drawled Lina Darrow, a very fat girl. "Mary Louise
has bad blood in her veins and it's bound to crop out, sooner or later.
I advise you girls to keep your trunks locked and to look after your
jewelry."

"Shame--shame!" cried Dorothy Knerr, and the others echoed the reproach.
Even Mable looked at fat Lina disapprovingly.

However, in spite of staunch support on the part of her few real
friends, Mary Louise felt from that hour a changed atmosphere when in
the presence of her school fellows. Weeks rolled by without further
public attacks upon Gran'pa Jim, but among the girls at the school
suspicion had crept in to ostracize Mary Louise from the general
confidence. She lost her bright, cheery air of self-assurance and grew
shy and fearful of reproach, avoiding her schoolmates more than they
avoided her. Instead of being content in her new home, as she had hoped
to be, the girl found herself more miserable and discontented than at
any other period of her life. She longed continually to be comforted by
Gran'pa Jim and Mamma Bee, and even lost interest in her studies, moping
dismally in her room when she should have been taking an interest in the
life at the school.

Even good Miss Stearne had unconsciously changed in her attitude toward
the forlorn girl. Deciding one day that she needed some new shoes, Mary
Louise went to the principal to ask for the money with which to buy
them.

Miss Stearne considered the matter seriously. Then she said with warning
emphasis:

"My dear, I do not think it advisable for you to waste your funds on
shoes, especially as those you have are in fairly good condition. Of
course, your grandfather left some money with me, to be expended as I
saw fit, but now that he has abscon--eh--eh--secreted himself, so to
speak, we can expect no further remittances. When this term is ended any
extra money should be applied toward your further board and tuition.
Otherwise you would become an outcast, with no place to go and no
shelter for your head. That, in common decency, must be avoided. No; I
do not approve of any useless expenditures. I shall hoard this money for
future emergencies."

In happier times Mary Louise would have been indignant at the thought
that her grandfather would ever leave her unprovided for, but she had
been so humbled of late that this aspect of her affairs, so candidly
presented by Miss Stearne, troubled her exceedingly. She had written a
letter every week to her grandfather, addressing it, as he had
instructed her to do, in care of Mr. Peter Conant at Dorfield. And
always she had stolen out, unobserved, and mailed the letter at the
village post office. Of course she had never by a single word referred
to the scandal regarding the Colonel or her mother, or to her own
unhappy lot at school because of that scandal, knowing how such a report
would grieve them; but the curious thing about this correspondence was
that it was distinctly one-sided. In the three months since they had
gone away, Mary Louise had never received an answer to any of her
letters, either from her grandfather or her mother.

This might be explained, she reflected, by the fact that they suspected
the mails would be watched; but this supposition attributed some truth
to the accusation that Gran'pa Jim was a fugitive from justice, which
she would not allow for an instant. Had he not told her to have faith in
him, whatever happened? Should she prove disloyal just because a brutal
officer and an irresponsible newspaper editor had branded her dear
grandfather a criminal?

No! Whatever happened she would cling to her faith in the goodness of
dear Gran'pa Jim.

There was very little money in her purse; a few pennies that she must
hoard to buy postage stamps with. Two parties for young people were
given in Beverly and at both of them Mary Louise was the only girl
boarding at the school who was uninvited. She knew that some of the
girls even resented her presence at the school and often when she joined
a group of schoolmates their hushed conversation warned her they had
been discussing her.

Altogether, she felt that her presence at the school was fast becoming
unbearable and when one of the boarders openly accused her of stealing a
diamond ring--which was later discovered on a shelf above a washstand--
the patient humility of Mary Louise turned to righteous anger and she
resolved to leave the shelter of Miss Stearne's roof without delay.

There was only one possible place for her to go--to the Conant house at
Dorfield, where her mother and grandfather were staying and where she
had already passed three of the most pleasant years of her short life.
Gran'pa Jim had not told her she could come to him, even in an
emergency, but when she explained all the suffering she had endured at
the school she knew quite well that he would forgive her for coming.

But she needed money for the long journey, and this must be secured in
some way from her own resources. So she got together all the jewelry she
possessed and placing it in her handbag started for the town.

She had an idea that a jewelry shop was the proper place to sell her
jewelry, but Mr. Trumbull the jeweler shook his head and said that
Watson, at the bank, often loaned money on such security. He advised the
girl to see Watson.

So Mary Louise went to the "bank," which was a one-man affair situated
in the rear of the hardware store, where a grating had been placed in
one corner. There she found Mr. Watson, who was more a country broker
than a banker, and throve by lending money to farmers.

Gran'pa Jim was almost as fond of pretty jewels as he was of good
clothes and he had always been generous in presenting his grand-daughter
with trinkets on her birthdays and at Christmas time. The jewelry she
laid before Mr. Watson was really valuable and the banker's eye was
especially attracted by a brooch of pearls that must have cost several
hundred dollars.

"How much do you want to borrow on this lot?" he asked.

"As much as I can get, sir," she replied.

"Have you any idea of redeeming it?"

"I hope to do so, of course."

The banker knew perfectly well who Mary Louise was and suspected she
needed money.

"This is no pawnbroker's shop," he asserted. "I'll give you a hundred
dollars, outright, for this pearl brooch--as a purchase, understand--but
the rest of the junk I don't want."

A little man who had entered the hardware store to purchase a tin dipper
was getting so close to the "bank" that Mary Louise feared being
overheard; so she did not argue with Mr. Watson. Deciding that a hundred
dollars ought to take her to Dorfield, she promptly accepted the offer,
signed a bill of sale and received her money. Then she walked two miles
to the railway station and discovered that a ticket to Dorfield could be
bought for ninety-two dollars. That would give her eight dollars leeway,
which seemed quite sufficient. Elated at the prospect of freedom she
returned to the school to make her preparation for departure and arrived
just in time to join the other girls at dinner.


CHAPTER VII

THE ESCAPE


As she packed her trunk behind the locked door of her room--an
unnecessary precaution, since the girls generally avoided her society--
Mary Louise considered whether to confide the fact of her going to Miss
Stearne or to depart without a word of adieu. In the latter case she
would forfeit her trunk and her pretty clothes, which she did not wish
to do unless it proved absolutely necessary; and, after all, she
decided, frankness was best. Gran'pa Jim had often said that what one
could not do openly should not be done at all. There was nothing to be
ashamed of in her resolve to leave the school where she was so unhappy.
The girls did not want her there and she did not want to stay; the
school would be relieved of a disturbing element and Mary Louise would
be relieved of unjust persecution; no blame attached to any but those
who had made public this vile slander against her grandfather. From all
viewpoints she considered she was doing the right thing; so, when her
preparations were complete, she went to Miss Stearne's room, although it
was now after eight o'clock in the evening, and requested an interview.

"I am going away," she quietly announced to the principal.

"Going away! But where?" asked the astonished teacher.

"I cannot tell you that, Miss Stearne."

"Do you not know?"

"Yes, I know, but I prefer not to tell you."

Miss Stearne was greatly annoyed. She was also perplexed. The fact that
Mary Louise was deserting her school did not seem so important, at the
moment, as the danger involved by a young girl's going out into the
world unprotected. The good woman had already been rendered very nervous
by the dreadful accusation of Colonel Weatherby and the consequent
stigma that attached to his granddaughter, a pupil at her eminently
respectable school. She realized perfectly that the girl was blameless,
whatever her grandsire might have done, and she deeply deplored the
scornful attitude assumed by the other pupils toward poor Mary Louise;
nevertheless a certain bitter resentment of the unwholesome scandal that
had smirched her dignified establishment had taken possession of the
woman, perhaps unconsciously, and while she might be a little ashamed of
the ungenerous feeling, Miss Stearne fervently wished she had never
accepted the girl as a pupil.

She HAD accepted her, however. She had received the money for Mary
Louise's tuition and expenses and had promptly applied the entire sum to
reducing her grocery bills and other pressing obligations; therefore she
felt it her duty to give value received. If Mary Louise was to be driven
from the school by the jeers and sneers of the other girls, Miss Stearne
would feel like a thief. Moreover, it would be a distinct reproach to
her should she allow a fifteen-year-old girl to wander into a cruel
world because her school--her sole home and refuge--had been rendered so
unbearable that she could not remain there. The principal was really
unable to repay the money that had been advanced to her, even if that
would relieve her of obligation to shelter the girl, and therefore she
decided that Mary Louise must not be permitted, under any circumstances,
to leave her establishment without the authority of her natural
guardians.

This argument ran hurriedly through her mind as the girl stood calmly
waiting.

"Is this action approved by your mother, or--or--by your grandfather?"
she asked, somewhat more harshly than was her wont in addressing her
pupils.

"No, Miss Stearne."

"Then how dare you even suggest it?"

"I am not wanted here," returned the girl with calm assurance. "My
presence is annoying to the other girls, as well as to yourself, and so
disturbs the routine of the school. For my part, I--I am very unhappy
here, as you must realize, because everyone seems to think my dear
Gran'pa Jim is a wicked man--which I know he is not. I have no heart to
study, and--and so--it is better for us all that I go away."

This statement was so absolutely true and the implied reproach was so
justified, that Miss Stearne allowed herself to become angry as the best
means of opposing the girl's design.

"This is absurd!" she exclaimed. "You imagine these grievances, Mary
Louise, and I cannot permit you to attack the school and your fellow
boarders in so reckless a manner. You shall not stir one step from this
school! I forbid you, positively, to leave the grounds hereafter without
my express permission. You have been placed in my charge and I insist
that you obey me. Go to your room and study your lessons, which you have
been shamefully neglecting lately. If I hear any more of this rebellious
wish to leave the school, I shall be obliged to punish you by confining
you to your room."

The girl listened to this speech with evident surprise; yet the tirade
did not seem to impress her.

"You refuse, then, to let me go?" she returned.

"I positively refuse."

"But I cannot stay here, Miss Stearne," she protested.

"You must. I have always treated you kindly--I treat all my girls well
if they deserve it--but you are developing a bad disposition, Mary
Louise--a most reprehensible disposition, I regret to say--and the
tendency must be corrected at once. Not another word! Go to your room."

Mary Louise went to her room, greatly depressed by the interview. She
looked at her trunk, made a mental inventory of its highly prized
contents, and sighed. But as soon as she rejoined Gran'pa, Jim, she
reflected, he would send an order to have the trunk forwarded and Miss
Stearne would not dare refuse. For a time she must do without her pretty
gowns.

Instead of studying her text books she studied the railway time-card.
She had intended asking Miss Stearne to permit her to take the five-
thirty train from Beverly Junction the next morning and since the recent
interview she had firmly decided to board that very train. This was not
entirely due to stubbornness, for she reflected that if she stayed at
the school her unhappy condition would become aggravated, instead of
improving, especially since Miss Stearne had developed unexpected
sharpness of temper. She would endure no longer the malicious taunts of
her school fellows or the scoldings of the principal, and these could be
avoided in no other way than by escaping as she had planned.

At ten o'clock she lay down upon her bed, fully dressed, and put out her
light; but she dared not fall asleep lest she miss her train. At times
she lighted a match and looked at her watch and it surprised her to
realize how long a night can be when one is watching for daybreak.

At four o'clock she softly rose, put on her hat, took her suit case in
hand and stealthily crept from, the room. It was very dark in the
hallway but the house was so familiar to her that she easily felt her
way along the passage, down the front stairs and so to the front door.

Miss Stearne always locked this door at night but left the key in the
lock. To-night the key had been withdrawn. When Mary Louise had
satisfied herself of this fact she stole along the lower hallway toward
the rear. The door that connected with the dining room and farther on
with the servants' quarters had also been locked and the key withdrawn.
This was so unusual that it plainly told the girl that Miss Stearne was
suspicious that she might try to escape, and so had taken precautions to
prevent her leaving the house.

Mary Louise cautiously set down her suit case and tried to think what to
do. The house had not been built for a school but was an old residence
converted to school purposes. On one side of the hall was a big drawing-
room; on the other side were the principal's apartments.

Mary Louise entered the drawing-room and ran against a chair that stood
in her way. Until now she had not made the slightest noise, but the suit
case banged against the chair and the concussion reverberated dully
throughout the house.

The opposite door opened and a light flooded the hall. From where the
girl stood in the dark drawing-room she could see Miss Stearne standing
in her doorway and listening. Mary Louise held herself motionless. She
scarcely dared breathe. The principal glanced up and down the hall,
noted the locked doors and presently retired into her room, after a
little while extinguishing the light.

Then Mary Louise felt her way to a window, drew aside the heavy
draperies and carefully released the catch of the sash, which she then
succeeded in raising. The wooden blinds were easily unfastened but swung
back with a slight creak that made her heart leap with apprehension. She
did not wait, now, to learn if the sound had been heard, for already she
had wasted too much time if she intended to catch her train. She leaned
through the window, let her suit case down as far as she could reach,
and dropped it to the ground. Then she climbed through the opening and
let herself down by clinging to the sill. It was a high window, but she
was a tall girl for her age and her feet touched the ground. Now she was
free to go her way.

She lost no time in getting away from the grounds, being guided by a dim
starlight and a glow in the east that was a promise of morning. With
rapid steps she made her way to the station, reaching it over the rough
country road just as the train pulled in. She had been possessed with
the idea that someone was stealthily following her and under the light
of the depot lamps her first act was to swing around and stare into the
darkness from which she had emerged. You see, she worked as a cook in
the hotel and her master wanted her to live close to her work. I
was born in the cabin in town.

"No, I never went to school, but I was taught a little by my master's
daughter, and can read and write a little.

As a slave boy I had to work in the military school in Goldsboro.

I waited on tables and washed dishes, but my wages went to my master
the sane as my mother's.

"I was about fourteen when the war broke out, and remember when the Yankees
came through our town. There was a Yankee soldier by the name of
Kuhns who took charge of a Government Store. He would sell tobacco and
such like to the soldiers. He was the man who told me I was free and
then give me a job working in the store.

"I had some brothers and sisters but I do not remember them--can't tell
you anything about them.

"Our beds were homemade out of poplar lumber and we slept on straw ticks.
We had good things to eat and a lot of corn cakes and sweet potatoes.
I had pretty good clothes, shoes, pants and a shirt, the same winter
and summer.

"I don't know anything about the plantation as I had to work in town and
did not go out there very much. No, I don't know how big it was or how
many slaves there was. I never heard of any uprisings either.

"Our overseer was 'poor white-trash', hired by the master. I remember
the master lived in a big white house and he was always kind to his
slaves, so was his wife and children, but we didn't like the overseer.
I heard of some slaves being whipped, but I never was and I did not
see any of the others get punished.

Yes, there was a jail on the plantation where slaves had to go if
they wouldn't behave. I never saw a slave in chains but I have seen
colored men in the chain gang since the war.

"We had a negro church in town and slaves that could be trusted
could go to church. It was a Methodist Church and we sang negro
spirituals.

"We could go to the funeral of a relative and quit work until it was
over and then went back to work. There was a graveyard on the plantation.

"A lot of slaves ran away and if they were caught they were brought
back and put in the stocks until they were sold. The master would never
keep a runaway slave. We used to have fights with the 'white trash'
sometimes and once I was hit by a rock throwed by a white
boy and that's what this lump on my head is.

"Yes, we had to work every day but Sunday. The slaves did not have any
holidays. I did not have time to play games but used to watch the slaves
sing and dance after dark. I don't remember any stories.

"When the slaves heard they had been set free, I remember a lot of
them were sorry and did not want to leave the plantation.

No, I never heard of any in our section getting any mules or land.

"I do remember the 'night riders' that come through our country after
the war. They put the horse shoes on the horses backwards and wrapped
the horses feet in burlap so we couldn't hear them coming. The
colored folks were deathly afraid of these men and would all run and
hide when they heard they were coming. These 'night riders' used to steal
everything the colored people had--even their beds and straw ticks.

"Right after the war I was brought north by Mr. Kuhns I spoke of, and
for a short while I worked at the milling trade in Tiffin and came to
Canton in 1866. Mr. Kuhns owned a part in the old flour mill here
(now the Ohio Builders and Milling Co.) and he give me a job as a
miller. I worked there until the end of last year, 70 years, and I am
sure this is a record in Canton. No, I never worked any other place.

"I was married July 4, 1871 to Jennie Scott in Massillon.

We had four children but they are all dead except one boy. Our first baby--a
girl named Mary Jane, born February 21, 1872, was the first colored
child born in Canton. My wife died in 1926. No, I do not know when she
was born, but I do know she was not a slave.

"I started to vote after I came north but did not ever vote in the south.
I do not like the way the young people of today live; they are too
fast and drink too much. Yes, I think this is true of the white children
the same as the colored.

"I saved my money when I worked and when I quit I had three properties.
I sold one of these, gave one to my son, and I am living in the other.

No, I have never had to ask for charity. I also get a pension
check from, the mill where I worked so long.

"I joined church simply because I thought it would make me a better man
and I think every one should belong. I have been a member of St. Paul's
A.M.E. church here in Canton for 54 years. Yesterday (Sunday, August 15,
1937) our church celebrated by burning the mortgage. As I was
the oldest member I was one of the three who lit it, the other two
are the only living charter members.

My church friends made me a present yesterday of $100.00 which was a
birthday gift. I was 90 years old the 25th of last month."
Hall resides at 1225 High Ave., S.W., Canton, Ohio.

Miriam Logan Lebanon, Ohio
MRS. CELIA HENDERSON, aged 88.

Born Hardin County, Kentucky in 1849
(drawing of Celia Henderson) [TR: no drawing found]

"Mah mammy were Julia Dittoe, an pappy, he were name Willis Dittoe.
Dey live at Louieville till mammy were sold fo' her marster's debt.
She were a powerful good cook, mammy were--an she were sol' fo to
pay dat debt."
"She tuk us four chillen 'long wid her, an pappy an th' others staid
back in Louieville.

Dey tuk us all on a boat de Big Ribber--evah heah ob de big ribber?
Mississippi its name--but we calls it de big ribber."
"_Natchez on de hill_--dats whaah de tuk us to. Nactchez-on-de-hill
dis side of N' Or'leans. Mammy she have eleven chillen. No 'em, don't
'member all dem names no mo'. No 'em, nevah see pappy no moah.
Im 'member mammy cryin' goin' down on de boat, and us chillen a cryin'
too, but de place we got us was a nice place, nicer den what we left.
Family 'o name of GROHAGEN it was dat got us.

Yas'em dey was nice to mammy fo' she was a fine cook, mammy wus. A fine
cook!"
"Me? Go'Long! I ain't no sech cook as my mammy was. But mah boy, he were
a fine cook. I ain't nothin' of a cook. Yas'em, I cook fo Mis Gallagher,
an fo 4 o' de sheriffs here, up at de jail.

But de fancy cookin' I ain't much on, no'em I ain't. But mah boy an mammy
now, dey was fine! Mah boy cook at hotels and wealthy homes in Louieville
'til he died."
"Dey was cotton down dere in Natchez, but no tobacco like up here. No 'em,
I nevah wuk in cotton fields. I he'p mammy tote water, hunt chips,
hunt pigs, get things outa de col' house. Dat way, I guess I went to
wuk when I wuz about 7 or 8 yeahs ol'. Chillen is sma't now, an dey hafto
be taught to wuk, but dem days us culled chillen wuk; an we had
a good time wukin' fo dey wernt no shows, no playthings lak dey
have now to takey up day time, no'em."

"Nevah no church fo' culled people does I 'member in Natchez. One time
dey was a drouth, an de water we hauls from way ovah to de rivah.
Now dat wuz down right wuk, a haulin dat water. Dey wuz an ol' man, he
were powerful in prayer, an gather de darkies unda a big tree, an
we all kneels down whilse he pray fo de po' beastes what needs
good clean water fo to drink.

Dat wuz a putty sight, dat church meetin' under de big tree. I
alus member dat, an how, dat day he foun a spring wid he ol' cane,
jes' like a miracle after prayer. It were a putty sight to see mah
cows an all de cattle a trottin' fo dat water. De mens dey dug out a
round pond fo' de water to run up into outa de spring, an it wuz good
watah dat wudn't make de beastes sick, an we-all was sho' happy.'"
"Yes'em, I'se de only one of mammy's chillen livin'. She had 11
chillen.
Mah gran'na on pappy's side, she live to be one hundred an ten
yeah's ol' powerful ol' ev'y body say, an she were part Indian,
gran'ma were, an dat made her live to be ol'.

"Me? I had two husband an three chillen. Mah firs' husban die an lef' me
wid three little chillens, an mah secon' husban', he die 'bout six yeahs
ago. Ah cum heah to Lebanon about forty yeahs ago, because mah mammy
were heah, an she wanted me to come. When ah wuz little, we live nine
yeahs in Natchez on de hill. Den when de wah were ovah Mammy she want to
go back to Louieville fo her folks wuz all theah. Ah live in
Louieville til ah cum to Lebanon. All ah 'members bout de close o'de wah,
wuz dat white folks wuz broke up an po' down dere at Natchez; and
de fus time ah hears de EMANICAPTION read out dey was a lot o' prancin
'roun, an a big time."

"Ah seen soldiers in blue down there in Natchez on de hill, oncet ah
seen dem cumin down de road when ah were drivin mah cows up de road.
Ah wuz scared sho, an' ah hid in de bushes side o' de road til dey
went by, don' member dat mah cows was much scared though."

Mammy say 'bettah hide when you sees sojers a-marchin by, so dat time a
whole line o dem cum along and I hide."
"Down dere mammy done her cookin' outa doors, wid a big oven. Yo gits yo
fiah goin' jes so under de oven, den you shovels some fiah up on
top de oven fo to get you bakin jes right.

Dey wuz big black kettles wid hooks an dey run up an down like on
pulleys ovah de oven stove.

Den dere wuz de col'house. No 'lectric ice box lak now, but a house
under groun' wheah things wuz kept jest as col' as a ice box. No'em don't
'member jes how it were fix inside."
"Yas'em we comes back to Louieville.

Yes'em mah chillen goes to school, lak ah nevah did.

Culled teachers in de culled school.

Yes'em mah chillen went far as dey could take 'em."

"Medicin? My ol' mammy were great fo herb doctorin' an I holds by dat
too a good deal, yas'em. Now-a-days you gets a rusty nail in yo foot
an has lockjaw. But ah member mammy--she put soot mix wid bacon fryin's
on mah foot when ah run a big nail inter it, an mah foot get well as
nice!"

"Long time ago ah cum heah to see mammy, Ah got a terrible misery.

Ah wuz asleep a dreamin bout it, an a sayin, "Mammy yo reckon axel grease
goin' to he'p it?" Den ah wake up an go to her wheahs she's sleepin an
say it.

"What fo axel grease gointo hep?

--an I tol her, an she say:--
"Axel grease put on hot, wid red flannel goin'to tak it away chile."
Ah were an ol' woman mahse'f den--bout fifty, but mammy she climb
outa bed an go out in de yard where deys an ol' wagon, an she scrapes
dat axel off, an heat it up an put it on wid red flannel.

Den ah got easy!

Ah sho was thankful when dat grease an flannel got to wukin on me!

"You try it sometime when you gets one o' dem col' miseries in de winter
time. But go 'long! Folks is too sma't nowadays to use dem good
ol' medicines.

Dey jes' calls de Doctor an he come an cut 'em wide open fo de
'pendycitus--he sho do!

Yas'em ah has de doctor, ef ah needs him. Ah has de rheumatism, no pain--ah
jes gets stiffer, an' stiffer right along."
Mah sight sho am poor now. Ah cain't wuk no mo. Ah done ironin aftah
ah quit cookin--washin an ironin, ah likes a nice wash an iron the bes
fo wuk.

But lasyear mah eyes done give out on me, an dey tell me not
to worry dey gointo give me a pension.

De man goes to a heap o' wuk to get dem papers fix jes right."
"Yes 'em, I'se de on'y one o' mammy's chillen livin. Mah, gran'ma on
pappy's side, she live to be one hundred and ten yeah's ol--powerful
ol eve'ybody say. She were part Indian, gran' ma were, an dat made her
to be ol."
"Yes'em, mos' I evah earn were five dollars a week.

Ah gets twenty dollars now, an pays eight dollars fo rent.

We is got no mo'--ah figgers--a wukin fo ourself den what we'd have wuz
we slaves, fo dey gives you a log house, an clothes, an yo eats all yo
want to, an when you _buys_ things, maybe you doesn't make enough to
git you what you needs, wukin sun-up to sun down.

No' em 'course ah isn't wukin _now_ when you gits be de hour--wukin
people does now; but ah don't know nothin 'but that way o'doin."

"We weahs cotton cloths when ah were young, jes plain weave it were;
no collar nor cuffs, n' belt like store clothes.

Den men's jes have a kinda clothes like ... well, like a chemise, den some
pantaloons wid a string run through at de knees. Bare feet--yes'em, no
shoes. Nevah need no coat down to Natchez, no'em."
"When we comes back to Louieville on de boat, we sleeps in de straw on
de flo' o' de boat. It gits colder 'n colder! Come big chunks ol ice
down de river. De sky am dark, an hit col' an spit snow.

Ah wish ah were back dere in Natchez dat time after de war were ovah!

Yes'em, ah members dat much."

"Ah wuk along wid mammy til ah were married, den ah gits on by mahsef.

Manny she come heah to Lebanon wid de Suttons--she married Sam.
Sutton's pappy. Yes 'em dey wuz about 12 o'de fambly cum heah, an ah come
to see mammy,... den ah gits me wuk, an ah stays.

"Cookin'? Yes'em, way meat is so high now, ah likes groundhog. Ground
hog is good eatin. A peddler was by wid groun' hog fo ten cents
apiece.
Ground hog is good as fried chicken any day. You cleans de hog,
an boils it in salt water til its tender. Den you makes flour gravy,
puts it on after de water am drain off; you puts it in de oven wif de
lid on an bakes hit a nice brown. No 'em, don' like fish so well, nor
coon, nor possum, dey is too greasy.

Likes chicken, groundhog an pork." Wid de wild meat you wants plain
boiled potatoes, yes'em Irish potatoes, sho enough, ah heard o' eatin
skunk, and muskrat, but ah ain't cookin em.

But ah tells you dat groun' hog is _good eatin_.

"Ah were Baptized by a white minister in Louieville, an' ah been a Baptist
fo' sixty yeahs now. Yes'em dey is plenty o' colored churches in
Louisville now, but when I were young, de white folks has to see
to it dat we is Baptised an knows Bible verses an' hymns.

Dere want no smart culled preachers like Reverend Williams ... an
dey ain't so many now."

"Up to Xenia is de culled school, an dey is mo's smart culled folks,
ol' ones too--dat could give you-all a real story if you finds dem.

But me, ah cain't read, nor write, and don't member's nuthin fo de War
no good."
Celia is very black as to complexion; tall spare; has small grey
eyes.

In three long interviews she has tried very hard to remember for us
from her youth and back through the years; it seems to trouble her that
she cannot remember more. Samuel Sutton's father married her
mother. Neither she or Samuel had the kind of a story to tell that I
was expecting to hear from what little I know about colored people. I
may have tried to get them on the songs and amusements of their
youth too often, but it seems that most that they knew was work;
did not sing or have a very good time. Of course I thought they would
say that slavery was terrible, but was surprised there too.

Colored people here are used to having white people come for them
to work as they have no telephones, and most white people only
hire colored help by the day or as needed. Celia and Samuel, old age
pensioners, were very apoligetic because they are no longer able to
work.

WPA in Ohio Federal Writers' Project Bishop & Isleman Reporter: Bishop
[HW: Revised]
Topic: Ex-Slaves.
Jefferson County, District #5 July 6, 1937
GEORGE JACKSON Ex-Slave, 79 years
I was born in Loudon County, Virginny, Feb. 6, 1858.

My mother's name was Betsy Jackson. My father's name was Henry Jackson.
Dey were slaves and was born right der in Loudon County. I had 16 brothers
and sisters.
All of dem is dead. My brothers were Henry, Richard, Wesley, John and
me; Sisters were Annie, Marion, Sarah Jane, Elizabeth, Alice, Cecila
and Meryl. Der were three other chillun dat died when babies.

I can remember Henry pullin' me out of de fire. I've got scars on my leg
yet. He was sold out of de family to a man dat was Wesley McGuest.
Afterwards my brother was taken sick with small-pox and died.

We lived on a big plantation right close to Bloomfield, Virginny. I
was born in de storeroom close to massa's home. It was called de weavin'
room--place where dey weaved cotton and yarn. My bed was like a little
cradle bed and dey push it under de big bed at day time.

My grandfather died so my mother told me, when he was very old. My
grandmother died when se bout 96. She went blind fore she died. Dey
were all slaves.

My father was owned by John Butler and my grandmother was owned by
Tommy Humphries. Dey were both farmers. My massa joined de war. He was
killed right der where he lived.

When my father wanted to cum home he had to get a permit from his massa.

He would only cum home on Saturday. He worked on de next plantation
joinin' us. All us chillun and my mother belonged to Massa
Humphries.

I worked in de garden, hoein' weeds and den I washed dishes in de
kitchen. I never got any money.

I eat fat pork, corn bread, black molasses and bad milk. The meat was
mostly boiled. I lived on fat meat and corn bread. I don't remember eatin'
rabbit, possum or fish.

De slaves on our plantation did not own der own garden. Dey ate vegetables
out of de big garden.

In hot weather I wore gean pants and shirt. De pants were red color
and shirt white. I wore heavy woolen clothes in de winter. I wore
little britches wid jacket fastened on. I went barefooted in de
summer.

De mistress scold and beat me when I was pullin' weeds. Sometimes I
pulled a cabbage stead of weed. She would jump me and beat me. I can
remember cryin'.

She told me she had to learn me to be careful. I remember the massa
when he went to war. He was a picket in an apple tree. A Yankee soldier
spied and shot him out of de tree.

I remember Miss Ledig Humphries. She was a pretty girl and she had a
sister Susie. She married a Mr. Chamlain who was overseer. Der were
Robert and Herbert Humphries. Dey were older dan me. Robert wuz about 15
years old when de war surrender.

De one that married Susie was de overseer.

He was pretty rough. I don't remember any white neighbors round at
dat time.
Der were 450 acres of de plantation. I can't remember all de slaves.
I know der were 80, odd slaves.
Lots of mornings I would go out hours fore daylight and when it was
cold my feet would 'most freeze. They all knew dey had to get up
in de mornin'. De slaves all worked hard and late at night.
I heerd some say that the overseer would take dem to de barn. I
remember Tom Lewis. Then his massa sold him to our massa he told
him not to let the overseer whip him. The overseer said he would
whip him. One day Tom did something wrong. The overseer ordered him
to de barn. Tom took his shirt off to get ready for de whippin' and
when de overseer raised de whip Tom gave him one lick wid his fist
and broke de overseer's neck.
Den de massa sold Tom to a man by de name of Joseph Fletcher. He
stayed with old man Fletcher til he died.
Fore de slaves were sold dey were put in a cell place til next day
when dey would be sold. Uncle Marshall and Douglas were sold and I
remember dem handcuffed but I never saw dem on de auction block.
I never knew nothin' bout de Bible til after I was free. I went to
school bout three months. I was 19 or 20 years old den.
My uncle Bill heard dey were goin' to sell him and he run away. He
went north and cum back after de surrender. He died in Bluemont,
Virginny, bout four years ago.
After de days work dey would have banjo pickin', singin' and
dancin'.
Dey work all day Saturday and Saturday night those dat had wives
to see would go to see dem. On Sunday de would sit around.
When Massa was shot my mother and dem was cryin'.
When Slaves were sick one of the mammies would look after dem and
dey would call de doctor if she couldn't fix de sick.For the first
time, ugly doubts began to creep into her heart. The officer was right
when he said that James Hathaway was masquerading under the false name
of Colonel Weatherby. Gran'pa Jim had never told even Mary Louise that
his real name was Hathaway; Mamma Bee had never told her, either. With a
deep sigh she snapped the case of the watch in place and then began to
dress.

It was still too early for breakfast when she had finished her toilet,
so she sat by the open window of her room, looking down into the street,
and tried to solve the mystery of Gran'pa Jim. Better thoughts came to
her, inspiring her with new courage. Her grandfather had changed his
name to enable him the more easily to escape observation, for it was
James Hathaway who was accused, not Colonel James Weatherby. It was
difficult, however, for the girl to familiarize herself with the idea
that Gran'pa Jim was really James Hathaway; still, if her mother's name
before her marriage was indeed Beatrice Hathaway, as the watch proved,
then there was no question but her grandfather's name was also Hathaway.
He had changed it for a purpose and she must not question the honesty of
that purpose, however black the case looked against her beloved Gran'pa
Jim.

This discovery, nevertheless, only added to the mystery of the whole
affair, which she realized her inability to cope with. Grouping the
facts with which she was familiar into regular order, her information
was limited as follows:

Once Gran'pa Jim was rich and prosperous and was named Hathaway. He had
many friends and lived in a handsome city house. Suddenly he left
everything and ran away, changing his name to that of Weatherby. He was
afraid, for some unknown reason, of being arrested, and whenever
discovery threatened his retreat he would run away again. In this manner
he had maintained his liberty for nine years, yet to-day the officers of
the law seemed as anxious to find him as at first. To sum up, Gran'pa
Jim was accused of a crime so important that it could not be condoned
and only his cleverness in evading arrest had saved him from prison.

That would look pretty black to a stranger, and it made even Mary Louise
feel very uncomfortable and oppressed, but against the accusation the
girl placed these facts, better known to her than the others: Gran'pa
Jim was a good man, kind and honest. Since she had known him his life
had been blameless. Mamma Bee, who knew him best of all, never faltered
in her devotion to him. He was incapable of doing an evil deed, he
abhorred falsehood, he insisted on defending the rights of his fellow
men. Therefore, in spite of any evidence against him Mary Louise
believed in his innocence.

Having settled this belief firmly in mind and heart, the girl felt a
distinct sense of relief. She would doubt no more. She would not try, in
the future, to solve a mystery that was beyond her comprehension. Her
one duty was to maintain an unfaltering faith.

At seven o'clock she went to the breakfast room, to which but two or
three other guests of the hotel had preceded her, and in a few minutes
Detective O'Gorman entered and seated himself at a table near her. He
bowed very respectfully as he caught her eye and she returned the
salutation, uneasy at the man's presence but feeling no especial
antagonism toward him. As he had said, he was but doing his duty.

O'Gorman finished his breakfast before Mary Louise did, after which,
rising from his chair, he came toward her table and asked quietly:

"May I sit at your table a moment, Miss Burrows?"

She neither consented nor refused, being taken by surprise, but O'Gorman
sat down without requiring an answer.

"I wish to tell you," he began, "that my unpleasant espionage of you is
ended. It will be needless for me to embarrass or annoy you longer."

"Indeed?"

"Yes. Aren't you glad?" with a smile at her astonished expression. "You
see, I've been busy investigating while you slept. I've visited the
local police station and--various other places. I am satisfied that Mr.
Hathaway--or Mr. Weatherby, as he calls himself--is not in Dorfield and
has never located here. Once again the man has baffled the entire force
of our department. I am now confident that your coming to this town was
not to meet your grandfather but to seek refuge with other friends, and
so I have been causing you all this bother and vexation for nothing."

She looked at him in amazement.

"I'm going to ask you to forgive me," he went on, "and unless I misjudge
your nature you're not going to bear any grudge against me. They sent me
to Beverly to watch you, and for a time that was a lazy man's job. When
you sold some of your jewelry for a hundred dollars, however, I knew
there would be something doing. You were not very happy at your school,
I knew, and my first thought was that you merely intended to run away--
anywhere to escape the persecution of those heartless girls. But you
bought a ticket for Dorfield, a faraway town, so I at once decided--
wrongly, I admit--that you knew where Hathaway was and intended going to
him. So I came with you, to find he is not here. He has never been here.
Hathaway is too distinguished a personage, in appearance, to escape the
eye of the local police. So I am about to set you free, my girl, and to
return immediately to my headquarters in Washington."

She had followed his speech eagerly and with a feeling of keen
disappointment at his report that her grandfather and her mother were
not in Dorfield. Could it be true?

Officer O'Gorman took a card from his pocket-book and laid it beside
her plate.

"My dear child," said he in a gentle tone, "I fear your life is destined
to be one of trials and perplexities, if not of dreary heartaches. I
have watched over you and studied your character for longer than you
know and I have found much in your make-up that is interesting and
admirable. You remind me a good deal of my own Josie--as good and clever
a girl as ever lived. So I am going to ask you to consider me your
friend. Keep this card and if ever you get into serious difficulty I
want you to wire me to come and help you. If I should happen, at the
time, to have duties to prevent my coming, I will send some other
reliable person to your assistance. Will you promise to do this?"

"Thank you, Mr. O'Gorman," she said. "I--I--your kindness embarrasses
me."

"Don't allow it to do that. A detective is a man, you know, much like
other men, and I have always held that the better man he is the better
detective he is sure to prove. I'm obliged to do disagreeable things, at
times, in the fulfillment of my duty, but I try to spare even the most
hardened criminal as much as possible. So why shouldn't I be kind to a
helpless, unfortunate girl?"

"Am I that?" she asked.

"Perhaps not. But I fear your grandfather's fate is destined to cause
you unhappiness. You seem fond of him."

"He is the best man in all the world!"

O'Gorman looked at the tablecloth rather than to meet her eyes.

"So I will now say good-bye, Miss Burrows, and--I wish you the happiness
you deserve. You're just as good a girl as my Josie is."

With this he rose to his feet and bowed again. He was a little man and
he had a fat nose, but Mary Louise could not help liking him.

She was still afraid of the detective, however, and when he had left the
dining room she asked herself if his story could be true, if Gran'pa Jim
was not in Dorfield--if he had never even come to the town, as O'Gorman
had stated.

The Conants would know that, of course, and if the detective went away
she would be free to go to the Conants for information. She would find
shelter, at least, with these old friends.

As she passed from the dining room into the hotel lobby Mr. O'Gorman was
paying his bill and bidding the clerk farewell. He had no baggage,
except such as he might carry in his pocket, but he entered a bus that
stood outside and was driven away with a final doff of his hat to the
watching girl.

Mary Louise decided in the instant what to do. Mr. Peter Conant was a
lawyer and had an office in one of the big buildings down-town. She
remembered that he always made a point of being in his office at eight
o'clock in the morning, and it was nearly eight now. She would visit Mr.
Conant in his office, for this could not possibly endanger the safety of
Gran'pa Jim in case the detective's story proved false, or if an attempt
had been made to deceive her. The man had seemed sincere and for the
time being he had actually gone away; but she was suspicious of
detectives.

She ran upstairs for her coat and hat and at once left the hotel. She
knew the way to Peter Conant's office and walked rapidly toward it.


CHAPTER X

RATHER QUEER INDEED


Mary Louise found the door of the office, which was located on the third
floor of the Chambers Building, locked. However, the sign: "Peter
Conant, Attorney at Law," was painted on the glass panel in big,
distinct letters, so she was sure she had made no mistake. She slowly
paced the hall, waiting, until the elevator stopped and Mr. Conant
stepped out and approached the door, his morning paper in one hand, a
key in the other. Running to him, the girl exclaimed:

"Oh, Mr. Conant!"

He stopped short and turned to face her. Then he stepped a pace backward
and said:

"Great heavens, it's Mary Louise!"

"Didn't you recognize me?" she asked.

"Not at first," he answered slowly. "You have grown tall and--and--
older, in two years."

"Where is Gran'pa J-"

"Hush!" with a startled glance up and down the hall. Then he unlocked
the door and added: "Come in."

Mary Louise followed him through the outer office and into a smaller
room beyond, the door of which Mr. Conant carefully closed after them.
Then he turned to look steadily at the girl, who thought he did not seem
especially delighted at her appearance in Dorfield. Indeed, his first
words proved this, for he asked sternly:

"Why are you here?"

"I left the school at Beverly because the girls made it so uncomfortable
for me there that I could not bear it longer," she explained.

"In what way did they make it uncomfortable for you?"

"They jeered at me because--because--Gran'pa Jim is being hunted by the
officers of the law, who accuse him, of doing something wicked."

Mr. Conant frowned.

"Perhaps their attitude was only natural," he remarked; "but there was
no accusation against you, my child. Why didn't you stick it out? The
scandal would soon have died away and left you in peace."

"I was unhappy there," she said simply, "and so I thought I would come
here to mother and Gran'pa Jim."

"Here?" as if surprised.

"Yes. Aren't they here, with you?"

"No."

"Then where are they?"

"I've no idea."

She sat still and stared at him, while he regarded her with a thoughtful
and perplexed look on his face.

Mr. Conant is difficult to describe because he was like dozens of men
one meets every day, at least in outward appearance. He was neither tall
nor short, lean nor fat, handsome nor ugly, attractive nor repulsive.
Yet Peter Conant must not be considered a nonentity because he was
commonplace in person, for he possessed mannerisms that were peculiar.
He would open his eyes very wide and stare at one steadily until the
person became confused and turned away. The gaze was not especially
shrewd, but it was disconcerting because steadfast. When he talked he
would chop off his words, one by one, with a distinct pause between
each, and that often made it hard to tell whether he had ended his
speech or still had more to say. When very earnest or interested he
would play with a locket that dangled from his watch chain; otherwise he
usually stood with his hands clasped behind his back.

Mary Louise well knew these peculiarities, having previously lived in
his house, and also she knew he was a kind-hearted man, devotedly
attached to his deaf wife and thoroughly trusted by Gran'pa Jim.

"I was told," said the girl presently, "to direct all my letters to my
grandfather in your care."

"I am aware that you have done so," he replied.

"So I thought, of course, that he and my mother were with you."

"No; they did not come here. Colonel Weatherby arranged for me to
forward your letters, which I did as soon as they arrived."

"Oh; then you know his address?"

"I do not. There are six different points to which I forward letters, in
rotation, both those from you and from others on various matters of
business, and these points are widely scattered. My impression is that
Colonel Weatherby is in none of these places and that the letters are
again forwarded to him to--wherever he may be."

Mary Louise felt quite discouraged. With hesitation she asked:

"Do you suppose you could find him for me?"

"It is impossible."

"What am I to do, Mr. Conant?"

"I advise you to go back to your school."

"Can't I stay here, with you?"

He stared at her with his round eyes, playing with his locket.

"I haven't the money for the return trip," she went on falteringly. "I
had to sell some of my jewelry to get here. I won't be much trouble, if
you will let me live with you until I can find Gran'pa Jim."

Mr. Conant still stared.

"I'm sure," said Mary Louise, "that my grandfather will gladly repay you
any money it costs you to keep me."

"You--don't--un-der-stand," he retorted, chopping off his words rather
viciously. "Moreover, you can't understand. Go to the house and talk to
Hannah. Have you any baggage!"

"I've a suit case at the hotel," she said, and went on to tell him the
experiences of her journey and of her encounter with Detective O'Gorman.

During this relation, which he did not interrupt, Mr. Conant toyed
persistently with his watch charm. His features were noncommittal but he
was thoroughly interested.

"You see," he remarked when she had finished, "Colonel Weatherby's
elaborate system of evading discovery is quite necessary."

"But why should he wish to hide?" asked the girl.

"Don't you know?"

"No, sir."

"Then your grandfather doesn't wish you to know. I am his lawyer--at
least I am one of his lawyers--and a lawyer must respect the confidences
of his clients."

Mary Louise looked at him wonderingly, for here was someone who
evidently knew the entire truth.

"Do you believe my grandfather is a bad man?" she asked.

"No. I have the highest respect for Colonel Weatherby."

"Do you know his name to be Weatherby--or is it Hathaway?"

"I am his lawyer," reiterated Mr. Conant.

"Is it possible that an innocent man would change his name and hide,
rather than face an unjust accusation?"

"Yes."

Mary Louise sighed.

"I will go with you to the hotel and pay your bill," said the lawyer.
"Then you may go to the house and talk to Hannah. When I have talked
with her myself, we will determine what to do with you."

So they went to the hotel and the girl packed her suit case and brought
it downstairs.

"Queer!" said Mr. Conant to her, fingering his locket. "Your bill has
been paid by that man O'Gorman."

"How impertinent!" she exclaimed.

"There is also a note for you in your box."

The clerk handed her an envelope, which she opened. "I hope to be able
to send you your grandfather's address very soon," wrote O'Gorman. "You
will probably stay in Dorfield; perhaps with the Conants, with whom you
lived before. You might try sending Colonel Weatherby a letter in care
of Oscar Lawler, at Los Angeles, California. In any event, don't forget
my card or neglect to wire me in case of emergency."

Having read this with considerable surprise the girl handed the note to
Mr. Conant, who slowly read it and gave a bark like that of an angry dog
when he came to the name of the California attorney. Without remark he
put the detective's letter in his pocket and picking up Mary Louise's
suit case led the girl outside to the street corner.

"This car will take you to within two blocks of my house," he said. "Can
you manage your grip alone?"

"Easily," she assured him.

"You have carfare!"

"Yes, thank you."

"Then good-bye. I'll see you this evening."

He turned away and she boarded the street car.


CHAPTER XI

MARY LOUISE MEETS IRENE


As Mary Louise approached the home of the Conants, which was a pretty
little house set far back in a garden filled with trees and shrubs, she
was surprised to hear a joyous ragtime tune being drummed upon the
piano--an instrument she remembered Mrs. Conant kept in the house
exclusively as an ornament, being unable to play it. Then, as the girl
reached the porch, the melody suddenly stopped, a merry laugh rang out
and a fresh, sweet voice was heard through the open window talking
rapidly and with eager inflection.

"I wonder who that can be?" thought Mary Louise. Everyone had to speak
loudly to poor Mrs. Conant, who might be entertaining a visitor. She
rang the bell and soon her old friend appeared in the doorway.

"My dear, dear child!" cried the good lady, recognizing the girl
instantly and embracing her after a welcoming kiss. "Where on earth have
you come from?"

"From Beverly," said Mary Louise with a smile, for in her depressed
state of mind this warm greeting cheered her wonderfully.

"Come right in," said Mrs. Conant, seizing the suit case. "Have you had
breakfast?"

"Yes, indeed; hours ago. And I've seen Mr. Conant at his office. He--he
wanted me to talk to you."

She spoke loudly, as she had been accustomed to do, but now Mrs. Conant
wore on her ear an instrument similar in appearance to a small telephone
receiver, and she seemed to hear quite distinctly through its mechanism.
Indeed, she pointed to it with an air of pride and said: "I can hear a
whisper, my dear!"

As Mary Louise was ushered into the cosy sitting room she looked for the
piano-player and the owner of the merry laugh and cheery voice. Near the
center of the room was a wheeled chair in which sat a young girl of
about her own age--a rather pretty girl in spite of her thin frame and
pallid countenance. She was neatly dressed in figured dimity, with a
bright ribbon at her throat. A pair of expressive brown eyes regarded
Mary Louise with questioning earnestness. Over her lap lay a coverlet;
her slender white fingers rested upon the broad arms of her chair.

"This," said Mrs. Conant, "is my niece, Irene Macfarlane, who is living
with us just now and is the life and joy of our formerly dull household.
You'll have to love her, Mary Louise, because no one can help doing so."

Mary Louise advanced to the chair and took one of the wan hands in her
own. A thrill of pity flooded her heart for the unfortunate girl, who
instantly noted her expression and met it with a charmingly spontaneous
smile.

"Don't you dare think of me as a cripple!" she said warningly. "I am not
at all helpless and my really-truly friends quickly forget this ugly
wheeled chair. We're to be friends, are we not? And you're going to
stay, because I see your baggage. Also I know all about you, Mary Louise
Burrows, for Aunt Hannah never tires of singing your praises."

This was said so naturally and with such absence of affectation that
Mary Louise could not fail to respond to the words and smile.

"I'm glad to find you here, Irene," she said, "and I don't know yet
whether I'm to stay or not. That will depend on Mrs. Conant's decision."

"Then you're to stay," promptly decided the hospitable lady, who by
turning her mechanical ear toward the speaker seemed able to hear her
words clearly.

"But you don't know all the complications yet," confessed the girl.
"I've run away from school and--and there are other things you must know
before you decide. Mr. Conant wasn't at all enthusiastic over my coming
here, I assure you, so I must tell you frankly the whole story of my
adventures."

"Very good," returned Mrs. Conant. "I think I can guess at most of the
story, but you shall tell it in your own way. Presently Irene is going
out to inspect the roses; she does that every morning; so when she is
out of the way we'll have a nice talk together."

"I'm going now," said Irene, with a bright laugh at her dismissal. "Mary
Louise won't be happy till everything is properly settled; nor will I,
for I'm anxious to get acquainted with my new friend. So here I go and
when you've had your talk out just whistle for me, Mary Louise."

She could propel the chair by means of rims attached to the wheels and,
even as she spoke, began to roll herself out of the room. Mary Louise
sprang to assist her, but the girl waved her away with a little laugh.

"I'm an expert traveler," she said, "and everyone lets me go and come as
I please. Indeed, I'm very independent, Mary Louise, as you will
presently discover."

Away she went, through the hall, out at the front door and along the
broad porch, and when she had gone Mary Louise whispered softly into
Mrs. Conant's mechanical eardrum:

"What is wrong with her?"

"A good many things," was the reply, "although the brave child makes
light of them all. One leg is badly withered and the foot of the other
is twisted out of shape. She can stand on that foot to dress herself--
which she insists on doing unaided--but she cannot walk a step. Irene
has suffered a great deal, I think, and she's a frail little body; but
she has the sweetest temperament in the world and seems happy and
content from morn till night."

"It's wonderful!" exclaimed Mary Louise. "What caused her affliction?"

"It is the result of an illness she had when a baby. Irene is sixteen
and has never known what it is to be well and strong, yet she never
resents her fate, but says she is grateful for the blessings she enjoys.
Her father died long ago and her mother about a year since; so, the
child being an orphan, Peter and I have taken her to live with us."

"That is very kind of you," asserted Mary Louise with conviction.

"No; I fear it is pure selfishness," returned the good woman, "for until
she came to us the old home had been dreadfully dull--the result, my
dear, of your going away. And now tell me your story, and all about
yourself, for I'm anxious to hear what brought you to Dorfield."

Mary Louise drew a chair close to that of Aunt Hannah Conant and
confided to her all the worries and tribulations that had induced her to
quit Miss Stearne's school and seek shelter with her old friends the
Conants. Also, she related the episode of Detective O'Gorman and how she
had first learned through him that her grandfather and her mother were
not living in Dorfield.

"I'm dreadfully worried over Gran'pa Jim," said she, "for those terrible
agents of the Secret Service seem bent on catching him. And he doesn't
wish to be caught. If they arrested him, do you think they would put him
in jail, Aunt Hannah?"

"I fear so," was the reply.

"What do they imagine he has done that is wrong?"

"I do not know," said Mrs. Conant. "Peter never tells me anything about
the private affairs of his clients, and I never ask him. But of one
thing I am sure, my dear, and that is that Peter Conant would not act as
Colonel Weatherby's lawyer, and try to shield him, unless he believed
him innocent of any crime. Peter is a little odd, in some ways, but he's
honest to the backbone."

"I know it," declared Mary Louise. "Also I know that Gran'pa Jim is a
good man. Cannot the law make a mistake, Aunt Hannah?"

"It surely can, or there would be no use for lawyers. But do not worry
over your grandfather, my child, for he seems quite able to take care of
himself. It is nine or ten years since he became a fugitive--also making
a fugitive of your poor mother, who would not desert him--and to this
day the officers of the law have been unable to apprehend him. Be
patient, dear girl, and accept the situation as you find it. You shall
live with us until your people again send for you. We have excellent
schools in Dorfield, where you will not be taunted with your
grandfather's misfortunes because no one here knows anything about
them."

"Doesn't Irene know?" asked Mary Louise.

"She only knows that your people are great travelers and frequently
leave you behind them as they flit from place to place. She knows that
you lived with us for three years and that we love you."

The girl became thoughtful for a time. "I can't understand," she finally
said, "why Gran'pa Jim acts the way he does. Often he has told me, when
I deserved censure, to 'face the music' and have it over with. Once he
said that those who sin must suffer the penalty, because it is the law
of both God and man, and he who seeks to escape a just penalty is a
coward. Gran'pa knows he is innocent, but the government thinks he is
guilty; so why doesn't he face the music and prove his innocence,
instead of running away as a coward might do and so allow his good name
to suffer reproach?"

Mrs. Conant shook her head as if perplexed.

"That very question has often puzzled me, as it has you," she confessed.
"Once I asked Peter about it and he scowled and said it might be just as
well to allow Colonel Weatherby to mind his own business. The Colonel
seems to have a good deal of money, and perhaps he fears that if he
surrendered to the law it would be taken away from him, leaving you and
your mother destitute."

"We wouldn't mind that," said the girl, "if Gran'pa's name could be
cleared."

"After all," continued Mrs. Conant reflectively, "I don't believe the
Colonel is accused of stealing money, for Peter says his family is one
of the oldest and richest in New York. Your grandfather inherited a vast
fortune and added largely to it. Peter says he was an important man of
affairs before this misfortune--whatever it was--overtook him."

"I can just remember our home in New York," said Mary Louise, also
musingly, "for I was very young at the time. It was a beautiful big
place, with a good many servants. I wonder what drove us from it?"

"Do you remember your father?" asked Mrs. Conant.

"Not at all."

"Peter once told me he was a foreigner who fell desperately in love with
your mother and married her without your grandfather's full approval. I
believe Mr. Burrows was a man of much political influence, for he served
in the Department of State and had a good many admirers. Peter never
knew why your grandfather opposed the marriage, for afterward he took
Mr. and Mrs. Burrows to live with him and they were all good friends up
to the day of your father's death. But this is ancient history and
speculation on subjects we do not understand is sure to prove
unsatisfactory. I wouldn't worry over your grandfather's troubles, my
dear. Try to forget them."

"Grandfather's real name isn't Weatherby," said the girl. "It is
Hathaway."

Mrs. Conant gave a start of surprise.

"How did you learn that?" she asked sharply.

The girl took out her watch, pried open the back ease with a penknife
and allowed Mrs. Conant to read the inscription. Also she curiously
watched the woman's face and noted its quick flush and its uneasy
expression. Did the lawyer's wife know more than she had admitted?

If so, why was everyone trying to keep her in the dark?

"I cannot see that this helps to solve the mystery," said Mrs. Conant in
a brisk tone as she recovered from her surprise. "Let us put the whole
thing out of mind, Mary Louise, or it will keep us all stirred up and in
a muddle of doubt. I shall tell Peter you are to live with us, and your
old little room at the back of the hall is all ready for you. Irene has
the next room, so you will be quite neighborly. Go and put away your
things and then we'll whistle for Irene."

Mary Louise went to the well-remembered room and slowly and thoughtfully
unpacked her suit case. She was glad to find a home again among
congenial people, but she was growing more and more perplexed over the
astonishing case of Gran'pa Jim. It worried her to find that an
occasional doubt would cross her mind in spite of her intense loyalty to
her dearly loved grandparent. She would promptly drive out the doubt,
but it would insist on intruding again.

"Something is wrong somewhere," she sighed. "There must be some snarl
that even Gran'pa Jim can't untangle; and, if he can't, I'm sure no one
else can. I wish I could find him and that he would tell me all about
it. I suppose he thinks I'm too young to confide in, but I'm almost
sixteen now and surely that's old enough to understand things. There
were girls at school twenty years old that I'm sure couldn't reason as
well as I can."

After a while she went down stairs and joined Irene in the garden, where
the chair-girl was trimming rose bushes with a pair of stout scissors.
She greeted Mary Louise with her bright smile, saying:

"I suppose everything is fixed up, now, and we can begin to get
acquainted."

"Why, we ARE acquainted," declared Mary Louise. "Until to-day I had
never heard of you, yet it seems as if I had known you always."

"Thank you," laughed Irene; "that is a very pretty compliment, I well
realize. You have decided to stay, then?"

"Aunt Hannah has decided so, but Mr. Conant may object."

"He won't do that," was the quick reply. "Uncle Peter may be an autocrat
in his office, but I've noticed that Aunt Hannah is the ruler of this
household."

Mr. Conant may have noticed that, also, for he seemed not at all
surprised when his wife said she had decided to keep Mary Louise with
them. But after the girls had gone to bed that night the lawyer had a
long talk with his better half, and thereafter Mary Louise's presence
was accepted as a matter of course. But Mr. Conant said to her the next
morning:

"I have notified your grandfather, at his six different addresses, of
your coming to us, so I ought to receive his instructions within the
next few days. Also, to-day I will write Miss Stearne that you are here
and why you came away from the school."

"Will you ask her to send my trunk?"

"Not now. We will first await advices from Colonel Weatherby."

These "advices" were received three days later in the form of a brief
telegram from a Los Angeles attorney. The message read: "Colonel
Weatherby requests you to keep M. L. in Dorfield until further
instructions. Money forwarded. Hot. Caution." It was signed "O. L." and
when Mr. Conant showed Mary Louise the message she exclaimed:

"Then Mr. O'Gorman was right!"

"In what way?" questioned the lawyer.

"In the note he left for me at the hotel he said I might find my
grandfather by writing to Oscar Lawler at Los Angeles, California. This
telegram is from Los Angeles and it is signed 'O. L.' which must mean
'Oscar Lawler.'"

"How clever!" said Mr. Conant sarcastically.

"That proves, of course, that Gran'pa Jim and mother are in California,
But how did the detective know that?" she asked wonderingly.

"He didn't know it," answered Peter Conant. "On the contrary, this
message proves to me that they are not there at all."

"But the telegram says--"

"Otherwise," continued the lawyer, "the telegram would not have come
from that far-away point on the Pacific coast. There now remain five
other places where Colonel Weatherby might be located. The chances are,
however, that he is not in any of them."

Mary Louise was puzzled. It was altogether too bewildering for her
comprehension.

"Here are two strange words," said she, eyeing the telegram she still
held. "What does 'hot' mean, Mr. Conant?"

"It means," he replied, "that the government spies are again seeking
Colonel Weatherby. The word 'caution' means that we must all take care
not to let any information escape us that might lead to his arrest.
Don't talk to strangers, Mary Louise; don't talk to anyone outside our
family of your grandfather's affairs, or even of your own affairs. The
safety of Colonel Weatherby depends, to a great extent, on our all being
silent and discreet."


CHAPTER XII

A CHEERFUL COMRADE


The more Mary Louise saw of Irene Macfarlane the more she learned to
love her. No one could be miserable or despondent for long in the chair-
girl's society, because she was always so bright and cheery herself. One
forgot to pity her or even to deplore her misfortunes while listening to
her merry chatter and frank laughter, for she seemed to find genuine joy
and merriment in the simplest incidents of the life about her.

"God has been so good to me, Mary Louise!" she once exclaimed as they
were sitting together in the garden. "He has given me sight, that I may
revel in bookland and in the beauties of flowers and trees and shifting
skies and the faces of my friends. He has given me the blessing of
hearing, that I may enjoy the strains of sweet music and the songs of
the birds and the voices of those I love. And I can scent the fragrance
of the morning air, the perfume of the roses and--yes! even the
beefsteak Aunt Hannah is frying for supper. The beefsteak tastes as good
to me as it does to you. I can feel the softness of your cheek; I can
sing melodies, in my own way, whenever my heart swells with joy. I can
move about, by means of this wonderful chair, without the bother of
walking. You don't envy me, Mary Louise, because you enjoy almost equal
blessings; but you must admit I have reason for being happy."

Irene read a good many books and magazines and through the daily papers
kept well posted on the world's affairs. Indeed, she was much better
posted than Mary Louise, who, being more active, had less leisure to
think and thus absorb the full meaning of all that came to her notice.
Irene would play the piano for hours at a time, though obliged to lean
forward in her chair to reach the keys, and her moods ran the gamut from
severely classical themes to ragtime, seeming to enjoy all equally. She
also sewed and mended with such consummate skill that Mary Louise, who
was rather awkward with her needle, marveled at her talent.

Nor was this the end of the chair-girl's accomplishments, for Irene had
a fancy for sketching and made numerous caricatures of those persons
with whom she came in contact. These contained so much humor that Mary
Louise was delighted with them--especially one of "Uncle Peter" toying
with his watch fob and staring straight ahead of him with round,
expressionless eyes.

"Really, Irene, I believe you could paint," she once said.

"No," answered her friend, "I would not be so wicked as to do that. All
imitations of Nature seem to me a mock of God's handiwork, which no
mortal brush can hope to equal. I shall never be so audacious, I hope.
But a photograph is a pure reflex of Nature, and my caricatures, which
are merely bits of harmless fun, furnish us now and then a spark of
humor to make us laugh, and laughter is good for the soul. I often laugh
at my own sketches, as you know. Sometimes I laugh at their whimsical
conception, before ever I put pencil to paper. Lots of caricatures I
make secretly, laughing over and then destroying them for fear they
might be seen and hurt the feelings of their innocent subjects. Why,
Mary Louise, I drew your doleful face only yesterday, and it was so
funny I shrieked with glee. You heard me and looked over at me with a
smile that made the caricature lie, so I promptly tore it up. It had
served its purpose, you see."

So many of these quaint notions filled the head of the crippled girl
that Mary Louise's wondering interest in her never flagged. It was easy
to understand why Mrs. Conant had declared that Irene was the joy and
life of the household, for it was impossible to remain morbid or blue in
her presence.

For this reason, as well as through the warm and sincere affection
inspired by Irene, Mary Louise came by degrees to confide to her the
entire story of the mystery that surrounded her grandfather and
influenced the lives of her mother and herself. Of her personal
anxieties and fears she told her new friend far more than she had ever
confessed to anyone else and her disclosures were met by ready sympathy.

"Phoo!" cried Irene. "This isn't a REAL trouble; it will pass away.
Everything passes away in time, Mary Louise, for life is a succession of
changes--one thing after another. Remember the quotation: 'Whate'er may
be thy fate to-day, remember--this will pass away.' I love that little
saying and it has comforted me and given me courage many a time."

"Life will also pass away," observed Mary Louise pessimistically.

"To be sure. Isn't that a glad prospect? To pass to a new life, to new
adventures, planned for us by the wisdom of God, is the most glorious
promise we mortals possess. In good time that joy will be ours, but now
we must make the most of our present blessings. I take it, Mary Louise,
that there is a purpose in everything--a Divine Purpose, you know--and
that those who most patiently accept their trials will have the better
future recompense. What's a twisted ankle or a shriveled leg to do with
happiness? Or even a persecuted grandfather? We're made of better stuff,
you and I, than to cry at such babyish bumps. My! what a lot of things
we both have to be thankful for."

Somehow these conversations cheered Mary Louise considerably and her
face soon lost its drawn, worried look and became almost as placid as in
the days when she had Gran'pa Jim beside her and suspected no
approaching calamity. Gran'pa Jim would surely have loved Irene, had he
known her, because their ideas of life and duty were so similar.

As it was now less than a month to the long summer vacation, Mary Louise
did not enter the Dorfield High School but studied a little at home, so
as not to get "rusty," and passed most of her days in the society of
Irene Macfarlane. It was a week or so after her arrival that Peter
Conant said to her one evening:

"I have now received ample funds for all your needs, Mary Louise, so I
have sent to Miss Stearne to have your trunk and books forwarded."

"Oh; then you have heard from Gran'pa Jim?" she asked eagerly.

"Yes."

"Where is he?"

"I do not know," chopping the words apart with emphasis. "The Colonel
has been very liberal. I am to put twenty dollars in cash in your
pocketbook and you are to come to me for any further sums you may
require, which I am ordered to supply without question. I would have
favored making you an allowance, had I been consulted, but the Colonel
is--eh--eh--the Colonel is the Colonel."

"Didn't Gran'pa Jim send me any letter, or--any information at all?" she
asked wistfully.

"Not a word."

"In my last letter, which you promised me to forward, I begged him to
write me," she said, with disappointment.

Peter Conant made no reply. He merely stared at her. But afterward, when
the two girls were alone, Irene said to her:

"I do not think you should beg your grandfather to write you. A letter
might be traced by his enemies, you know, and that would mean his
undoing. He surely loves you and bears you in mind, for he has provided
for your comfort in every possible way. Even your letters to him may be
dangerous, although they reach him in such roundabout ways. If I were
you, Mary Louise, I'd accept the situation as I found it and not demand
more than your grandfather and your mother are able to give you."

This frank advice Mary Louise accepted in good part and through the
influence of the chair-girl she gradually developed a more contented
frame of mind.

Irene was a persistent reader of books and one of Mary Louise's self-
imposed duties was to go to the public library and select such volumes
as her friend was likely to be interested in. These covered a wide range
of subjects, although historical works and tales of the age of chivalry
seemed to appeal to Irene more than any others. Sometimes she would read
aloud, in her sweet, sympathetic voice, to Mary Louise and Mrs. Conant,
and under these conditions they frequently found themselves interested
in books which, if read by themselves, they would be sure to find
intolerably dry and uninteresting. The crippled girl had a way of giving
more than she received and, instead of demanding attention, would often
entertain the sound-limbed ones of her immediate circle.


CHAPTER XIII

BUB SUCCUMBS TO FORCE


One day Peter Conant abruptly left his office, came home and packed his
grip and then hurried down town and caught the five o'clock train for
New York. He was glum and uncommunicative, as usual, merely telling Aunt
Hannah that business called him away and he did not know when he would
be back.

A week later Peter appeared at the family breakfast table, having
arrived on the early morning express, and he seemed in a more gracious
mood than usual. Indeed, he was really talkative.

"I met Will Morrison in New York, Hannah," he said to his wife. "He was
just sailing for London with his family and will remain abroad all
summer. He wanted us to occupy his mountain place, Hillcrest Lodge,
during July and August, and although I told him we couldn't use the
place he insisted on my taking an order on his man to turn the shack
over to us."

"The shack!" cried Aunt Hannah indignantly.

"Why, Peter, Hillcrest Lodge is a little palace. It is the cosiest, most
delightful place I have ever visited. Why shouldn't we accept Will
Morrison's proposition to occupy it?"

"I can't leave my business."

"You could run up every Friday afternoon, taking the train to Millbank
and the stage to Hillcrest, and stay with us till Monday morning."

He stared at her reflectively.

"Would you be safe in that out-of-the-way place?" he asked.

"Of course. Didn't you say Will had a man for caretaker? And only a few
scattered cottages are located near by, so we shall be quite by
ourselves and wholly unmolested. I mean to go, and take the girls. The
change will do us all good, so you may as well begin to make
arrangements for the trip."

Peter Conant stared awhile and then resumed his breakfast without
comment. Mary Louise thought she saw a smile flicker over his stolid
features for a moment, but could not be positive. Aunt Hannah had spoken
in a practical, matter-of-fact way that did not admit of argument.

"Let me see," she resumed; "we will plan to leave on Thursday morning,
over the branch road, which will get us to Millbank by noon. If you
telegraph the stage-driver to meet us we can reach Hillcrest Lodge by
three o'clock--perhaps earlier--and that will enable us to get settled
before dark. That is far better than taking the afternoon train. Will
you make the proper arrangements, Peter?"

"Yes," he briefly replied.

As he was leaving the house after breakfast he fixed his stare on Irene
and said to her:

"In New York I ran across a lot of second-hand books at an auction sale-
-old novels and romances which you will probably like. I bought the lot
and shipped them home. If they arrive in time you can take them to
Hillcrest and they will keep you reading all summer."

"Oh, thank you, Uncle Peter!" exclaimed the chair-girl gratefully.

"Have you any--any--news of Gran'pa Jim?" asked Mary Louise diffidently.

"No," he said and walked away.

During the few days that remained before their exodus they were busy
preparing for the anticipated vacation. Summer gowns had to be looked
over and such things gathered together as might be useful during their
two months' stay at Hillcrest.

"Of course no one will see us," remarked Aunt Hannah; "it's really the
jumping-off place of the world; but Will Morrison has made it as cosy as
possible and we three, with just Peter at the week-ends, can amuse one
another without getting lonely. Peter will fish in the mountain streams,
of course, and that's the reason he is allowing us to go. We've visited
the Morrisons two or three times at the Lodge and Peter has fished for
trout every minute he was there."

"Who are the Morrisons?" asked Mary Louise.

"Will Morrison is a rich banker and his wife Sallie was an old
schoolmate of mine. The Lodge is only a little resort of theirs, you
know, for in the city they live in grand style. I know you girls will
enjoy the place, for the scenery is delightful and the clear mountain
air mighty invigorating."

All girls delight in change of location and although Irene was a little
worried over the difficulties of getting to Hillcrest Lodge in her
crippled condition, she was as eager to go as was Mary Louise. And she
made the trip more comfortably than she had feared.

At Millbank the stage-driver fixed a comfortable seat for her in his
carryall and loaded the boxes and baggage and the wheeled chair and the
box of books--which had arrived from New York--on the railed top of his
bus, and then they drove away through a rough but picturesque country
that drew from the girls many exclamations of delight.

Presently they came to a small group of dwellings called the "Huddle,"
which lay at the foot of the mountain. Then up a winding path the four
horses labored patiently, halting often to rest and get their breaths.
At such times the passengers gloried in the superb views of the valley
and its farms and were never impatient to proceed. They passed one or
two modest villas, for this splendid location had long ago been
discovered by a few others besides Will Morrison who loved to come here
for their vacations and so escape the maddening crowds of the cities.

Aunt Hannah had planned the trip with remarkable accuracy, for at about
three o'clock the lumbering stage stopped at a pretty chalet half hidden
among the tall pines and overlooking a steep bluff. Here the baggage and
boxes were speedily unloaded.

"I gotta git back ter meet the aft'noon train," said Bill Coombs, their
driver. "They won't be any more passingers in this direction, tain't
likely, 'cause the houses 'roun' here is mighty scattered an' no one's
expectin' nobody, as I know of. But in the other direction from
Millbank--Sodd Corners way--I may catch a load, if I'm lucky."

So back he drove, leaving the Conants' traps by the roadside, and Peter
began looking around for Morrison's man. The doors of the house were
fast locked, front and rear. There was no one in the barn or the shed-
like garage, where a rusty looking automobile stood. Peter looked around
the grounds in vain. Then he whistled. Afterward he began bawling out
"Hi, there!" in a voice that echoed lonesomely throughout the mountain
side.

And, at last, when they were all beginning to despair, a boy came
slouching around a corner of the house, from whence no one could guess.
He was whittling a stick and he continued to whittle while he stared at
the unexpected arrivals and slowly advanced. When about fifteen paces
away he halted, with feet planted well apart, and bent his gaze sturdily
on his stick and knife. He was barefooted, dressed in faded blue-jeans
overalls and a rusty gingham shirt--the two united by a strap over one
shoulder--and his head was covered by a broad Scotch golf cap much too
big for him and considerably too warm for the season.

"Come here!" commanded Mr. Conant.

The boy did not move, therefore the lawyer advanced angrily toward him.

"Why didn't you obey me?" he asked.

"They's gals there. I hates gals," said the boy in a confidential tone.
"Any sort o' men critters I kin stand, but gals gits my goat."

"Who are you?" inquired Mr. Conant.

"Me? I'm jus' Bub."

"Where is Mr. Morrison's man?"

"Meanin' Talbot? Gone up to Mark's Peak, to guide a gang o' hunters f'm
the city."

"When did he go?" asked the lawyer.

"I guess a Tuesday. No--a Wednesday."

"And when will he be back?"

The boy whittled, abstractedly.

"Answer me!"

"How kin I? D'ye know where Mark's Peak is?"

"No."

"It takes a week ter git thar; they'll likely hunt two er three weeks;
mebbe more; ye kin tell that as well as I kin. Mister Will's gone ter
You-RUPP with Miss' Morrison, so Talbot he won't be in no hurry ter come
back."

"Great Caesar! Here's a pretty mess. Are you Talbot's boy?"

"Nope. I'm a Grigger, an' live over in the holler, yonder."

"What are you doing here?"

"Earnin' two bits a week."

"How?"

"Lookin' after the place."

"Very well. Mr. Morrison has given us permission to use the Lodge while
he is away, so unlock the doors and help get the baggage in."

The boy notched the stick with his knife, using great care.

"Talbot didn't say nuth'n' 'bout that," he remarked composedly.

Mr. Conant uttered an impatient ejaculation. It was one of his
peculiarities to give a bark similar to that of a dog when greatly
annoyed. After staring at the boy a while he took out Will Morrison's
letter to Talbot, opened it and held it before Bub's face.

"Read that!" he cried.

Bub grinned and shook his head.

"_I_ kain't read," he said.

Mr. Conant, in a loud and severe voice, read Mr. Morrison's instruction
to his man Talbot to do everything in his power to make the Conants
comfortable and to serve them as faithfully as he did his own master.
The boy listened, whittling slowly. Then he said:

"Mebbe that's all right; an' ag'in, mebbe tain't. Seein' as I kain't
read I ain't goin' ter take no one's word fer it."

"You insolent brat!" exclaimed Peter Conant, highly incensed. Then he
turned and called: "Come here, Mary Louise."

Mary Louise promptly advanced and with every step she made the boy
retreated a like distance, until the lawyer seized his arm and held it
in a firm grip.

"What do you mean by running away?" he demanded.

"I hates gals," retorted Bub sullenly.

"Don't be a fool. Come here, Mary Louise, and read this letter to the
boy, word for word."

Mary Louise, marking the boy's bashfulness and trying to restrain a
smile, read Mr. Morrison's letter.

"You see," said the lawyer sharply, giving Bub a little shake, "those
are the exact words of the letter. We're going to enter the Lodge and
take possession of it, as Mr. Morrison has told us to do, and if you
don't obey my orders I shall give you a good flogging. Do you understand
that?"

Bub nodded, more cheerfully.

"If ye do it by force," said he, "that lets me out. Nobody kin blame me
if I'm forced."

Mary Louise laughed so heartily that the boy cast an upward, half-
approving glance at her face. Even Mr. Conant's stern visage relaxed.

"See here, Bub," he said, "obey my orders and no harm can come to you.
This letter is genuine and if you serve us faithfully while we are here
I'll--I'll give you four bits a week."

"Heh? Four bits!"

"Exactly. Four bits every week."

"Gee, that'll make six bits a week, with the two Talbot's goin' ter give
me. I'm hanged ef I don't buy a sweater fer next winter, afore the cold
weather comes!"

"Very good," said Mr. Conant. "Now get busy and let us in."

Bub deliberately closed the knife and put it in his pocket, tossing away
the stick.

"Gals," he remarked, with another half glance at Mary Louise, "ain't ter
my likin'; but FOUR BITS--"

He turned and walked away to where a wild rosebush clambered over one
corner of the Lodge. Pushing away the thick, thorny branches with care,
he thrust in his hand and drew out a bunch of keys.

"If it's jus' the same t' you, sir, I'd ruther ye'd snatch 'em from my
hand," he suggested. "Then, if I'm blamed, I kin prove a alibi."

Mr. Conant was so irritated that he literally obeyed the boy's request
and snatched the keys. Then he led the way to the front door.

"It's that thin, brass one," Bub hinted.

Mr. Conant opened the front door. The place was apparently in perfect
order.

"Go and get Hannah and Irene, please," said Peter to Mary Louise, and
soon they had all taken possession of the cosy Lodge, had opened the
windows and aired it and selected their various bedrooms.

"It is simply delightful!" exclaimed Irene, who was again seated in her
wheeled chair, "and, if Uncle Peter will build a little runway from the
porch to the ground, as he did at home, I shall be able to go and come
as I please."

Meantime Aunt Hannah--as even Mary Louise now called Mrs. Conant--
ransacked the kitchen and cupboards to discover what supplies were in
the house. There was a huge stock of canned goods, which Will Morrison
had begged them to use freely, and the Conants had brought a big box of
other groceries with them, which was speedily unpacked.

While the others were thus engaged in settling and arranging the house,
Irene wheeled her chair to the porch, on the steps of which sat Bub,
again whittling. He had shown much interest in the crippled girl, whose
misfortune seemed instantly to dispel his aversion for her sex, at least
so far as she was concerned. He was not reluctant even to look at her
face and he watched with astonishment the ease with which she managed
her chair. Having overheard, although at a distance, most of the boy's
former conversation with Uncle Peter, Irene now began questioning him.

"Have you been eating and sleeping here?"

"Of course," answered Bub.

"In the Lodge?"

"No; over in Talbot's house. That's over the ridge, yonder; it's only a
step, but ye kain't see it f'm here. My home's in the South Holler, four
mile away."

"Do you cook your own meals?"

"Nobudy else ter do it."

"And don't you get dreadfully lonesome at night?"

"Who? Me? Guess not. What the Sam Hill is they to be lonesome over?"

"There are no near neighbors, are there?"

"Plenty. The Barker house is two mile one way an' the Bigbee house is
jus' half a mile down the slope; guess ye passed it, comin' up; but they
ain't no one in the Bigbee house jus' now, 'cause Bigbee got shot on the
mount'n las' year, a deer hunt'n', an' Bigbee's wife's married another
man what says he's delicate like an' can't leave the city. But neighbors
is plenty. Six mile along the canyon lives Doolittle."

Irene was delighted with Bub's quaint language and ways and before Mrs.
Conant called her family to the simple improvised dinner the chair-girl
had won the boy's heart and already they were firm friends.


CHAPTER XIV

A CALL FROM AGATHA LORD


Hillcrest Lodge was perched upon a broad shelf of the wooded mountain,
considerably nearer to the bottom than to the top, yet a stiff climb
from the plain below. Behind it was a steep cliff; in front there was a
gradual descent covered with scrub but affording a splendid view of the
lowlands. At one side was the rocky canyon with its brook struggling
among the boulders, and on the other side the roadway that wound up the
mountain in zigzag fashion, selecting the course of least resistance.

Will Morrison was doubtless a mighty hunter and an expert fisherman, for
the "den" at the rear of the Lodge was a regular museum of trophies of
the chase. Stag and doe heads, enormous trout mounted on boards, antlers
of wild mountain sheep, rods, guns, revolvers and hunting-knives fairly
lined the wails, while a cabinet contained reels, books of flies,
cartridge belts, creels and many similar articles. On the floor were
rugs of bear, deer and beaver. A shelf was filled with books on sporting
subjects. There was a glass door that led onto a little porch at the
rear of the Lodge and a big window that faced the cliff.

This sanctum of the owner rather awed the girls when first they examined
it, but they found it the most fascinating place in all the house and
Irene was delighted to be awarded the bedroom that adjoined it. The
other bedrooms were on the upper floor.

"However," said Mr. Conant to Irene, "I shall reserve the privilege of
smoking my evening pipe in this den, for here is a student lamp, a low
table and the easiest chairs in all the place. If you keep your bedroom
door shut you won't mind the fumes of tobacco."

"I don't mind them anyhow, Uncle Peter," she replied.

Bub Grigger helped get in the trunks and boxes. He also filled the
woodbox in the big living room and carried water from the brook for Aunt
Hannah, but otherwise he was of little use to them. His favorite
occupation was whittling and he would sit for hours on one of the broad
benches overlooking the valley, aimlessly cutting chips from a stick
without forming it into any object whatsoever.

"I suppose all this time he is deeply thinking," said Mary Louise as the
girls sat on the porch watching him, the day after their arrival, "but
it would be interesting to know what direction Bub's thoughts take."

"He must be figuring up his earnings and deciding how long it will take
to buy that winter sweater," laughed Irene. "I've had a bit of
conversation with the boy already and his ideas struck me as rather
crude and undeveloped."

"One idea, however, is firmly fixed in his mind," declared Mary Louise.
"He 'hates gals.'"

"We must try to dispel that notion. Perhaps he has a big sister at home
who pounds him, and therefore he believes all girls are alike."

"Then let us go to him and make friends," suggested Mary Louise. "If we
are gentle with the boy we may win him over."

Mr. Conant had already made a runway for the chair, so they left the
porch and approached Bub, who saw them coming and slipped into the
scrub, where he speedily disappeared from view. At other times, also, he
shyly avoided the girls, until they began to fear it would be more
difficult to "make friends" than they had supposed.

Monday morning Mr. Conant went down the mountain road, valise in hand,
and met Bill Coombs the stage-driver at the foot of the descent, having
made this arrangement to save time and expense. Peter had passed most of
his two days' vacation in fishing and had been so successful that he
promised Aunt Hannah he would surely return the following Friday. He had
instructed Bub to "take good care of the womenfolks" during his absence,
but no thought of danger occurred to any of them. The Morrisons had
occupied the Lodge for years and had never been molested in any way. It
was a somewhat isolated place but the country people in the neighborhood
were thoroughly honest and trustworthy.

"There isn't much for us to do here," said Mary Louise when the three
were left alone, "except to read, to eat and to sleep--lazy occupations
all. I climbed the mountain a little way yesterday, but the view from
the Lodge is the best of all and if you leave the road you tear your
dress to shreds in the scrub."

"Well, to read, to eat and to sleep is the very best way to enjoy a
vacation," asserted Aunt Hannah. "Let us all take it easy and have a
good time."

Irene's box of books which Mr. Conant had purchased for her in New York
had been placed in the den, where she could select the volumes as she
chose, and the chair-girl found the titles so alluring that she promised
herself many hours of enjoyment while delving among them. They were all
old and secondhand--perhaps fourth-hand or fifth-hand--as the lawyer had
stated, and the covers were many of them worn to tatters; but "books is
books," said Irene cheerily, and she believed they would not prove the
less interesting in contents because of their condition. Mostly they
were old romances, historical essays and novels, with a sprinkling of
fairy tales and books of verse--just the subjects Irene most loved.

"Being exiles, if not regular hermits," observed the crippled girl,
sunning herself on the small porch outside the den, book in hand, "we
may loaf and dream to our hearts' content, and without danger of
reproach."

But not for long were they to remain wholly secluded. On Thursday
afternoon they were surprised by a visitor, who suddenly appeared from
among the trees that lined the roadway and approached the two girls who
were occupying a bench at the edge of the bluff.

The new arrival was a lady of singularly striking appearance, beautiful
and in the full flush of womanhood, being perhaps thirty years of age.
She wore a smart walking-suit that fitted her rounded form perfectly,
and a small hat with a single feather was jauntily perched upon her
well-set head. Hair and eyes, almost black, contrasted finely with the
bloom on her cheeks. In her ungloved hand she held a small walking-
stick.

Advancing with grace and perfect self-possession, she smiled and nodded
to the two young girls and then, as Mary Louise rose to greet her, she
said:

"I am your nearest neighbor, and so I have climbed up here to get
acquainted. I am Agatha Lord, but of course you do not know me, because
I came from Boston, whereas you came from--from--"

"Dorfield," said Mary Louise. "Pray be seated. Let me present Irene
Macfarlane; and I am Mary Louise Burrows. You are welcome, Miss Lord--or
should I say Mrs. Lord?"

"Miss is correct," replied their visitor with a pleasant laugh, which
brought an answering smile to the other faces; "but you must not address
me except as 'Agatha.' For here in the wilderness formalities seem
ridiculous. Now let us have a cosy chat together."

"Won't you come into the Lodge and meet Mrs. Conant?"

"Not just yet. You may imagine how that climb winded me, although they
say it is only half a mile. I've taken the Bigbee house, just below you,
you know, and I arrived there last night to get a good rest after a
rather strenuous social career at home. Ever since Easter I've been on
the 'go' every minute and I'm really worn to a frazzle."

She did not look it, thought Mary Louise. Indeed, she seemed the very
picture of health.

"Ah," said she, fixing her eyes on Irene's book, "you are very
fortunate. The one thing I forgot to bring with me was a supply of
books, and there is not a volume--not even a prayer-book--in the Bigbee
house. I shall go mad in these solitudes if I cannot read."

"You may use my library," promised Irene, sympathizing with Miss Lord's
desire. "Uncle Peter brought a great box of books for me to read and you
are welcome to share their delights with me, I believe there are fifty
of them, at the least; but many were published ages ago and perhaps,"
with a glance at the dainty hands, "you won't care to handle secondhand
books."

"This ozonic air will fumigate them," said Agatha Lord carelessly. "We
don't absorb bindings, Irene, but merely the thoughts of the authors.
Books are the one banquet-table whereat we may feast without destroying
the delicacy or flavor of the dishes presented. As long as the pages
hold together and the type is legible a book is as good as when new."

"I like pretty bindings, though," declared Irene, "for they dress pretty
thoughts in fitting attire. An ill-looking book, whatever its contents,
resembles the ugly girl whose only redeeming feature is her good heart.
To be beautiful without and within must have been the desire of God in
all things."

Agatha gave her a quick look of comprehension. There was an
unconsciously wistful tone in the girl's voice. Her face, though pallid,
was lovely to view; her dress was dainty and arranged with care; she
earnestly sought to be as beautiful "without and within" as was
possible, yet the twisted limbs forbade her attaining the perfection she
craved.

They sat together for an hour in desultory conversation and Agatha Lord
certainly interested the two younger girls very much. She was decidedly
worldly in much of her gossip but quick to perceive when she infringed
the susceptibilities of her less sophisticated companions and was able
to turn the subject cleverly to more agreeable channels.

"I've brought my automobile with me," she said, "and, unless you have a
car of your own, we will take some rides through the valley together. I
mean to drive to Millbank every day for mail."

"There's a car here, which belongs to Mr. Morrison," replied Mary
Louise, "but as none of us understands driving it we will gladly accept
your invitations to ride. Do you drive your own car?"

"Yes, indeed; that is the joy of motoring; and I care for my car, too,
because the hired chauffeurs are so stupid. I didn't wish the bother of
servants while taking my 'rest cure,' and so my maid and I are all alone
at the Bigbee place."

After a time they went into the house, where Miss Lord was presented to
Aunt Hannah, who welcomed their neighbor with her accustomed cordiality.
In the den Agatha pounced upon the books and quickly selected two which
she begged permission to take home with her.

"This is really a well selected collection," she remarked, eyeing the
titles critically. "Where did Mr. Conant find it?"

"At an auction of second-hand junk in New York," explained Irene. "Uncle
Peter knows that I love the old-fashioned books best but I'm sure he
didn't realize what a good collection this is."

As she spoke, Irene was listlessly running through the leaves of two or
three volumes she had not before examined, when in one of them her eye
was caught by a yellowed sheet of correspondence paper, tucked among the
pages at about midway between the covers. Without removing the sheet she
leaned over to examine the fine characters written upon it and presently
exclaimed in wondering tones:

"Why, Mary Louise! Here is an old letter about your mother--yes, and
here's something about your grandfather, too. How strange that it should
be--"

"Let me see it!" cried Mary Louise, eagerly stretching out her hands.

But over her friend's shoulder Irene caught the expression of Agatha
Lord--tense, startled, with a gleam of triumph in the dark eyes. It
frightened her, that look on the face of one she had deemed a stranger,
and it warned her. She closed the book with a little slam of decision
and tucked it beside her in her chair.

"No," she said positively, "no one shall see the letter until I've had
time to read it myself."

"But what was it about?" asked Mary Louise.

"I don't know, yet; and you're not to ask questions until I DO know,"
retorted Irene, calmly returning Miss Lord's curious gaze while
addressing Mary Louise. "These are my books, you must admit, and so
whatever I find in them belongs to me."

"Quite right, my dear," approved Agatha Lord, with her light, easy
laugh. She knew that Irene had surprised her unguarded expression and
wished to counteract the impression it had caused.

Irene returned the laugh with one equally insincere, saying to her
guest:

"Help yourself to whatever books you like, neighbor. Carry them home,
read them and return them at your convenience."

"You are exceedingly kind," answered Agatha and resumed her examination
of the titles. Mary Louise had not observed the tell-tale expression on
Miss Lord's face but she was shrewd enough to detect an undercurrent of
ice in the polite phrases passing between her companions. She was
consumed with curiosity to know more of the letter which Irene had found
in the book but did not again refer to it in the presence of their
visitor.

It was not long before Agatha rose to go, a couple of books tucked
beneath her arm.

"Will you ride with me to Millbank to-morrow?" she asked, glancing from
one face to another.

Mary Louise looked at Irene and Irene hesitated.

"I am not very comfortable without my chair," she said.

"You shall have the rear seat all to yourself, and it is big and broad
and comfortable. Mary Louise will ride with me in front. I can easily
drive the car up here and load you in at this very porch. Please come!"

"Very well, since you are so kind," Irene decided, and after a few more
kindly remarks the beautiful Miss Lord left them and walked with
graceful, swinging stride down the path to the road and down the road
toward the Bigbee house.


CHAPTER XV

BUB'S HOBBY


When their visitor had departed Mary Louise turned to her friend.

"Now, Irene, tell me about that queer letter," she begged.

"Not yet, dear. I'm sure it isn't important, though it's curious to find
such an old letter tucked away in a book Uncle Peter bought at an
auction in New York--a letter that refers to your own people, in days
long gone by. In fact, Mary Louise, it was written so long ago that it
cannot possibly interest us except as proof of the saying that the
world's a mighty small place. When I have nothing else to do I mean to
read that old epistle from start to finish; then, if it contains
anything you'd care to see, I'll let you have a look at it."

With this promise Mary Louise was forced to be content, for she did not
wish to annoy Irene by further pleadings. It really seemed, on
reflection, that the letter could be of little consequence to anyone. So
she put it out of mind, especially as just now they spied Bub sitting on
the bench and whittling as industriously as ever.

"Let me go to him first," suggested Irene, with a mischievous smile. "He
doesn't seem at all afraid of me, for some reason, and after I've led
him into conversation you can join us."

So she wheeled her chair over to where the boy sat. He glanced toward
her as she approached the bench but made no movement to flee.

"We've had a visitor," said the girl, confidentially; "a lady who has
taken the Bigbee house for the summer."

Bub nodded, still whittling.

"I know; I seen her drive her car up the grade on high," he remarked,
feeling the edge of his knife-blade reflectively. "Seems like a real
sport--fer a gal--don't she?"

"She isn't a girl; she's a grown woman."

"To me," said Bub, "ev'rything in skirts is gals. The older they gits,
the more ornery, to my mind. Never seen a gal yit what's wuth havin'
'round."

"Some day," said Irene with a smile, "you may change your mind about
girls."

"An' ag'in," said Bub, "I mayn't. Dad says he were soft in the head when
he took up with marm, an' Talbot owned a wife once what tried ter pizen
him; so he giv 'er the shake an' come here to live in peace; but Dad's
so used to scoldin's thet he can't sleep sound in the open any more
onless he lays down beside the brook where it's noisiest. Then it
reminds him o' marm an' he feels like he's to home. Gals think they got
the men scared, an' sometimes they guess right. Even Miss' Morrison
makes Will toe the mark, an' Miss' Morrison ain't no slouch, fer a gal."

This somewhat voluble screed was delivered slowly, interspersed with
periods of aimless whittling, and when Irene had patiently heard it
through she decided it wise to change the subject.

"To-morrow we are going to ride in Miss Lord's automobile," she
remarked.

Bub grunted.

"She says she can easily run it up to our door. Do you believe that!"

"Why not?" he inquired. "Don't Will Morrison have a car? It's over there
in the shed now."

"Could it be used?" quietly asked Mary Louise, who had now strolled up
behind the bench unperceived.

Bub turned a scowling face to her, but she was looking out across the
bluff. And she had broached a subject in which the boy was intensely
interested.

"Thet thar car in there is a reg'lar hummer," he asserted, waving the
knife in one hand and the stick in the other by way of emphasis. "Tain't
much fer looks, ye know, but looks cuts no figger with machinery,
s'long's it's well greased. On a hill, thet car's a cat; on a level
stretch, she's a jack-rabbit. I've seen Will Morrison take 'er ter
Millbank an' back in a hour--jus' one lonesome hour!"

"That must have been in its good days," observed Mary Louise. "The thing
hasn't any tires on it now."

"Will takes the tires off ev'ry year, when he goes away, an' puts 'em in
the cellar," explained Bub. "They's seven good tires down cellar now; I
counted 'em the day afore ye come here."

"In that case," said Mary Louise, "if any of us knew how to drive we
could use the car."

"Drive?" said Bub scornfully. "That's nuth'n'."

"Oh. Do you know how?"

"Me? I kin drive any car thet's on wheels. Two years ago, afore Talbot
come, I used ter drive Will Morrison over t' Millbank ev'ry week t'
catch the train; an' brung the car home ag'in; an' went fer Will when he
come back."

"You must have been very young, two years ago," said Irene.

"Shucks. I'm goin' on fifteen this very minnit. When I were 'leven I
druv the Higgins car fer 'em an' never hit the ditch once. Young!
Wha'd'ye think I am--a KID?"

So indignant had he become that he suddenly rose and slouched away, nor
could they persuade him to return.

"We're going to have a lot of fun with that boy, once we learn how to
handle him," predicted Irene, when the two girls had enjoyed a good
laugh at Bub's expense. "He seems a queer mixture of simplicity and
shrewdness."

The next day Agatha Lord appeared in her big touring car and after
lifting Irene in and making her quite comfortable on the back seat they
rolled gayly away to Millbank, where they had lunch at the primitive
restaurant, visited the post-office in the grocery store and amused
themselves until the train came in and brought Peter Conant, who was
loaded down with various parcels of merchandise Aunt Hannah had ordered.

The lawyer was greatly pleased to find a car waiting to carry him to the
Lodge and after being introduced to Miss Lord, whose loveliness he could
not fail to admire, he rode back with her in the front seat and left
Mary Louise to sit inside with Irene and the packages. Bill Coombs
didn't approve of this method of ruining his stage business and scowled
at the glittering auto as it sped away across the plain to the mountain.

On this day Miss Lord proved an exceedingly agreeable companion to them
all, even Irene forgetting for the time the strange expression she had
surprised on Agatha's face at the time she found the letter. Mary Louise
seemed to have quite forgotten that letter, for she did not again refer
to it; but Irene, who had studied it closely in the seclusion of her own
room that very night, had it rather persistently in mind and her eyes
took on an added expression of grave and gentle commiseration whenever
she looked at Mary Louise's unconscious face.

"It is much more fun," observed Peter Conant at breakfast the nest
morning, "to ride to and from the station in a motor car than to
patronize Bill Coombs' rickety, slow-going omnibus. But I can't expect
our fair neighbor to run a stage line for my express accommodation."

"Will Morrison's motor car is here in the shed," said Mary Louise, and
then she told of their conversation with Bub concerning it. "He says he
has driven a car ever since he was eleven years old," she added.

"I wondered what that boy was good for," asserted the lawyer, "yet the
very last thing I would have accused him of is being a chauffeur."

"Why don't you put on the tires and use the car?" asked Aunt Hannah.

"H-m. Morrison didn't mention the car to me. I suppose he forgot it. But
I'm sure he'd be glad to have us use it. I'll talk with the boy."

Bub was found near the Talbot cottage in the gully. When Mr. Conant and
Mary Louise approached him, soon after finishing their breakfast, he
was--as usual--diligently whittling.

"They tell me you understand running Mr. Morrison's car," began the
lawyer.

Bub raised his eyes a moment to the speaker's face but deemed an answer
unnecessary.

"Is that true?" with an impatient inflection.

"Kin run any car," said Bub.

"Very well. Show me where the tires are and we will put them on. I want
you to drive me to and from Millbank, hereafter."

Bub retained his seat and whittled.

"Hev ye got a order from Will Morrison, in writin'?" he demanded.

"No, but he will be glad to have me use the machine. He said everything
at the Lodge was at my disposal."

"Cars," said Bub, "ain't like other things. A feller'll lend his
huntin'-dog, er his knife, er his overcoat; but he's all-fired shy o'
lendin' his car. Ef I runned it for ye, Will might blame ME."

Mr. Conant fixed his dull stare on the boy's face, but Bub went on
whittling. However, in the boy's inmost heart was a keen desire to run
that motor car, as had been proposed. So he casually remarked:

"Ef ye forced me, ye know, I'd jus' hev to do it. Even Will couldn't
blame me ef I were forced."

Mr. Conant was so exasperated that the hint was enough. He seized the
boy's collar, lifted him off the stump and kicked him repeatedly as he
propelled his victim toward the house.

"Oh, Uncle Peter!" cried Mary Louise, distressed; but Peter was obdurate
and Bub never whimpered. He even managed to close his knife, between
kicks, and slip it into his trousers pocket.

When they came to the garage the lawyer halted, more winded than Bub,
and demanded sharply:

"What is needed to put the car in shape to run?"

"Tires, gas'line, oil 'n' water."

"The tires are in the cellar, you say? Get them out or I'll skin you
alive."

Bub nodded, grinning.

"Forcin' of me, afore a witness, lets me out," he remarked, cheerfully,
and straightway went for the tires.

Irene wheeled herself out and joined Uncle Peter and Mary Louise in
watching the boy attach the tires, which were on demountable rims and
soon put in place. All were surprised at Bub's sudden exhibition of
energy and his deft movements, for he worked with the assurance of a
skilled mechanic.

"Now, we need gasoline," said Mr. Conant. "I must order that from
Millbank, I suppose."

"Onless ye want to rob Will Morrison's tank," agreed Bub.

"Oh; has he a tank of gasoline here?"

Bub nodded.

"A undergroun' steel tank. I dunno how much gas is in it, but ef ye
forced me I'd hev to measure it."

Peter picked up a stick and shook it threateningly, whereat Bub smiled
and walked to the rear of the garage where an iron plug appeared just
above the surface of the ground. This he unscrewed with a wrench, thrust
in a rod and drew it out again.

"'Bout forty gallon," he announced. "Thet's 'nough fer a starter, I
guess."

"Then put some of it into the machine. Is there any oil?"

"Plenty oil."

Half an hour later Bub started the engine and rolled the car slowly out
of its shed to the graveled drive in the back yard.

"All right, mister," he announced with satisfaction. "I dunno what
Will'll say to this, but I kin prove I were forced. Want to take a ride
now?"

"No," replied Mr. Conant, "I merely wanted to get the car in shape. You
are to take me to the station on Monday morning. Under the circumstances
we will not use Morrison's car for pleasure rides, but only for
convenience in getting from here to the trains and back. He surely
cannot object to that."

Bub seemed disappointed by this decision. He ran the car around the yard
two or three times, testing its condition, and then returned it to its
shed. Mr. Conant got his rod and reel and departed on a fishing
excursion.


CHAPTER XVI

THE STOLEN BOOK


Miss Lord came up to the Lodge that Saturday forenoon and proved so
agreeable to Aunt Hannah and the girls that she was invited to stay to
lunch. Mr. Conant was not present, for he had put a couple of sandwiches
in his pocket and would not return home until dinner-time.

After luncheon they were all seated together on the benches at the edge
of the bluff, which had become their favorite resort because the view
was so wonderful. Mary Louise was doing a bit of fancy work, Irene was
reading and Aunt Hannah, as she mended stockings, conversed in a
desultory way with her guest.

"If you don't mind," said Agatha, after a time, "I'll run in and get me
a book. This seems the place and the hour for dreaming, rather than
gossip, and as we are all in a dreamy mood a good old-fashioned romance
seems to me quite fitting for the occasion."

Taking permission for granted, she rose and sauntered toward the house.
There was a serious and questioning look in Irene's eyes as they
followed the graceful form of Miss Lord, but Mary Louise and Aunt Hannah
paid no heed to their visitor's going in to select a book, it seemed so
natural a thing for her to do.

It was fully fifteen minutes before Agatha returned, book in hand. Irene
glanced at the title and gave a sigh of relief. Without comment their
guest resumed her seat and soon appeared to be immersed in her volume.
Gradually the sun crossed the mountain and cast a black shadow over the
plain below, a shadow which lengthened and advanced inch by inch until
it shrouded the landscape spread beneath them.

"That is my sun-dial," remarked Mary Louise, dropping her needlework to
watch the shifting scene. "When the shadow passes the Huddle, it's four
o'clock; by the time it reaches that group of oaks, it is four-thirty;
at five o'clock it touches the creek, and then I know it's time to help
Aunt Hannah with the dinner."

Agatha laughed.

"Is it really so late?" she asked. "I see the shadow has nearly reached
the brook."

"Oh! I didn't mean--"

"Of course not; but it's time I ran home, just the same. My maid Susan
is a perfect tyrant and scolds me dreadfully if I'm late. May I take
this book home, Irene? I'll return the others I have borrowed to-
morrow."

"To be sure," answered Irene. "I'm rich in books, you know."

When Miss Lord went away the party broke up, for Aunt Hannah was already
thinking of dinner and Mary Louise wanted to make one of Uncle Peter's
favorite desserts. So Irene wheeled her chair into the house and
entering the den began a sharp inspection of the place, having in mind
exactly the way it had looked when last she left it. But presently she
breathed a sigh of relief and went into her own room, for the den had
not been disturbed. She wheeled herself to a small table in a corner of
her chamber and one glance confirmed her suspicions.

For half an hour she sat quietly thinking, considering many things that
might prove very important in the near future. The chair-girl knew
little of life save what she had gleaned from books, but in some ways
that was quite equal to personal experiences. At dinner she asked:

"Did you take a book from my room to-day, Mary Louise?"

"No," was the reply; "I have not been in your room since yesterday."

"Nor you, Aunt Hannah?"

"No, my dear. What book is missing?"

"It was entitled 'The Siberian Exile.'"

"Good gracious!" exclaimed Mary Louise. "Wasn't that the book you found
the letter in?"

"Yes."

"And you say it is missing?"

"It has mysteriously disappeared."

"Nonsense," said Uncle Peter, who had returned with a fine string of
trout. "No one would care to steal an old book, and the thing hasn't
legs, you know."

"Nevertheless," said Irene gravely, "it is gone."

"And the letter with it!" added Mary Louise regretfully. "You ought to
have let me read it while I could, Irene."

"What letter are you talking about?" asked the lawyer.

"It is nothing important, Uncle Peter," Irene assured him. "The loss of
the book does not worry me at all."

Nor did it, for she knew the letter was not in it. And, to avoid further
questioning on the part of Mr. Conant, she managed to turn the
conversation to less dangerous subjects.


CHAPTER XVII

THE HIRED GIRL


Mr. Conant had just put on a comfortable smoking-jacket and slippers and
seated himself in the den, pipe in mouth, when the old-fashioned knocker
on the front door of the Lodge began to bang. It banged three times, so
Mr. Conant rose and made for the door.

Mrs. Conant and Mary Louise were in the kitchen and Irene was in her own
room. The lawyer reflected, with a deprecating glance at his
unconventional costume, that their evening caller could be none other
than their neighbor, the beautiful Miss Lord, so as he opened the door
he regretted that his appearance was not more presentable.

But it was not Miss Lord who stood upon the porch awaiting admittance.
It was a strange girl, who asked in a meek voice:

"Is this Hillcrest Lodge?"

"It is," replied the lawyer.

The girl came in without an invitation, bringing a carpet-bag in one
hand and a bundle tied in a newspaper tucked under the other arm. As she
stood in the lighted room she looked around inquiringly and said:

"I am Sarah Judd. Where is Mrs. Morrison, please?"

Mr. Conant stood and stared at her, his hands clasped behind his back in
characteristic attitude. He could not remember ever having heard of
Sarah Judd.

"Mrs. Morrison," he said in his choppy voice, "is in Europe."

The girl stared at him in return, as if stupified. Then she sat down in
the nearest chair and continued to stare. Finding her determined on
silence, Mr. Conant spoke again.

"The Morrisons are spending the summer abroad. I and my family are
occupying the Lodge in their absence. I--eh--eh--I am Mr. Conant, of
Dorfield."

The girl sighed drearily. She was quite small, about seventeen years of
age and dressed in a faded gingham over which she wore a black cloth
coat that was rusty and frayed. A black straw hat, fearfully decorated
with red velvet and mussed artificial flowers, was tipped over her
forehead. Her features were not bad, but her nose was blotched, her face
strongly freckled and her red hair very untidy. Only the mild blue eyes
redeemed the unattractive face--eyes very like those of Mary Louise in
expression, mused Mr. Conant, as he critically eyed the girl.

"I have come here to work," she said after a long pause, during which
she seemed trying to collect her thoughts. "I am Sarah Judd. Mrs.
Morrison said I must come here on Saturday, the tenth day of July, to go
to work. This is the tenth day of July."

"H-m--h-m; I see. When did Mrs. Morrison tell you that?"

"It was last September."

"Oh; so she hired you a year in advance and didn't tell you, afterward,
that she was going abroad?"

"I didn't see her since, sir."

Mr. Conant was perplexed. He went into the kitchen and told Aunt Hannah
about it and the good woman came at once to interview Sarah Judd,
followed by Mary Louise, who had just finished wiping the dishes.

"This seems very unfortunate for you," began Mrs. Conant, regarding the
strange girl with mild interest. "I suppose, when Mrs. Morrison engaged
you, she expected to pass the summer at the Lodge, and afterward she
forgot to notify you."

Sarah Judd considered this soberly; then nodded her head.

"I've walked all the way from Millbank," she said with another sigh.

"Then you've had nothing to eat!" exclaimed Mary Louise, with ready
sympathy. "May I get her something, Aunt Hannah?"

"Of course, my dear."

Both Mr. and Mrs. Conant felt rather embarrassed.

"I regret," said the latter, "that we do not need a maid at present. As
compared with Italian opera, in which the principal singers are
all and the _ensemble_ nothing, it means, mayhap, inferior vocalists
but better actors in the principal parts, a superior orchestra and
chorus, and a more conscientious effort on the part of conductor,
stage manager, and artists, from first to last, to lift the general
effect above the conventional level which has prevailed for centuries
in the Italian opera houses.

[Sidenote: _Wagner's "Musikdrama."_]
[Sidenote: _Modern Italian terminology._]
In terminology, as well as in artistic aim, Wagner's lyric dramas
round out a cycle that began with the works of the Florentine
reformers of the sixteenth century.

Wagner called his later operas _Musikdramen_, wherefore he was soundly
abused and ridiculed by his critics. When the Italian opera first
appeared it was called _Dramma per musica_, or _Melodramma_, or
_Tragedia per musica_, all of which terms stand in Italian for the
conception that _Musikdrama_ stands for in German.

The new thing had been in existence for half a century, and was already
on the road to the degraded level on which we shall find it when we
come to the subject of operatic singing, before it came to be called
_Opera in musica_, of which "opera" is an abbreviation. Now it is to
be observed that the composers of all countries, having been taught to
believe that the dramatic contents of an opera have some significance,
are abandoning the vague term "opera" and following Wagner in his
adoption of the principles underlying the original terminology. Verdi
called his "Aïda" an _Opera in quattro atti_, but his "Otello" he
designated a lyric drama (_Dramma lirico_), his "Falstaff" a lyric
comedy (_Commedia lirica_), and his example is followed by the
younger Italian composers, such as Mascagni, Leoncavallo, and
Puccini.

[Sidenote: _Recitative._]
In the majority of the operas of the current list the vocal element
illustrates an amalgamation of the archaic recitative and aria.

The dry form of recitative is met with now only in a few of the operas
which date back to the last century or the early years of the present.

"Le Nozze di Figaro," "Don Giovanni," and "Il Barbiere di Siviglia"
are the most familiar works in which it is employed, and in the
second of these it is used only by the bearers of the comedy element.

The dissolute _Don_ chatters glibly in it with _Zerlina_, but when
_Donna Anna_ and _Don Ottavio_ converse, it is in the _recitativo
stromentato_.

[Sidenote: _The object of recitative._]
[Sidenote: _Defects of the recitative._]
[Sidenote: _What it can do._]
In both forms recitative is the vehicle for promoting the action of
the play, preparing its incidents, and paving the way for the
situations and emotional states which are exploited, promulgated,
and dwelt upon in the set music pieces.

Its purpose is to maintain the play in an artificial atmosphere, so
that the transition from dialogue to song may not be so abrupt as to
disturb the mood of the listener.
Of all the factors in an opera, the dry recitative is the
most monotonous.

It is not music, but speech about to break into music.
Unless one is familiar with Italian and desirous of following the
conversation, which we have been often told is not necessary to the
enjoyment of an opera, its everlasting use of stereotyped falls and
intervallic turns, coupled with the strumming of arpeggioed cadences
on the pianoforte (or worse, double-bass and violoncello), makes
it insufferably wearisome to the listener.

Its expression is fleeting--only for the moment. It lacks the sustained
tones and structural symmetry essential to melody, and therefore
it cannot sustain a mood.

It makes efficient use of only one of the fundamental factors of vocal
music--variety of pitch--and that in a rudimentary way. It is
specifically a product of the Italian language, and best adapted
to comedy in that language.

Spoken with the vivacity native to it in the drama, dry recitative
is an impossibility in English.

It is only in the more measured and sober gait proper to oratorio that we
can listen to it in the vernacular without thought of incongruity.
Yet it may be made most admirably to preserve the characteristics of
conversation, and even illustrate Spencer's theory of the origin of
music.

Witness the following brief example from "Don Giovanni," in which the
vivacity of the master is admirably contrasted with the lumpishness of
his servant:

[Sidenote: _An example from Mozart._]
[Music illustration: _Sempre sotto voce._
DON GIOVANNI. LEPORELLO.

_Le-po-rel-lo, o-ve sei?

Son qui per_ Le-po-rel-lo, where are you?

I'm here and
D.G. LEP.
_dis-gra-zi-a! e vo-i? Son qui. Chi è_ more's the pit-y! and you, Sir?
Here too. Who's
D.G.
_mor-to, voi, o il vec-chio? Che do-_ been killed, you or the old
one? What a
LEP.

_man-da da bes-tia! il vec-chio. Bra-vo!_ ques-tion, you boo-by!

the old one. Bra-vo!]
[Sidenote: _Its characteristics._]
Of course it is left to the intelligence and taste of the singers
to bring out the effects in a recitative, but in this specimen it ought
to be noted how sluggishly the disgruntled _Leporello_ replies to the
brisk question of _Don Giovanni_, how correct is the rhetorical
pause in "you, or the old one?"

and the greater sobriety which comes over the manner of the _Don_ as he
thinks of the murder just committed, and replies, "the old one."

[Sidenote: _Recitative of some sort necessary._]
[Sidenote: _The speaking voice in opera._]
I am strongly inclined to the belief that in one form or the other,
preferably the accompanied, recitative is a necessary integer in
the operatic sum.

That it is possible to accustom one's self to the change alternately
from speech to song we know from the experiences made with German,
French, and English operas, but these were not true lyric dramas, but
dramas with incidental music.

To be a real lyric drama an opera ought to be musical throughout,
the voice being maintained from beginning to end on an exalted plane.
The tendency to drop into the speaking voice for the sake of dramatic
effect shown by some tragic singers does not seem to me commendable.
Wagner relates with enthusiasm how Madame Schroeder-Devrient in
"Fidelio" was wont to give supreme emphasis to the phrase immediately
preceding the trumpet signal in the dungeon scene ("Another step,
and you are _dead_!")

by speaking the last word "with an awful accent of despair." He then
comments:

"The indescribable effect of this manifested itself to all like an agonizing
plunge from one sphere into another, and its sublimity consisted in this,
that with lightning quickness a glimpse was given to us of the nature
of both spheres, of which one was the ideal, the other the real."
[Sidenote: _Wagner and Schroeder-Devrient._]
I have heard a similar effect produced by Herr Niemann and Madame
Lehmann, but could not convince myself that it was not an extremely
venturesome experiment.

Madame Schroeder-Devrient saw the beginning of the modern methods of
dramatic expression, and it is easy to believe that a sudden change like
that so well defined by Wagner, made with her sweeping voice and
accompanied by her plastic and powerful acting, was really thrilling;
but, I fancy, nevertheless, that only Beethoven and the intensity
of feeling which pervades the scene saved the audience from a
disturbing sense of the incongruity of the performance.

[Sidenote: _Early forms._]
[Sidenote: _The dialogue of the Florentines._]
The development which has taken place in the recitative has not only
assisted in elevating opera to the dignity of a lyric drama by saving us
from alternate contemplation of the two spheres of ideality and reality,
but has also made the factor itself an eloquent vehicle of dramatic
expression. Save that it had to forego the help of the instruments beyond
a mere harmonic support, the _stilo rappresentativo_, or _musica
parlante_, as the Florentines called their musical dialogue,
approached the sustained recitative which we hear in the oratorio
and grand opera more closely than it did the _recitative secco_.

Ever and anon, already in the earliest works (the "Eurydice" of
Rinuccini as composed by both Peri and Caccini) there are passages which
sound like rudimentary melodies, but are charged with vital dramatic
expression.

Note the following phrase from _Orpheus's_ monologue on being left in the
infernal regions by _Venus_, from Peri's opera, performed A.D. 1600, in
honor of the marriage of Maria de' Medici to Henry IV. of France:

[Sidenote: _An example from Peri._]
[Music illustration:

_E voi, deh per pie-tà, del mio mar-ti-re Che nel mi-se-ro cor
di-mo-ra e-ter-no, La-cri-ma-te al mio pian-to om-bre d'in-fer-no!

_]
[Sidenote: _Development of the arioso._]
[Sidenote: _The aria supplanted._]
[Sidenote: _Music and action._]
Out of this style there grew within a decade something very near
the arioso, and for all the purposes of our argument we may accept
the melodic devices by which Wagner carries on the dialogue of his
operas as an uncircumscribed arioso superimposed upon a foundation
of orchestral harmony; for example, _Lohengrin's_ address to the
swan, _Elsa's_ account of her dream.

The greater melodiousness of the _recitativo stromentato_, and the
aid of the orchestra when it began to assert itself as a factor
of independent value, soon enabled this form of musical conversation
to become a reflector of the changing moods and passions of the
play, and thus the value of the aria, whether considered as a solo,
or in its composite form as duet, trio, quartet, or _ensemble_, was
lessened.

The growth of the accompanied recitative naturally brought with it
emancipation from the tyranny of the classical aria.

Wagner's reform had nothing to do with that emancipation, which had
been accomplished before him, but went, as we shall see presently,
to a liberation of the composers from all the formal dams which had
clogged the united flow of action and music.

We should, however, even while admiring the achievements of modern
composers in blending these elements (and I know of no more striking
illustration than the scene of the fat knight's discomfiture in
_Ford's_ house in Verdi's "Falstaff") bear in mind that while we
may dream of perfect union between words and music, it is not always
possible that action and music shall go hand in hand.

Let me repeat what once I wrote in a review of Cornelius's opera, "Der
Barbier von Bagdad:"[F]

[Sidenote: _How music can replace incident._]
"After all, of the constituents of an opera, action, at least that
form of it usually called incident, is most easily spared.

Progress in feeling, development of the emotional element, is indeed
essential to variety of musical utterance, but nevertheless all
great operas have demonstrated that music is more potent and eloquent
when proclaiming an emotional state than while seeking to depict
progress toward such a state.

Even in the dramas of Wagner the culminating musical moments are predominantly
lyrical, as witness the love-duet in 'Tristan,' the close of 'Das
Rheingold,' _Siegmund's_ song, the love-duet, and _Wotan's_ farewell
in 'Die Walküre,' the forest scene and final duet in 'Siegfried,'
and the death of _Siegfried_ in 'Die Götterdämmerung.'

It is in the nature of music that this should be so. For the drama
which plays on the stage of the heart, music is a more truthful
language than speech; but it can stimulate movement and prepare the
mind for an incident better than it can accompany movement and
incident.

Yet music that has a high degree of emotional expressiveness, by diverting
attention from externals to the play of passion within the breasts of
the persons can sometimes make us forget the paucity of incident
in a play.

'Tristan und Isolde' is a case in point. Practically, its outward action
is summed up in each of its three acts by the same words:
Preparation for a meeting of the ill-starred lovers; the meeting.

What is outside of this is mere detail; yet the effect of the tragedy upon
a listener is that of a play surcharged with pregnant occurrence.

It is the subtle alchemy of music that transmutes the psychological
action of the tragedy into dramatic incident."

[Sidenote: _Set forms not to be condemned._]

[Sidenote: _Wagner's influence._]
[Sidenote: _His orchestra._] 
[Sidenote: _Vocal feats._]
For those who hold such a view with me it will be impossible to
condemn pieces of set forms in the lyric drama.

Wagner still represents his art-work alone, but in the influence which
he exerted upon contemporaneous composers in Italy and France, as
well as Germany, he is quite as significant a figure as he is as
the creator of the _Musikdrama_.

The operas which are most popular in our Italian and French repertories
are those which benefited by the liberation from formalism and the
exaltation of the dramatic idea which he preached and exemplified--such
works as Gounod's "Faust," Verdi's "Aïda" and "Otello," and Bizet's
"Carmen."

With that emancipation there came, as was inevitable, new conceptions
of the province of dramatic singing as well as new convictions
touching the mission of the orchestra.

The instruments in Wagner's latter-day works are quite as much as the
singing actors the expositors of the dramatic idea, and in the works
of the other men whom I have mentioned they speak a language which a
century ago was known only to the orchestras of Gluck and Mozart with
their comparatively limited, yet eloquent, vocabulary.

Coupled with praise for the wonderful art of Mesdames Patti and Melba
(and I am glad to have lived in their generation, though they do
not represent my ideal in dramatic singing), we are accustomed to
hear lamentations over the decay of singing.

I have intoned such jeremiads myself, and I do not believe that music
is suffering from a greater want to-day than that of a more thorough
training for singers. I marvel when I read that Senesino sang
cadences of fifty seconds' duration; that Ferri with a single breath
could trill upon each note of two octaves, ascending and descending,
and that La Bastardella's art was equal to a perfect performance (perfect
in the conception of her day) of a flourish like this:
[Sidenote: _La Bastardella's flourish._]
[Music illustration]
[Sidenote: _Character of the opera a century and a half ago._]
[Sidenote: _Music and dramatic expression._]
I marvel, I say, at the skill, the gifts, and the training which
could accomplish such feats, but I would not have them back again
if they were to be employed in the old service.

When Senesino, Farinelli, Sassarelli, Ferri, and their tribe dominated
the stage, it strutted with sexless Agamemnons and Cæsars.

Telemachus, Darius, Nero, Cato, Alexander, Scipio, and Hannibal ran around
on the boards as languishing lovers, clad in humiliating disguises,
singing woful arias to their mistress's eyebrows--arias full of
trills and scales and florid ornaments, but void of feeling as a problem
in Euclid.

Thanks very largely to German influences, the opera is returning to
its original purposes. Music is again become a means of dramatic
expression, and the singers who appeal to us most powerfully are
those who are best able to make song subserve that purpose, and who
to that end give to dramatic truthfulness, to effective elocution, and
to action the attention which mere voice and beautiful utterance
received in the period which is called the Golden Age of singing,
but which was the Leaden Age of the lyric drama.

[Sidenote: _Singers heard in New York._]
For seventy years the people of New York, scarcely less favored than
those of London, have heard nearly all the great singers of Europe.

Let me talk about some of them, for I am trying to establish some
ground on which my readers may stand when they try to form an
estimate of the singing which they are privileged to hear in the
opera houses of to-day.

Madame Malibran was a member of the first Italian company that ever
sang here. Madame Cinti-Damoreau came in 1844, Bosio in 1849,
Jenny Lind in 1850, Sontag in 1853, Grisi in 1854, La Grange in 1855,
Frezzolini in 1857, Piccolomini in 1858, Nilsson in 1870, Lucca in 1872,
Titiens in 1876, Gerster in 1878, and Sembrich in 1883. I omit the
singers of the German opera as belonging to a different category. Adelina
Patti was always with us until she made her European début in 1861,
and remained abroad twenty years.

Of the men who were the artistic associates of these _prime donne_, mention
may be made of Mario, Benedetti, Corsi, Salvi, Ronconi, Formes, Brignoli,
Amadeo, Coletti, and Campanini, none of whom, excepting Mario, was
of first-class importance compared with the women singers.

[Sidenote: _Grisi._]
[Sidenote: _Jenny Lind._]

[Sidenote: _Lilli Lehmann._]
Nearly all of these singers, even those still living and remembered by
the younger generation of to-day, exploited their gifts in the operas
of Rossini, Bellini, Donizetti, the early Verdi, and Meyerbeer. Grisi
was acclaimed a great dramatic singer, and it is told of her that once
in "Norma" she frightened the tenor who sang the part of _Pollio_ by
the fury of her acting.

But measured by the standards of to-day, say that set by Calvé's _Carmen_,
it must have been a simple age that could be impressed by the
tragic power of anyone acting the part of Bellini's Druidical
priestess.

The surmise is strengthened by the circumstance that Madame Grisi
created a sensation in "Il Trovatore" by showing signs of agitation
in the tower scene, walking about the stage during _Manrico's_
"_Ah!

che la morte ognora_," as if she would fain discover the part of
the castle where her lover was imprisoned.

The chief charm of Jenny Lind in the memory of the older generation
is the pathos with which she sang simple songs.

Mendelssohn esteemed her greatly as a woman and artist, but he is quoted
as once remarking to Chorley: "I cannot think why she always prefers to
be in a bad theatre."

Moscheles, recording his impressions of her in Meyerbeer's "Camp
of Silesia" (now "L'Étoile du Nord"), reached the climax of his
praise in the words: "Her song with the two concertante flutes is
perhaps the most incredible feat in the way of bravura singing that
can possibly be heard."

She was credited, too, with fine powers as an actress; and that she
possessed them can easily be believed, for few of the singers whom
I have mentioned had so early and intimate an association with the
theatre as she.

Her repugnance to it in later life she attributed to a prejudice
inherited from her mother. A vastly different heritage is disclosed
by Madame Lehmann's devotion to the drama, a devotion almost akin
to religion. I have known her to go into the scene-room of the
Metropolitan Opera House in New York and search for mimic stumps
and rocks with which to fit out a scene in "Siegfried," in which
she was not even to appear.

That, like her super-human work at rehearsals, was "for the good of
the cause," as she expressed it.

[Sidenote: _Sontag._]
Most amiable are the memories that cluster around the name of Sontag,
whose career came to a grievous close by her sudden death in Mexico in
1854.

She was a German, and the early part of her artistic life was
influenced by German ideals, but it is said that only in the music
of Mozart and Weber, which aroused in her strong national emotion,
did she sing dramatically.

For the rest she used her light voice, which had an extraordinary
range, brilliancy, and flexibility, very much as Patti and Melba
use their voices to-day--in mere unfeeling vocal display.

"She had an extensive soprano voice," says Hogarth; "not remarkable
for power, but clear, brilliant, and singularly flexible; a quality
which seems to have led her (unlike most German singers in general)
to cultivate the most florid style, and even to follow the bad
example set by Catalani, of seeking to convert her voice into an
instrument, and to astonish the public by executing the violin
variations on Rode's air and other things of that stamp."

[Sidenote: _La Grange._]
[Sidenote: _Piccolomini._]
[Sidenote: _Adelina Patti._]
[Sidenote: _Gerster._]

[Sidenote: _Lucca and Nilsson._]

[Sidenote: _Sembrich._]
Madame La Grange had a voice of wide compass, which enabled her to
sing contralto rôles as well as soprano, but I have never heard her
dramatic powers praised.

As for Piccolomini, read of her where you will, you shall find that
she was "charming."

She was lovely to look upon, and her acting in soubrette parts was
fascinating. Until Melba came Patti was for thirty years peerless
as a mere vocalist.

She belongs, as did Piccolomini and Sontag, to the comic _genre_;
so did Sembrich and Gerster, the latter of whom never knew it.

I well remember how indignant she became on one occasion, in her
first American season, at a criticism which I wrote of her _Amina_
in "La Sonnambula," a performance which remains among my loveliest
and most fragrant recollections.

I had made use of Catalani's remark concerning Sontag: "_Son genre
est petit, mais elle est unique dans son genre_," and applied it
to her style.

She almost flew into a passion. "_Mon genre est grand!

_" said she, over and over again, while Dr. Gardini, her husband, tried
to pacify her.

"Come to see my _Marguerite_ next season." Now, Gounod's _Marguerite_
does not quite belong to the heroic rôles, though we can all
remember how Lucca thrilled us by her intensity of action as well
as of song, and how Madame Nilsson sent the blood out of our cheeks,
though she did stride through the opera like a combination of the
_grande dame_ and Ary Scheffer's spirituelle pictures; but such as
it is, Madame Gerster achieved a success of interest only, and that
because of her strivings for originality.

Sembrich and Gerster, when they were first heard in New York, had
as much execution as Melba or Nilsson; but their voices had less
emotional power than that of the latter, and less beauty than that
of the former--beauty of the kind that might be called classic,
since it is in no way dependent on feeling.

Her only recourse must be a stubborn
refusal to explain anything more.

"Colonel Weatherby," she said slowly, "has better information than I of
the charge against him and his reasons for keeping hidden, yet he
steadfastly refuses to proclaim his innocence or to prove he is unjustly
accused, which he might very well do if he chose. You say you are
working in his interests, and, allowing that, I am satisfied he would
bitterly reproach anyone who succeeded in clearing his name by
disclosing the truth."

This argument positively amazed Agatha Lord, as it might well amaze
anyone who had not read the letter. In spite of her supreme confidence
of the moment before, the woman now suddenly realized that this
promising interview was destined to end disastrously to her plans.

"I am so obtuse that you will have to explain that statement," she said
with assumed carelessness; but Irene was now on guard and replied:

"Then our alliance is dissolved. I do not intend, Miss Lord, to betray
such information as I may have stumbled upon unwittingly. You express
interest in Mary Louise and her grandfather and say you are anxious to
serve them. So am I. Therefore I beg you, in their interests, to abandon
any further attempt to penetrate the secret."

Agatha was disconcerted.

"Show me the letter," she urged, as a last resort. "If, on reading it, I
find your position is justifiable--you must admit it is now bewildering-
-I will agree to abandon the investigation altogether."

"I will not show you the letter," declared the girl positively.

The woman studied her face.

"But you will consider this conversation confidential, will you not?"

"Since you request it, yes."

"I do not wish our very pleasant relations, as neighbors, disturbed. I
would rather the Conants and Mary Louise did not suspect I am here on
any especial mission."

"Very well."

"In truth," continued Agatha, "I am growing fond of yon all and this is
a real vacation to me, after a period of hard work in the city which
racked my nerves. Before long I must return to the old strenuous life,
so I wish to make the most of my present opportunities."

"I understand."

No further reference was made to the letter or to Colonel Weatherby.
They talked of other things for a while and when Miss Lord went away
there seemed to exist--at least upon the surface--the same friendly
relations that had formerly prevailed between them.

Irene, reflecting upon the interview, decided that while she had
admitted more than was wise she had stopped short of exposing the truth
about Colonel Weatherby. The letter was safely hidden, now. She defied
even Miss Lord to find it. If she could manage to control her tongue,
hereafter, the secret was safe in her possession.

Thoughtfully she wheeled herself back to the den and finding the room
deserted she ventured to peep into her novel hiding-place. Yes; the
precious letter was still safe. But this time, in her abstraction, she
failed to see the face at the window.


CHAPTER XX

DIAMOND CUT DIAMOND


Tuesday afternoon Miss Lord's big touring car stood at the door of
Hillcrest Lodge, for Agatha had invited the Conant party to ride with
her to Millbank. Irene was tucked into the back seat in a comfortable
position and beside her sat Mrs. Conant, who was going to make a few
purchases at the village store. Mary Louise rode on the front seat with
Agatha, who loved to drive her car and understood it perfectly.

When they drove away there was no one left in the house but Sarah Judd,
the servant girl, who was washing the lunch dishes. Bub was in the shed-
like garage, however, washing and polishing Will Morrison's old car, on
which the paint was so cracked and faded that the boy's attempt to
improve its appearance was a desperate one.

Sarah, through the kitchen window, watched Bub for a time rather
sharply. Then she went out on the bluff and looked down in the valley.
Miss Lord's big car was just passing the Huddle on its way up the
valley.

Sarah turned and reentered the house. Her meek and diffident expression
of countenance had quite disappeared. Her face now wore a look of stern
determination and the blue eyes deepened and grew shrewd.

She walked straight to the den and without hesitation approached the
farther wall and took from its pegs Will Morrison's fine hunting rifle.
In the stock was a hollow chamber for cartridges, for the rifle was of
the type known as a "repeater." Sliding back the steel plate that hid
this cavity, Sarah drew from it a folded paper of a yellow tint and
calmly spread it on the table before her. Then she laid down the rifle,
placed a chair at the table and with absorbed attention read the letter
from beginning to end--the letter that Irene had found in the book.

It was closely written on both sides the thin sheet--evidently of
foreign make--and although the writing was faded it was still clearly
legible.

After the first perusal Sarah Judd leaned her elbows on the table and
her head on her hands and proceeded to study the epistle still more
closely. Then she drew from her pocket a notebook and pencil and with
infinite care made a copy of the entire letter, writing it in her book
in shorthand. This accomplished, she replaced the letter in the rifle
stock and hung the weapon on its pegs again.

Both the window and the glass door of the den faced the back yard. Sarah
opened the door and stood there in deep thought, watching Bub at his
work. Then she returned to the table and opening a drawer drew out a
sheet of blank paper. On this she wrote the following words:

"John Folger, 1601 F. Street, Washington, D. C.

Nothing under sterling over letter bobbing every kernel sad mother
making frolic better quick. If England rumples paper Russia admires
money.

Sarah Judd."

Each word of this preposterous phrasing she wrote after consulting
another book hidden cleverly among the coils of her red hair--a tiny
book it--was, filled with curious characters. When the writing was
finished the girl seemed well satisfied with her work. After tucking
away the book in its former place she went to her room, got her purse
and then proceeded to the shed and confronted Bub.

"I want you to drive this car to Millbank, to the telegraph office at
the railway station," said Sarah.

Bub gave her a scornful look.

"Ye're crazy," he said and went on with his polishing.

"That needn't worry you," retorted the girl.

"It don't," declared Bub.

"You can drive and you're going to," she continued. "I've got to send
this telegram quick, and you've got to take it." She opened her purse
and placed two coins on the fender of the car. "There's a dollar to pay
for the message, and there's a five-dollar gold-piece to pay you for
your trouble."

Bub gave a gasp. He came up beside her and stared at the money. Then he
turned to look at Sarah Judd.

"What's up?" he demanded.

"Private business. Don't ask questions; you'd only get lies for answers.
Go and earn your money."

"Miss' Conant, she's gone to Millbank herself. Ef she sees me there,
I'll git fired. The boss'll fire me himself, anyhow, fer usin' the car
when he tol' me not to."

"How much do you get a week!" asked Sarah.

"Four bits."

"That's about two dollars a month. In two months the Conants will move
back to the city, and by then you'll have earned four dollars. Why, Bub,
it's cheaper for you to take this five-dollar gold-piece and get fired,
than to work for two months for four dollars."

Bub scratched his head in perplexity.

"Ye ain't count'n' on the fun o' workin'," he suggested.

"I'm counting on that five dollars--eight bits to a dollar, forty bits
altogether. Why, it's a fortune, Bub."

He took out his knife, looked around for a stick to whittle and, finding
none, put the knife in his pocket with a sigh.

"I guess Will Morrison wouldn't like it," he decided. "Put up yer money,
Sairy."

Sarah withdrew the gold-piece and put a larger one in its place.

"There," she said; "let's make it ten dollars, and save time."

Bub's hesitation vanished, but he asked anxiously:

"Tain't go'n' to do no harm to them gals thet's stoppin' here, is it?"

"It is to do them a good turn that I'm sending this telegram."

"Honor bright?"

"Hope to die, Bub."

"All right; I'm off."

He folded the letter, placed it inside his Scotch cap and stowed the
money carefully in his pocket.

"Don't let any of the folks see you if yon can help it," warned Sarah;
"and, whatever happens, don't say anything about that telegram to a
living soul. Only--see that it's sent."

"I'm wise," answered Bub and a moment later he started the car and
rolled away down the road.

Sarah Judd looked after him with a queer smile on her face. Then she
went back to her kitchen and resumed her dish-washing. Presently a
scarcely audible sound arrested her attention. It seemed to come from
the interior of the Lodge.

Sarah avoided making a particle of noise herself as she stole softly
through the dining room and entered the main hallway. One glance showed
her that the front door was ajar and the door of the den closed--exactly
the reverse of what they should be. She crept forward and with a sudden
movement threw open the door of the den.

A woman stood in the center of the room. As the door opened she swung
around and pointed a revolver at Sarah. Then for a moment they silently
faced one another.

"Ah," said the woman, with an accent of relief, "you're the servant. Go
back to your work. Mrs. Conant told me to make myself at home here."

"Yes, I know," replied Sarah sarcastically. "She said she was expecting
you and told me it wouldn't do any harm to keep an eye on you while
you're here. She said Miss Lord was going to get all the family away, so
you could make a careful search of the house, you being Miss Lord's
maid, Susan--otherwise known as Nan Shelley, from the Washington
Bureau."

Susan's hand shook so ridiculously that she lowered the revolver to
prevent its dropping from her grasp. Her countenance expressed chagrin,
surprise, anger.

"I don't know you," she said harshly. "Who are you?"

"New at the game," replied Sarah Judd, with a shrug. "You don't know me,
Nan, but I know you; and I know your record, too. You're as slick as
they make 'em, and the one who calls herself Agatha Lord is just an
infantile amateur beside you. But go ahead, Nan; don't let me interrupt
your work."

The woman sank into a chair.

"You can't be from the home office," she muttered, staring hard at the
girl. "They wouldn't dare interfere with my work here."

"No; I'm not from the home office."

"I knew," said Susan, "as soon as I heard the story of your coming, that
it was faked. I'd gamble that you never saw Mrs. Morrison in your life."

"You'd win," said Sarah, also taking a chair.

"Then who could have sent you here?"

"Figure it out yourself," suggested Sarah.

"I'm trying to. Do you know what we're after?"

"A clew to Hathaway. Incidentally, any other information concerning him
that comes your way. That includes the letter."

"Oh. So you know about the letter, do you?" asked Susan.

"To be sure. And I know that's what you're here for now. Don't let me
interrupt you. It's a mighty hard job, finding that letter, and the
folks'll be back by and by."

"You're right," exclaimed the woman, rising abruptly. "Go back to your
work in the kitchen."

"This is my occupation, just now," retorted Sarah, lolling in her chair.
"Go ahead with your search, Nan, and I'll tell you when you are 'hot' or
'cold.'"

"You're an impudent little chit," said Nan tartly. "See here," with a
sudden change of voice, "let's pool issues. If we can discover anything
important in this place, there's reward enough for us all."

"I am not opposing you," protested Sarah Judd, "I'm not a particle
interested in whether you trace Hathaway or not. I don't believe you can
do it, though, and that letter you're so eager for won't help you a bit.
It was written ten years ago."

"That makes it more important," declared the other, "We've two things to
accomplish; one is to locate Hathaway, and the other to secure absolute
proof of his guilt."

"I thought he was caught doing the job."

"So he was, in a way. But the Department needs more proof."

Sarah Judd smiled unbelievingly. Then she chuckled. Presently she
laughed outright, in genuine merriment, as the thought that amused her
grew and expanded.

"What fools--" she said, "what perfect fools--we mortals be!"

All this annoyed Nan Shelley exceedingly. The successful woman detective
did not relish being jeered at by a mere girl.

"You've read the letter, I suppose, and are now making fun of me for
trying to get it? Perhaps you've hidden it yourself--although that isn't
likely. Why can't you give me an honest tip? We're both in the same
line, it seems, and both trying to earn an honest living. How about that
letter? Is it necessary for me to find it?"

"I've read it," admitted Sarah, "and I know where it is. You might
perhaps find it, if you hunted long enough, but it isn't worth your
while. It wouldn't help in the least to convict Hathaway and of course
it couldn't tell you where he is now hiding."

"Is this straight?"

"True as gospel."

"Then why don't you prove it by showing me the letter?"

"Because I don't belong on your side of the fence. You're working for
one organization and I for another. Any little tip I let slip is just
for your personal use. Don't bother about that letter."

Susan--or Nan Shelley--sat for a time in thought. Once in a while she
would cast a furtive glance around the room and its wall covered with
trophies, and then she would turn to Sarah Judd's placid face.

"Where did the boy go? "she asked abruptly.

"What boy?"

"Bub; in the automobile."

"To Millbank."

"What for?"

"To send a telegram."

"Your report?"

"Yes."

"Important?"

"I think it'll bring things to a climax."

"The Hathaway case?"

"You can guess anything, Nan, if you guess long enough."

Nan rose and put the revolver in her pocket. Then she held out her hand
frankly to Sarah Judd.

"If you've beaten me in this affair," she said, with no apparent
resentment, "you're clever enough to become famous some day. I'm going
to take your advice about the letter and if that climax you're
predicting arrives on schedule time I'll not be sorry to quit this
dreary, dragging case and pick up a more interesting one."

The tone was friendly and frank. Sarah stretched out her hand to meet
that of Nan and in a flash a handcuff snapped over her wrist. With a cry
she drew back, but a dextrous twist of her opponent's free hand prisoned
her other wrist and she at once realized that she was fairly caught.

"Fine!" she cried admiringly, as she looked at her bonds, "What next,
Nan?"

But Nan was too busy to talk. She deftly searched the girl's pocket and
found the notebook. The shorthand writing caught her eye at once but the
characters were unknown to her.

"Cipher, eh?" she muttered.

"A little code of my own invention," said Sarah." Sometimes I can't make
it out myself."

Nan restored the book and examined Sarah Judd's purse.

"They keep you well supplied with funds, it seems."

"Comes handy in emergencies," was the reply.

"Now let's go to your room."

Sarah, handcuffed, led the way. Nan Shelley made a wonderfully rapid
search through every article in the maid's room. The lining of her
clothes was inspected, her hair-brush tested for a sliding back, the
pictures on the wall, the rug and the bed-clothing examined minutely.
Yet all this consumed but a brief period of time and resulted in no
important discovery.

"Feel better?" asked Sarah cheerfully.

"You know I do. I'm going to remove these handcuffs, now, and then I'm
going home. Come and see me, some time when you feel lonesome. I've only
that fool Agatha to talk to and I've an idea you and I might interest
each other."

As she spoke she unlocked the manacles and dropped them with a slight
click into a concealed pocket of her dark skirt.

"I imagine Agatha isn't REAL brilliant," returned Sarah; "but neither am
I. When I'm your age, Nan, I hope to be half as clever. Just now you can
twist me around your finger."

Nan regarded her seriously.

"I wish I knew what you are up to," she remarked suspiciously. "You can
scarcely conceal your joy, my girl, and that proves I've overlooked
something. You've puzzled me, youngster as you are, but you must
remember that I'm working in the dark while some mysterious gleam of
knowledge lights your way. Put us side by side, on the same track, and I
wouldn't be afraid of you, Sarah Judd."

"Don't apologize, Nan; it makes me feel ashamed."

Nan's frown, as she looked into the blue eyes, turned to a smile of
appreciation. Sarah also smiled, and then she said:

"Let me make you a cup of tea before you go."

"A good idea. We're friends, then?"

"Why not? One friend is worth a thousand enemies and it's absurd to
quarrel with one for doing her duty."

"That's what O'Gorman is always saying. Ever hear of O'Gorman?"

"Yes; he's one of the old stand-bys in the secret service department;
but they say he's getting old. Slipped a good many cogs lately, I hear."

"He's the Chief's right hand man. O'Gorman used to have this case--the
branch of it I'm now working--but he gave it up and recommended the
Chief to put me on the job. Said a woman could trail Mary Louise better
than any man and with less chance of discovery; and he was right, for
I've lived half a block from her in Dorfield and she never saw my face
once. But O'Gorman didn't suspect you were coming into the case and the
thing's getting altogether too complicated to suit me."

Sarah was brewing the tea and considered an answer unnecessary. The
conversation drifted away from the Hathaway case and into less personal
channels. When Nan Shelley finally rose to go there was sincere
friendliness in Sarah's "good-bye" and the elder woman said in parting:

"You're the right sort, Sarah. If ever you drift into Washington and
need work, come to me and I'll get the Chief to take you on. I know he'd
be glad to get you."

"Thank you, Nan," said Sarah meekly.

But there was a smile on her freckled face as she watched her recent
acquaintance walk down the road, and it lingered there while she
returned to her kitchen and finally washed and put away the long
neglected lunch dishes.

Bub dashed into the yard and tooted his horn. Sarah went out to him.

"Ye kin call me lucky, ef ye don't mind," he said with a grin. "Sent yer
tel'gram, found out the tenner ye guv me were good, an' got back without
the folks gett'n' a single blink at me."

"You're some driver, Bub, and you've got a wise head on your shoulders.
If you don't talk about this trip, and I don't, no one will ever know,
except we two, that the car has been out of the garage."


CHAPTER XXI

BAD NEWS


Peter Conant had told his wife that he wouldn't be at the Lodge this
week until Saturday, as business would prevent his coming earlier, yet
the Thursday afternoon train brought him to Millbank and Bill Coombs'
stage took him to Hillcrest.

"Why, Peter!" exclaimed Aunt Hannah, when she saw him, "what on earth
brought you--"

Then she stopped short, for Peter's eyes were staring more roundly than
usual and the hand that fumbled at his locket trembled visibly. He
stared at Aunt Hannah, he stared at Irene; but most of all he stared at
Mary Louise, who seemed to sense from his manner some impending
misfortune.

"H-m," said the lawyer, growing red and then paling; "I've bad news."

He chopped the words off abruptly, as if he resented the necessity of
uttering them. His eyes, which had been fixed upon the face of Mary
Louise, suddenly wavered and sought the floor.

His manner said more than his words. Mary Louise grew white and pressed
her hands to her heart, regarding the lawyer with eyes questioning and
full of fear. Irene turned a sympathetic gaze upon her friend and Aunt
Hannah came closer to the girl and slipped an arm around her waist, as
if to help her to endure this unknown trial. And Mary Louise, feeling
she could not bear the suspense, asked falteringly:

"Has--Gran'pa Jim--been--"

"No," said Mr. Conant. "No, my dear, no."

"Then--has anything happened to--to--mother?"

"Well, well," muttered the lawyer, with a sort or growl, "Mrs. Burrows
has not been in good health for some months, it seems. She--eh--was
under a--eh--under a nervous strain; a severe nervous strain, you know,
and--"

"Is she dead?" asked the girl in a low, hard voice.

"The end, it seems, came unexpectedly, several days ago. She did not
suffer, your grandfather writes, but--"

Again he left his sentence unfinished, for Mary Louise had buried her
face in Aunt Hannah's bosom and was sobbing in a miserable, heart-
breaking way that made Peter jerk a handkerchief from, his pocket and
blow his nose lustily. Then he turned and marched from the room, while
his wife led the hapless girl to a sofa and cuddled her in her lap as if
she had been a little child.

"She's best with the women," muttered Peter to himself. "It's a
sorrowful thing--a dreadful thing, in a way--but it can't be helped and-
-she's best with the women."

He had wandered into the dining room, where Sarah Judd was laying the
table for dinner. She must have overheard the conversation in the living
room, for she came beside the lawyer and asked:

"When did Mrs. Burrows die?"

"On Monday."

"Where?"

"That's none of your business, my girl."

"Has the funeral been held?"

He regarded her curiously. The idea of a servant asking such questions!
But there was a look in Sarah's blue eyes that meant more than
curiosity; somehow, it drew from him an answer.

"Mrs. Burrows was cremated on Wednesday. It seems she preferred it to
burial." Having said this, he turned to stare from the window again.

Sarah Judd stood silent a moment. Then she said with a sigh of relief:

"It's a queer world, isn't it, Mr. Conant? And this death isn't
altogether a calamity."

"Eh? Why not?" whirling round to face her.

"Because," said Sarah, "it will enable Mr. Hathaway to face the world
again--a free man."

Peter Conant was so startled that he stood motionless, forgetting his
locket but not forgetting to stare. Sarah, with her hands full of forks
and spoons, began placing the silver in orderly array upon the table.
She paid no heed to the lawyer, who gradually recovered his poise and
watched her with newly awakened interest. Once or twice he opened his
mouth to speak, and then decided not to. He was bewildered, perplexed,
suspicious. In thought he began to review the manner of Sarah's coming
to them, and her subsequent actions. She seemed a capable servant. Mrs.
Conant had never complained of her. Yet--what did she know of Hathaway?

Mary Louise did not appear at dinner. She begged to be left alone in her
room. Sarah took her some toast and tea, with honest sympathy in her
eyes, but the sorrowing girl shook her head and would not taste the
food. Later, however, in the evening, she entered the living room where
the others sat in depressed silence and said:

"Please, Mr. Conant, tell me all you know about--mother."

"It is very little, my dear" replied the lawyer in a kindly tone." This
morning I received a message from your grandfather which said: 'Poor
Beatrice passed away on Monday and at her request her body was cremated
to-day. Be very gentle in breaking the sad news to Mary Louise.' That
was all, my child, and I came here as quickly as I could. In a day or so
we shall have further details, I feel sure. I am going back to town in
the morning and will send you any information I receive."

"Thank you," said the girl, and was quietly leaving the room when Irene
called to her.

"Mary Louise!"

"Yes?" half turning.

"Will you come with me to my room?"

"Now?"

"Yes. You know I cannot go up the stairs. And--I lost my own dear mother
not long ago, you will remember."

Tears started to the girl's eyes, but she waited until Irene wheeled her
chair beside her and then the two went through the den to Irene's room.

Mrs. Conant nodded to Peter approvingly.

"Irene will comfort her," she said, "and in a way far better than I
might do. It is all very dreadful and very sad, Peter, but the poor
child has never enjoyed much of her mother's society and when the first
bitter grief is passed I think she will recover something of her usual
cheerfulness."

"H-m," returned the lawyer; "it seems a hard thing to say, Hannah, but
this demise may prove a blessing in disguise and be best for the child's
future happiness. In any event, I'm sure it will relieve the strain many
of us have been under for the past ten years."

"You talk in riddles, Peter."

"The whole thing is a riddle, Hannah. And, by the way, have you noticed
anything suspicious about our hired girl?"

"About Sarah? No," regarding him with surprise.

"Does she--eh--snoop around much?"

"No; she's a very good girl."

"Too good to be true, perhaps," observed Peter, and lapsed into thought.
Really, it wouldn't matter now how much Sarah Judd--or anyone else--knew
of the Hathaway case. The mystery would solve itself, presently.


CHAPTER XXII

THE FOLKS AT BIGBEE'S


Mr. Conant decided to take the Friday morning train back to Dorfield,
saying it would not be possible for him to remain at the Lodge over
Sunday, because important business might require his presence in town.

"This demise of Mrs. Burrows," he said confidentially to his wife in the
privacy of their room, "may have far-reaching results and turn the whole
current of Colonel Weatherby's life."

"I don't see why," said Aunt Hannah.

"You're not expected to see why," he replied. "As the Colonel is my most
important client, I must be at the office in case of developments or a
sudden demand for my services. We got our cabin and a piece of ground
for a garden and a share of de crops. Daddy worked in de mill.
Miss Nancy saw to it that we always had nice clothes too.

"Ku Klux, honey?

Why, we nevah did hear tell of no sich thing where we was. Nevah heered
nothin' 'bout dat atall until we come up here, and dey had em here.
Law, honey, folks don't know when dey's well off. My daddy worked in
de mill and save his money, and twelve yeahs aftah de wah he bought
two hundred and twenty acres of land, 'bout ten miles away.

Den latah on daddy bought de mill from de Mosleys too.

Yas'm, my daddy was well off.

"My, you had to be somebody to votes. I sure do 'membahs all 'bout dat.
You had to be edicated and have money to votes.

But I don' 'membahs no trouble 'bout de votin'.

Not where we come from, no how.

"I was married down dere.

Mah husband's fust name was Monroe after the county we lived in. My
chilluns was named aftah some of the Mosleys. I got a Ed and Hattie. Aftah
my daddy died we each got forty acahs.

I sold mine and come up here to live with my boys.

"But honey dis ain't no way to raise chilluns. Not lak dey raised now.
All dis dishonesty and stealin' and laziness. _No mam!_ Look here at
my gran'sons. Eatin' offen dey daddy. No place for 'em. Got edication,
and caint git no jobs outside cuttin' grass and de like. Down on de
plantation ev'body worked.

No laziness er 'oneriness, er nothin! I tells yo' honey, I sure do wish
these chilluns had de chances we had. Not much learnin', but we had
up-bringin'! Look at dem chilluns across de street.

Jist had a big fight ovah dere, and dey mothah's too lazy to do any
thing 'bout it.

No'm, nevah did see none o' dat when we was young.

Gittin' in de folkeses hen houses and stealing, and de carryins on
at night.

_No mam!

_ I sure do wish de old times was here.

"I went back two-three yeahs ago, to de old home place, and dere
it was, jist same as when I was livin' with Miss Nancy. Co'se, theys
all dead and gone now, but some of the gran'chilluns was around."Hop in," said Bub and for a time they rode together in silence.

"This 'ere's the Huddle, as we're comin' to," announced the boy. "Ol'
Miss' Parsons she sometimes takes boarders."

"That's kind of her," remarked the stranger. "But the air isn't so good
as further up the hill."

"Ef ye go up," said Bub with a grin, "guess ye'll hev to camp out an'
eat scrub. Nobody don't take boarders, up th' mount'n."

"I suppose not."

He made no demand to be let out at the Huddle, so Bub drove on.

"By the way," said the little man, "isn't there a place called Bigbee's,
near here?"

"Comin' to it pretty soon. They's some gals livin' there now, so ye
won't care to stop."

"What sort of girls are they?"

"Sort o' queer."

"Yes?"

"Ye bet ye. Come from the city a while ago an' livin' by theyselves.
Someth'n' wrong 'bout them gals," added Bub reflectively.

"In what way?" asked the little man in a tone of interest.

"They ain't here fer nuth'n' special 'cept watchin' the folks at
Hillcrest. Them's the folks I belongs to. For four bits a week. They's
someth'n' queer 'bout them, too; but I guess all the folks is queer thet
comes here from the city."

"Quite likely," agreed the little man, nodding. "Let me out at Bigbee's,
please, and I'll look over those women and form my own opinion of them.
They may perhaps be friends of mine."

"In thet case," asserted Bub, "I pity ye, stranger. F'r my part, I ain't
got no use fer anything thet wears skirts--'cept one er two, mebbe," he
added reflectively. "Most men I kin git 'long with fust-rate; but ef a
man ever gits in trouble, er begins cussin' an' acts ugly, it's 'cause
some gal's rubbed him crossways the grain er stuck a knife in him an'
twisted the blade--so's ter speak."

"You're an observant lad, I see."

"When I'm awake I kain't help seein' things."

"And you're a pastoral philosopher."

Bub scowled and gave him a surly glance.

"What's the use firin' thet high-brow stuff at me?" he asked
indignantly. "I s'pose ye think I'm a kid, jes' 'cause I don't do no
fancy talkin'."

"I suspect you of nothing but generosity in giving me this ride," said
the stranger pleasantly. "Is that Bigbee's, over yonder?"

"Yes."

The little man got out at the point where the Bigbee drive met the road,
and walked up the drive toward the house. Agatha Lord was standing at
the gateway, as he approached it, and seemed rather startled at his
appearance. But she quickly controlled her surprise and asked in a calm
voice, as she faced him:

"What's up, O'Gorman?"

"Hathaway's coming here," he said.

"Are you sure?"

"He's in Dorfield to-day, waiting to see Lawyer Conant, who went in on
the morning train. Where's Nan?"

"Here, my lord!" said Nan Shelley, stepping from behind a tall shrub.
"How are you, partner? I recognized you as you passed the Huddle with
the boy."

"Field glasses, eh? There isn't much escapes you, Nan."

"Why didn't you tell me?" asked Agatha reproachfully.

"Why don't you make your own discoveries?" retorted her confederate.
Then, turning to O'Gorman, she continued: "So Hathaway's coming, is he?
At last."

"A little late, but according to program. How have you been getting
along?"

"Bored to death," asserted Nan. "Agatha has played the lady and I've
done the dirty work. But tell me, why didn't you nab Hathaway at
Dorfield?"

O'Gorman smiled a little grimly as he answered:

"I'm not sure, Nan, that we shall nab Hathaway at all."

"Isn't he being shadowed?" with some surprise.

"No. But he'll come here, right enough; and then--"

"And then," she added, as he paused, "the chase of years will come to an
end."

"Exactly. We may decide to take him to Washington, and we may not."

She gazed at him inquiringly.

"There are some new developments, then, O'Gorman?"

"I'm inclined to suspect there are."

"Known to the department?"

"Yes. I'm to investigate and use my judgment."

"I see. Then Agatha and I are out of it?"

"Not yet; I'm still depending on your shrewdness to assist me. The
office has only had a hint, so far, of the prospective break in the
case, but--"

"Oh, yes; I remember now," exclaimed Nan.

"That girl up at Conant's sent a telegram, in a desperate hurry. I
suspected it meant something important. Who is she, O'Gorman, and why
did the Chief cut under us by planting Sarah Judd in the Conants'
household?"

"He didn't. The girl has nothing to do with the Department."

"Then some of you intercepted the telegram?"

"We know what it said," he admitted.

"Come, let's go to the house. I've had no lunch. Can you feed me?"

"Certainly." They turned and walked slowly up the path. Said Nan,
musingly: "That Sarah Judd is rather clever, O'Gorman. Is she in
Hathaway's pay?"

"I think not," he replied, with an amused chuckle.

Nan tossed her head indignantly.

"Very well; play me for a ninny, if you like," she said resentfully.
"You'll get a heap more out of me, in that way!"

"Now, now," said Agatha warningly, "keep your tempers and don't quarrel.
You two are like cats and dogs when you get together; yet you're the two
cleverest people in the service. According to your story, Mr. O'Gorman,
there's an important crisis approaching, and we'd all like to be able to
render a good account of ourselves."

Agatha Lord may have lacked something of Nan's experience, but this
speech proved her a fair diplomat. It dispersed the gathering storm and
during the rest of that afternoon the three counseled together in
perfect harmony, O'Gorman confiding to his associates such information
as would enable them to act with him intelligently. Hathaway and Peter
Conant could not arrive till the next day at noon; they might even come
by the afternoon train. Nan's field glasses would warn them of the
arrival and meanwhile there was ample time to consider how they should
act.


CHAPTER XXIII

A KISS FROM JOSIE


That evening, as Sarah Judd was sitting in her room reading a book, her
work for the day being over, she heard a succession of little taps
against her window-pane. She sat still, listening, until the taps were
repeated, when she walked straight to the window, drew the shade and
threw tip the sash. O'Gorman's face appeared in the opening and the girl
put a hand on each of his cheeks and leaning over kissed him full upon
his lips.

The man's face, lighted by the lamp from within the room, was radiant.
Even the fat nose was beatified by the love that shone in his small gray
eyes. He took one of her hands in both of his own and held it close a
moment, while they regarded one another silently.

Then he gave a little beckoning signal and the girl turned to slip on a
light coat, for the nights were chill on the mountain. Afterward she
unfastened her outside door and joined the detective, who passed an arm
around her and led her to one of the benches on the bluff.

The new moon was dim, but a sprinkling of stars lit the sky. The man and
girl were far enough from the Lodge not to be overheard.

"It's good to see you again, Josie," said O'Gorman, as they seated
themselves on the bench. "How do you like being a sleuth?"

"Really, Daddy," she replied, "it has been no end of a lark. I'm dead
sick of washing other folks' dishes, I confess, but the fun I've had has
more than made up for the hard work. Do you know, Dad, I had a session
with Nan Shelley one day, and she didn't have much the best of it,
either, although she's quick as a cat and had me backed off the map in
every way except for the matter of wits. My thoughts didn't crumble much
and Nan was good enough to congratulate me. She knew, as soon as I did,
about the letter the crippled girl found in a book, but I managed to
make a copy of it, while Nan is still wondering where it is hid. I'm
patting myself on the back, Dad, because you trained me and I want to
prove myself a credit to your training. It's no wonder, with such a
master, that I could hold my own with Nan Shelley!"

He gave a little amused laugh.

"You're all right, Josie dear," he replied. "My training wouldn't have
amounted to shucks if you hadn't possessed the proper gray matter to
work with. But about that letter," more seriously; "your telegram told
me a lot, because our code is so concise, but it also left a good deal
to be guessed at. Who wrote the letter? I must know all the details in
order to understand it properly."

"It's all down in my private shorthand book," said Josie O'Gorman, "but
I've never dared make a clear copy while Nan was so near me. You can't
read it, Dad, and I can't read it to you in the dark; so you'll have to
wait."

"Have you your notebook here?"

"Always carry it."

He drew an electric storage-lamp from his pocket and shielded the tiny
circle of light with his coat.

"Now, then," said he, "read the letter to me, Josie. It's impossible for
anyone to see the light from the house."

The girl held her notebook behind the flap of his coat, where the lamp
shed its white rays upon it, and slowly read the text of the letter.
O'Gorman sat silent for some time after she had finished reading.

"In all my speculations concerning the Hathaway case," he said to his
daughter, "I never guessed this as the true solution of the man's
extraordinary actions. But now, realizing that Hathaway is a gentleman
to the core, I understand he could not have acted in any other way."

"Mrs. Burrows is dead," remarked Josie.

"I know. It's a pity she didn't die long ago."

"This thing killed her, Dad."

"I'm sure of it. She was a weak, though kind-hearted, woman and this
trouble wore her out with fear and anxiety. How did the girl--Mary
Louise--take her mother's death?"

"Rather hard, at first. She's quieter now. But--see here, Dad--are you
still working for the Department?"

"Of course."

"Then I'm sorry I've told you so much. I'm on the other side. I'm here
to protect Mary Louise Burrows and her interests."

"To be sure. I sent you here myself, at my own expense, both to test
your training before I let you into the regular game and for the sake of
the little Burrows girl, whom I fell in love with when she was so
friendless. I believed things would reach a climax in the Hathaway case,
in this very spot, but I couldn't foresee that your cleverness would
ferret out that letter, which the girl Irene intended to keep silent
about, nor did I know that the Chief would send me here in person to
supervise Hathaway's capture. Mighty queer things happen in this
profession of ours, and circumstances lead the best of us by the nose."

"Do you intend to arrest Mr. Hathaway?"

"After hearing that letter read and in view of the fact that Mrs.
Burrows is dead, I think not. The letter, if authentic, clears up the
mystery to our complete satisfaction. But I must get the story from
Hathaway's own lips, and then compare his statement with that in the
letter. If they agree, we won't prosecute the man at all, and the famous
case that has caused us so much trouble for years will be filed in the
office pigeonholes and pass into ancient history."

Josie O'Gorman sat silent for a long time. Then she asked:

"Do you think Mr. Hathaway will come here, now that--now that--"

"I'm quite sure he will come."

"When?"

"To-morrow."

"Then I must warn them and try to head him off. I'm on his side, Dad;
don't forget that."

"I won't; and because you're on his side, Josie, you must let him come
and be vindicated, and so clear up this matter for good and all."

"Poor Mary Louise! I was thinking of her, not of her grandfather. Have
you considered how a knowledge of the truth will affect her?"

"Yes. She will be the chief sufferer when her grandfather's innocence is
finally proved."

"It will break her heart," said Josie, with a sigh.

"Perhaps not. She's mighty fond of her grandfather. She'll be glad to
have him freed from suspicion and she'll be sorry--about the other
thing."

Sarah Judd--otherwise Josie O'Gorman--sighed again; but presently she
gave a little chuckle of glee.

"Won't Nan be wild, though, when she finds I've beaten her and won the
case for Hathaway?"

"Nan won't mind. She's an old hand at the game and has learned to take
things as they come. She'll be at work upon some other case within a
week and will have forgotten that this one ever bothered her."

"Who is Agatha Lord, and why did they send her here as principal, with
Nan as her maid?"

"Agatha is an educated woman who has moved in good society. The Chief
thought she would be more likely to gain the friendship of the Conants
than Nan, for poor Nan hasn't much breeding to boast of. But she was
really the principal, for all that, and Agatha was instructed to report
to her and to take her orders."

"They were both suspicious of me," said the girl, "but as neither of
them had ever set eyes on me before I was able to puzzle them. On the
other hand, I knew who Nan was because I'd seen her with you, which gave
me an advantage. Now, tell me, how's mother?"

"Pretty chirky, but anxious about you because this is your first case
and she feared your judgment wasn't sufficiently matured. I told her
you'd pull through all right."

For an hour they sat talking together. Then Officer O'Gorman kissed his
daughter good night and walked back to the Bigbee house.


CHAPTER XXIV

FACING THE TRUTH


Irene was a great comfort to Mary Louise in this hour of trial. The
chair-girl, beneath her gayety of demeanor and lightness of speech, was
deeply religious. Her absolute faith sounded so cheering that death was
robbed of much of its horror and her bereaved friend found solace. Mary
Louise was able to talk freely of "Mamma Bee" to Irene, while with Aunt
Hannah she rather avoided reference to her mother.

"I've always longed to be more with Mamma Bee and to learn to know her
better," she said to her friend; "for, though she was very loving and
gentle to me while I was with her, she spent most of her life caring for
Gran'pa Jim, and they were away from me so much that I really didn't get
to know Mamma very well. I think she worried a good deal over Gran'pa's
troubles. She couldn't help that, of course, but I always hoped that
some day the troubles would be over and we could all live happily
together. And now--that can never be!"

Irene, knowing more of the Hathaway family history than Mary Louise did,
through the letter she had found and read, was often perplexed how to
console her friend and still regard honesty and truth. Any deception,
even when practiced through the best of motives, was abhorrent to her
nature, so she avoided speaking of the present affliction and led Mary
Louise to look to a future life for the motherly companionship she had
missed on earth.

"That," said she, "is the thought that has always given me the most
comfort. We are both orphans, dear, and I'm sure your nature is as brave
as my own and that you can bear equally well the loss of your parents."

And Mary Louise was really brave and tried hard to bear her grief with
patient resignation. One thing she presently decided in her mind,
although she did not mention it to Irene. She must find Gran'pa Jim and
go to him, wherever he might be. Gran'pa Jim and her mother had been
inseparable companions; Mary Louise knew that her own present sorrow
could be nothing when compared with that of her grandfather. And so it
was her duty to find him and comfort him, to devote her whole life, as
her mother had done, to caring for his wants and cheering his
loneliness--so far, indeed, as she was able to do. Of course, no one
could quite take the place of Mamma Bee.

She was thinking in this vein as she sat in the den with Irene that
Saturday afternoon. The chair-girl, who sewed beautifully, was fixing
over one of Mary Louise's black dresses while Mary Louise sat opposite,
listlessly watching her. The door into the hall was closed, but the
glass door to the rear porch was wide open to let in the sun and air.
And this simple scene was the setting for the drama about to be enacted.

Mary Louise had her back half turned to the hall door, which Irene
partially faced, and so it was that when the door opened softly and the
chair-girl raised her head to gaze with startled surprise at someone who
stood in the doorway, Mary Louise first curiously eyed her friend's
expressive face and then, rather languidly, turned her head to glance
over her shoulder.

The next moment she sprang to her feet and rushed forward.

"Gran'pa Jim--Oh, Gran'pa Jim!" she cried, and threw herself into the
arms of a tall man who folded her to his breast in a close embrace.

For a while they stood there silent, while Irene dropped her eyes to her
lap, deeming the reunion too sacred to be observed by another. And then
a little stir at the open porch door attracted her attention and with a
shock of repulsion she saw Agatha Lord standing there with a cynical
smile on her lovely face. Softly the sash of the window was raised, and
the maid Susan stood on the ground outside, leaned her elbows on the
sill and quietly regarded the scene within the den.

The opening of the window arrested Colonel Weatherby's attention. He
lifted his head and with a quick glance took in the situation. Then,
still holding his granddaughter in his arms, he advanced to the center
of the room and said sternly, addressing Agatha:

"Is this a deliberate intrusion, because I am here, or is it pure
insolence?"

"Forgive us if we intrude, Mr. Hathaway," replied Agatha. "It was not
our desire to interrupt your meeting with your granddaughter, but--it
has been so difficult, in the past, to secure an interview with you,
sir, that we dared not risk missing you at this time."

He regarded her with an expression of astonishment.

"That's it, exactly, Mr. Weatherby-Hathaway," remarked Susan mockingly,
from her window.

"Don't pay any attention to them, Gran'pa Jim," begged Mary Louise,
clinging to him. "They're just two dreadful women who live down below
here, and--and--"

"I realize who they are," said the old gentleman in a calm voice, and
addressing Agatha again he continued: "Since you are determined to
interview me, pray step inside and be seated."

Agatha shook her head with a smile; Nan Shelley laughed outright and
retorted:

"Not yet, Hathaway. We can't afford to take chances with one who has
dodged the whole Department for ten years."

"Then you are Government agents?" he asked.

"That's it, sir."

He turned his head toward the door by which he had entered, for there
was an altercation going on in the hallway and Mr. Conant's voice could
be heard angrily protesting.

A moment later the lawyer came in, followed by the little man with the
fat nose, who bowed to Colonel Weatherby very respectfully yet remained
planted in the doorway.

"This is--er--er--very unfortunate, sir; ve-ry un-for-tu-nate!"
exclaimed Peter Conant, chopping off each word with a sort of snarl.
[Sidenote: _The instrument's mechanism._]

[Sidenote: _Tone formation and production._]
In the intricacy of its mechanism the pianoforte stands next to the organ.
The farther removed from direct utterance we are the more difficult
is it to speak the true language of music.

The violin player and the singer, and in a less degree the performers
upon some of the wind instruments, are obliged to form the musical
tone--which, in the case of the pianist, is latent in the instrument,
ready to present itself in two of its attributes in answer to a
simple pressure upon the key.

The most unmusical person in the world can learn to produce a series
of tones from a pianoforte which shall be as exact in pitch and
as varied in dynamic force as can Mr.

Paderewski.

He cannot combine them so ingeniously nor imbue them with feeling, but
in the simple matter of producing the tone with the attributes
mentioned, he is on a level with the greatest virtuoso.

Very different is the case of the musician who must exercise a
distinctly musical gift in the simple evocation of the materials of
music, like the violinist and singer, who both form and produce
the tone.

For them compensation flows from the circumstance that the tone thus formed
and produced is naturally instinct with emotional life in a degree
that the pianoforte tone knows nothing of.

[Sidenote: _Technical manipulation._]
[Sidenote: _Touch and emotionality._]

In one respect, it may be said that the mechanics of pianoforte
playing represent a low plane of artistic activity, a fact which
ought always to be remembered whenever the temptation is felt greatly
to exalt the technique of the art; but it must also be borne in
mind that the mechanical nature of simple tone production in
pianoforte playing raises the value of the emotional quality which,
nevertheless, stands at the command of the player.

The emotional potency of the tone must come from the manner in which
the blow is given to the string.

Recognition of this fact has stimulated reflection, and this in
turn has discovered methods by which temperament and emotionality
may be made to express themselves as freely, convincingly, and
spontaneously in pianoforte as in violin playing.

If this were not so it would be impossible to explain the difference
in the charm exerted by different virtuosi, for it has frequently
happened that the best-equipped mechanician and the most intellectual
player has been judged inferior as an artist to another whose gifts
were of the soul rather than of the brains and fingers.

[Sidenote: _The technical cult._]
[Sidenote: _A low form of art._]
The feats accomplished by a pianoforte virtuoso in the mechanical
department are of so extraordinary a nature that there need be small
wonder at the wide prevalence of a distinctly technical cult.

All who know the real nature and mission of music must condemn such
a cult. It is a sign of a want of true appreciation to admire technique
for technique's sake.

It is a mistaking of the outward shell for the kernel, a means for the
end. There are still many players who aim to secure this admiration,
either because they are deficient in real musical feeling, or because
they believe themselves surer of winning applause by thus appealing to
the lowest form of appreciation. In the early part of the century they
would have been handicapped by the instrument which lent itself to
delicacy, clearness, and gracefulness of expression, but had little
power. Now the pianoforte has become a thing of rigid steel, enduring
tons of strain from its strings, and having a voice like the roar
of many waters; to keep pace with it players have become athletes with

"Thews of Anakim And pulses of a Titan's heart."

[Sidenote: _Technical skill a matter of course._]
They care no more for the "murmurs made to bless," unless it be
occasionally for the sake of contrast, but seek to astound, amaze, bewilder,
and confound with feats of skill and endurance. That with their
devotion to the purely mechanical side of the art they are threatening
to destroy pianoforte playing gives them no pause whatever. The era
which they illustrate and adorn is the technical era which was, is,
and ever shall be, the era of decay in artistic production. For the
judicious technique alone, be it never so marvellous, cannot serve
to-day. Its possession is accepted as a condition precedent in the
case of everyone who ventures to appear upon the concert-platform. He
must be a wonder, indeed, who can disturb our critical equilibrium by
mere digital feats.

We want strength and velocity of finger to be coupled with strength,
velocity, and penetration of thought.

The old man's head was bowed, his chin resting on his breast. It was now
the turn of Mary Louise to smooth his thin gray locks.

"If you will make a statement, sir," continued O'Gorman, "we shall be
able to verify it."

Slowly Hathaway raised his head.

"I have no statement to make," he persisted.

"This is rank folly," exclaimed O'Gorman, "but if you refuse to make the
statement, I shall make it myself."

"I beg you--I implore you!" said Hathaway pleadingly.

The detective rose and stood before him, looking not at the old man but
at the young girl--Mary Louise.

"Tell me, my child," he said gently, "would you not rather see your
grandfather--an honorable, high-minded gentleman--acquitted of an unjust
accusation, even at the expense of some abasement and perhaps heart-
aches on your part, rather than allow him to continue to suffer disgrace
in order to shield you from so slight an affliction?"

"Sir!" cried Hathaway indignantly, starting to his feet; "how dare you
throw the burden on this poor child? Have you no mercy--no compassion?"

And the giant Vafthrûdnir, when Gangrad asked, 'Whence came Orgelmir
the first of the sons of giants?' answered, 'The Elivagar cast out drops
of venom that quickened into a giant.

From him spring all our race, and hence are we so strong and mighty.'"
Then he
turned and seated himself, again putting an arm around Mary Louise as if
to shield her.

Said Irene, speaking very slowly:

"I am quite sure Mr. O'Gorman is right. Mary Louise is a brave girl, and
she loves her grandfather."

Then Mary Louise spoke--hesitatingly, at first, for she could not yet
comprehend the full import of the officer's words.

"If you mean," said she, "that it will cause me sorrow and humiliation
to free my grandfather from suspicion, and that he refuses to speak
because he fears the truth will hurt me, then I ask you to speak out,
Mr. O'Gorman."

"Of course," returned the little man, smiling at her approvingly; "that
is just what I intend to do. All these years, my girl, your grandfather
has accepted reproach and disgrace in order to shield the good name of a
woman and to save her from a prison cell. And that woman was your
mother."

"Oh!" cried Mary Louise and covered her face with her hands.

"You brute!" exclaimed Hathaway, highly incensed.

"But this is not all," continued O'Gorman, unmoved; "your mother, Mary
Louise, would have been condemned and imprisoned--and deservedly so in
the eyes of the law--had the truth been known; and yet I assure you she
was only guilty of folly and of ignorance of the terrible consequences
that might have resulted from her act. She was weak enough to be loyal
to a promise wrung from her in extremity, and therein lay her only
fault. Your grandfather knew all this, and she was his daughter--his
only child. When the accusation for your mother's crime fell on him, he
ran away and so tacitly admitted his guilt, thus drawing suspicion from
her. His reason for remaining hidden was that, had he been caught and
brought to trial, he could not have lied or perjured himself under oath
even to save his dearly loved daughter from punishment. "Among
the Æsir," continued Har, "we also reckon Hodur, who is blind, but
extremely strong. Both gods and men would be very glad if they never had
occasion to pronounce his name, for they will long have cause to
remember the deed perpetrated by his hand.[132] 
30.Your mother's recent death renders her prosecution
impossible. It is time the truth prevailed. In simple justice I will not
allow this old man to embitter further his life, just to protect his
grandchild from a knowledge of her mother's sin."

Again a deathly silence pervaded the room.

"You--you are speaking at random," said Hathaway, in a voice choked with
emotion. "You have no proof of these dreadful statements."

"But _I_ have!" said Irene bravely, believing it her duty to support
O'Gorman.

"And so have I," asserted the quiet voice of Sarah Judd, who had entered
the room unperceived.

Hathaway regarded both the girls in surprise, but said nothing.

"I think," said Officer O'Gorman, "it will be best for us to read to Mr.
We lived on John Beck's farm--a big farm, and the first work for
me to do was picking up chips o' wood, and lookin' after hogs.

"In those days they'd all kinds of work by hand on the farm.

No Madam, no cotton to speak of, or tobacco _then_. Just farmin' corn,
hogs, wheat fruit,--like here.

Yes Madam, that was all on John Beck's farm except the flax and the
big wooley sheep. Plenty of nice clean flax-cloth suits we all had.

"Beck wasn't so good--but we had enough to eat, wear, and could have
our Saturday afternoon to go to town, and Sunday for church. We
sho did have church, large meetin'--camp meetin'--with lot of singin'
an shoutin' and it was fine! Nevah was no singer, but I was a good
dancer in my day, yes--yes Madam I were a good dancer.He always said he was training her to follow his own profession and that
when the education was complete Josie O'Gorman would make a name for
herself in the detective service. So Nan and Agatha exchanged meaning
glances and regarded the freckled-faced girl with new interest.

"I'm not much of a reader," said Josie, carefully unfolding the paper.
"Suppose we let Miss Irene read it?"

Her father nodded assent and Josie handed the sheet to Irene.

Mr. Hathaway had been growing uneasy and now addressed Officer O'Gorman
in a protesting voice:

"Is this reading necessary, sir?"

"Very necessary, Mr. Hathaway."

"What letter is this that you have referred to?"

"A bit of information dating nearly ten years ago and written by one who
perhaps knew more of the political intrigues of John and Beatrice
Burrows than has ever come to your own knowledge."

"The letter is authentic, then?"

"Quite so."

"And your Department knows of its existence?"

"I am acting under the Department's instructions, sir. Oblige us, Miss
Macfarlane," he added, turning to Irene, "by reading the letter in
full."


CHAPTER XXVI

THE LETTER


"This sheet," explained Irene, "is, in fact, but a part of a letter. The
first sheets are missing, so we don't know who it was addressed to; but
it is signed, at the end, by the initials 'E. de V.'"

"The ambassador!" cried Hathaway, caught off his guard by surprise.

"The same," said O'Gorman triumphantly; "and it is all in his well-known
handwriting. Read the letter, my girl."

"The first sentence," said Irene, "is a continuation of something on a
previous page, but I will read it just as it appears here."

And then, in a clear, distinct voice that was audible to all present,
she read as follows:

"which forces me to abandon at once my post and your delightful country
in order to avoid further complications. My greatest regret is in
leaving Mrs. Burrows in so unfortunate a predicament. The lady was
absolutely loyal to us and the calamity that has overtaken her is
through no fault of her own.

"That you may understand this thoroughly I will remind you that John
Burrows was in our employ. It was through our secret influence that he
obtained his first government position, where he inspired confidence and
became trusted implicitly. He did not acquire full control, however,
until five years later, and during that time he met and married Beatrice
Hathaway, the charming daughter of James J. Hathaway, a wealthy broker.
That gave Burrows added importance and he was promoted to the high
government position he occupied at the time of his death.

"Burrows made for us secret copies of the fortifications on both the
east and west coasts, including the number and caliber of guns, amounts
of munitions stored and other details. Also he obtained copies of the
secret telegraph and naval codes and the complete armaments of all war
vessels, both in service and in process of construction. A part of this
information and some of the plans he delivered to me before he died, as
you know, and he had the balance practically ready for delivery when he
was taken with pneumonia and unfortunately expired very suddenly.

"It was characteristic of the man's faithfulness that on his death bed
he made his wife promise to deliver the balance of the plans and an
important book of codes to us as early as she could find an opportunity
to do so. Mrs. Burrows had previously been in her husband's confidence
and knew he was employed by us while holding his position with the
government, so she readily promised to carry out his wishes, perhaps
never dreaming of the difficulties that would confront her or the
personal danger she assumed. But she was faithful to her promise and
afterward tried to fulfill it.

"Her father, the James J. Hathaway above mentioned, in whose mansion
Mrs. Burrows lived with her only child, is a staunch patriot. Had he
known of our plot he would have promptly denounced it, even sacrificing
his son-in-law. I have no quarrel with him for that, you may well
believe, as I value patriotism above all other personal qualities. But
after the death of John Burrows it became very difficult for his wife to
find a way to deliver to me the packet of plans without being detected.
Through some oversight at the government office, which aroused suspicion
immediately after his death, Burrows was discovered to have made
duplicates of many documents intrusted to him and with a suspicion of
the truth government agents were sent to interview Mrs. Burrows and find
out if the duplicates were still among her husband's papers. Being a
clever woman, she succeeded in secreting the precious package and so
foiled the detectives. Even her own father, who was very indignant that
a member of his household should be accused of treason, had no suspicion
that his daughter was in any way involved. But the house was watched,
after that, and Mrs. Burrows was constantly under surveillance--a fact
of which she was fully aware. I also became aware of the difficulties
that surrounded her and although impatient to receive the package I
dared not press its delivery. Fortunately no suspicion attached to me
and a year or so after her husband's death I met Mrs. Burrows at the
house of a mutual friend, on the occasion of a crowded reception, and
secured an interview with her where we could not be overheard. We both
believed that by this time the police espionage had been greatly relaxed
so I suggested that she boldly send the parcel to me, under an assumed
name, at Carver's Drug Store, where I had a confederate. "The term,"
says Trench, "is drawn from the political economy of Rome. Such a man
was rated as to his income in the third class, such another in the
fourth, and so on, and he who was in the highest was emphatically said
to be of the class, _classicus_, a class man, without adding the
number as in that case superfluous; while all others were _infra
classem_.

Hence by an obvious analogy the best authors were rated as _classici_,
or men of the highest class; just as in English we say 'men of rank'
absolutely for men who are in the highest ranks of the State."
Thus Trench, and his historical definition, explains why in music also
there is something more than a lurking suggestion of excellence in
the conception of "classical;" but that fact does not put away the
quarrel which we feel exists between Classic and Romantic.

[Sidenote: _Romantic in literature._]
[Sidenote: _Schumann and Jean Paul._]
[Sidenote: _Weber's operas._] 
[Sidenote: _Mendelssohn._]
As applied to literature Romantic was an adjective affected by
certain poets, first in Germany, then in France, who wished to
introduce a style of thought and expression different from that of
those who followed old models.

Intrinsically, of course, the term does not imply any such opposition
but only bears witness to the source from which the poets drew their
inspiration. This was the imaginative literature of the Middle
Ages, the fantastical stories of chivalry and knighthood written
in the Romance, or Romanic languages, such as Italian, Spanish, and
Provençal.

Being again arrested he did
not deny his guilt but cheerfully suffered imprisonment. Before the day
set for his trial, however, he managed to escape and since then he has
so cleverly hidden himself that the authorities remain ignorant of his
whereabouts. His wife and his grandchild also disappeared and it was
found that his vast business interests had been legally transferred to
some of his most intimate friends--doubtless for his future benefit.

"The government secret service was helpless. No one save I knew that
Hathaway was shielding his daughter, whose promise to her dead husband
had led her to betray her country to the representative of a foreign
power such as our own. Yet Hathaway, even in sacrificing his name and
reputation, revolted at suffering life-long imprisonment, nor dared he
stand trial through danger of being forced to confess the truth. So he
remains in hiding and I have hopes that he will be able--through his
many influential friends--to save himself from capture for many months
to come.

"This is the truth of the matter, dear friend, and as this explanation
must never get beyond your own knowledge I charge you to destroy this
letter as soon as it is read. When you are abroad next year we will meet
and consider this and other matters in which we are mutually interested.
I would not have ventured to put this on paper were it not for my desire
to leave someone in this country posted on the Hathaway case. You will
understand from the foregoing that the situation has become too delicate
for me to remain here. If you can, give aid to Hathaway, whom I greatly
admire, for we are in a way responsible for his troubles. As for Mrs.
Burrows, I consider her a woman of character and honor. That she might
keep a pledge made to her dead husband she sinned against the law
without realizing the enormity of her offense. If anyone is to blame it
is poor John Burrows, who was not justified in demanding so dangerous a
pledge from his wife; but he was dying at the time and his judgment was
impaired. Let us be just to all and so remain just to ourselves.

"Write me at the old address and believe me to be yours most faithfully

E. de V.

The 16th of September, 1905."

During Irene's reading the others maintained an intense silence. Even
when she had ended, the silence continued for a time, while all
considered with various feelings the remarkable statement they had just
heard.

It was O'Gorman who first spoke.

"If you will assert, Mr. Hathaway, that the ambassador's statement is
correct, to the best of your knowledge and belief, I have the authority
of our department to promise that the charge against you will promptly
be dropped and withdrawn and that you will be adjudged innocent of any
offense against the law. It is true that you assisted a guilty person to
escape punishment, and are therefore liable for what is called
'misprision of treason,' but we shall not press that, for, as I said
before, we prefer, since no real harm has resulted, to allow the case to
be filed without further publicity. Thou shalt, young maiden! live
with me: of a good race thou art, as I perceive.

Helgi then collected a large fleet and proceeded to Frekastein, and
at sea experienced a perilous storm. Lightnings came over them,
and the flashes entered the ships.She was not sobbing; she did not even appear
to be humbled or heart-broken. Perhaps she did not realize at the moment
how gravely her father and mother had sinned against the laws of their
country. That realization might come to her later, but just now she was
happy in the vindication of Gran'pa Jim--a triumph that overshadowed all
else.

"I'll take this letter for our files," said Officer O'Gorman, folding it
carefully before placing it in his pocketbook. "And now, sir, I hope you
will permit me to congratulate you and to wish you many years of
happiness with your granddaughter, who first won my admiration by her
steadfast faith in your innocence. She's a good girl, is Mary Louise,
and almost as clever as my Josie here. Come, Nan; come, Agatha; let's go
back to Bigbee's. Our business here is finished."