The Abbe had a habit of commissioning her to visit his poor. They
engaged in all sorts of whispered talk together on this subject,
private business which a word or two enabled them to settle together,
and which they never referred to in the presence of other persons.

On the morrow Helene went out alone. She decided to leave Jeanne in
the house, as the child had been troubled with fits of shivering since
paying a visit of charity to an old man who had become paralyzed. Once
out of doors, she followed the Rue Vineuse, turned down the Rue
Raynouard, and soon found herself in the Passage des Eaux, a strange,
steep lane, like a staircase, pent between garden walls, and
conducting from the heights of Passy to the quay. At the bottom of
this descent was a dilapidated house, where Mother Fetu lived in an
attic lighted by a round window, and furnished with a wretched bed, a
rickety table, and a seatless chair.

"Oh! my good lady, my good lady!" she moaned out, directly she saw
Helene enter.

The old woman was in bed. In spite of her wretchedness, her body was
plump, swollen out, as it were, while her face was puffy, and her
hands seemed numbed as she drew the tattered sheet over her. She had
small, keen eyes and a whimpering voice, and displayed a noisy
humility in a rush of words.

"Ah! my good lady, how I thank you! Ah, ah! oh, how I suffer! It's
just as if dogs were tearing at my side. I'm sure I have a beast
inside me--see, just there! The skin isn't broken; the complaint is
internal. But, oh! oh! the pain hasn't ceased for two days past. Good
Lord, how is it possible to suffer so much? Ah, my good lady, thank
you! You don't forget the poor. It will be taken into account up
above; yes, yes, it will be taken into account!"

Helene had sat down. Noticing on the table a jug of warm _tisane_, she
filled a cup which was near at hand, and gave it to the sufferer. Near
the jug were placed a packet of sugar, two oranges, and some other
comfits.

"Has any one been to see you?" Helene asked.

"Yes, yes,--a little lady. But she doesn't know. That isn't the sort
of stuff I need. Oh, if I could get a little meat! My next-door
neighbor would cook it for me. Oh! oh! this pain is something
dreadful! A dog is tearing at me--oh, if only I had some broth!"

In spite of the pains which were racking her limbs, she kept her sharp
eyes fixed on Helene, who was now busy fumbling in her pocket, and on
seeing her visitor place a ten-franc piece on the table, she whimpered
all the more, and tried to rise to a sitting posture. Whilst
struggling, she extended her arm, and the money vanished, as she
repeated:

"Gracious Heaven! this is another frightful attack. Oh! oh! I cannot
stand such agony any longer! God will requite you, my good lady; I
will pray to Him to requite you. Bless my soul, how these pains shoot
through my whole body! His reverence Abbe Jouve promised me you would
come. It's only you who know what I want. I am going to buy some meat.
But now the pain's going down into my legs. Help me; I have no
strength left--none left at all!"

The old woman wished to turn over, and Helene, drawing off her gloves,
gently took hold of her and placed her as she desired. As she was
still bending over her the door opened, and a flush of surprise
mounted to her cheeks as she saw Dr. Deberle entering. Did he also
make visits to which he never referred?

"It's the doctor!" blurted out the old woman. "Oh! Heaven must bless
you both for being so good!"

The doctor bowed respectfully to Helene. Mother Fetu had ceased
whining on his entrance, but kept up a sibilant wheeze, like that of a
child in pain. She had understood at once that the doctor and her
benefactress were known to one another; and her eyes never left them,
but travelled from one to the other, while her wrinkled face showed
that her mind was covertly working. The doctor put some questions to
her, and sounded her right side; then, turning to Helene, who had just
sat down, he said:

"She is suffering from hepatic colic. She will be on her feet again in
a few days."

And, tearing from his memorandum book a leaf on which he had written
some lines, he added, addressing Mother Fetu:

"Listen to me. You must send this to the chemist in the Rue de Passy,
and every two hours you must drink a spoonful of the draught he will
give you."

The old woman burst out anew into blessings. Helene remained seated.
The doctor lingered gazing at her; but when their eyes had met, he
bowed and discreetly took his leave. He had not gone down a flight ere
Mother Fetu's lamentations were renewed.

"Ah! he's such a clever doctor! Ah! if his medicine could do me some
good! Dandelions and tallow make a good simple for removing water from
the body. Yes, yes, you can say you know a clever doctor. Have you
known him long? Gracious goodness, how thirsty I am! I feel burning
hot. He has a wife, hasn't he? He deserves to have a good wife and
beautiful children. Indeed, it's a pleasure to see kind-hearted people
good acquaintances."

Helene had risen to give her a drink.

"I must go now, Mother Fetu," she said. "Good-bye till to-morrow."

"Ah! how good you are! If I only had some linen! Look at my chemise
--it's torn in half; and this bed is so dirty. But that doesn't matter.
God will requite you, my good lady!"

Next day, on Helene's entering Mother Fetu's room, she found Dr.
Deberle already there. Seated on the chair, he was writing out a
prescription, while the old woman rattled on with whimpering
volubility.

"Oh, sir, it now feels like lead in my side--yes, just like lead! It's
as heavy as a hundred-pound weight, and prevents me from turning
round."

Then, having caught sight of Helene, she went on without a pause: "Ah!
here's the good lady! I told the kind doctor you would come. Though
the heavens might fall, said I, you would come all the same. You're a
very saint, an angel from paradise, and, oh! so beautiful that people
might fall on their knees in the streets to gaze on you as you pass!
Dear lady, I am no better; just now I have a heavy feeling here. Oh, I
have told the doctor what you did for me! The emperor could have done
no more. Yes, indeed, it would be a sin not to love you--a great sin."

These broken sentences fell from her lips as, with eyes half closed,
she rolled her head on the bolster, the doctor meantime smiling at
Helene, who felt very ill at ease.

"Mother Fetu," she said softly, "I have brought you a little linen."

"Oh, thank you, thank you; God will requite you! You're just like this
kind, good gentleman, who does more good to poor folks than a host of
those who declare it their special work. You don't know what great
care he has taken of me for four months past, supplying me with
medicine and broth and wine. One rarely finds a rich person so kind to
a poor soul! Oh, he's another of God's angels! Dear, dear, I seem to
have quite a house in my stomach!"

In his turn the doctor now seemed to be embarrassed. He rose and
offered his chair to Helene; but although she had come with the
intention of remaining a quarter of an hour, she declined to sit down,
on the plea that she was in a great hurry.

Meanwhile, Mother Fetu, still rolling her head to and fro, had
stretched out her hand, and the parcel of linen had vanished in the
bed. Then she resumed:

"Oh, what a couple of good souls you are! I don't wish to offend you;
I only say it because it's true. When you have seen one, you have seen
the other. Oh, dear Lord! give me a hand and help me to turn round.
Kind-hearted people understand one another. Yes, yes, they understand
one another."

"Good-bye, Mother Fetu," said Helene, leaving the doctor in sole
possession. "I don't think I shall call to-morrow."

The next day, however, found her in the attic again. The old woman was
sound asleep, but scarcely had she opened her eyes and recognized
Helene in her black dress sitting on the chair than she exclaimed:

"He has been here--oh, I really don't know what he gave me to take,
but I am as stiff as a stick. We were talking about you. He asked me
all kinds of questions; whether you were generally sad, and whether
your look was always the same. Oh, he's such a good man!"

Her words came more slowly, and she seemed to be waiting to see by the
expression of Helene's face what effect her remarks might have on her,
with that wheedling, anxious air of the poor who are desirous of
pleasing people. No doubt she fancied she could detect a flush of
displeasure mounting to her benefactress's brow, for her huge,
puffed-up face, all eagerness and excitement, suddenly clouded over;
and she resumed, in stammering accents:

"I am always asleep. Perhaps I have been poisoned. A woman in the Rue
de l'Annonciation was killed by a drug which the chemist gave her in
mistake for another."

[_Taking her hands._] I can't imagine it; I defy anybody to.

LILY.

[_Unthinkingly allowing him to retain her hands._] Everything I've
learned since-- except my music, and that I owe to Tedder and
Vincent-- everything I've learned since, I've learned by sheer
cuteness, from novels, the papers, the theatres, and by keeping my
ears open like a cunning little parrot.

[_Softly._] Ha, ha! That's what I am-- a cunning little parrot!

FARNCOMBE.

[_Laughing with her._] Ha, ha!

LILY.

[_Tossing her head._] Ho, I dare say, if I had the opportunity, I
could imitate the fine _ly_dies _you_ mix with, so that in less than
six months you'd hardly know the difference between them and me!

FARNCOMBE.

[_Holding her hands to his breast._] There is no difference already;
there _is_ none.

LILY.

Isn't there! [_Almost nestling up to him._] Ah, you should see me in
one of my vile tempers. [_Wistfully._] Then-- then you wouldn't--!
[_Becoming conscious of her proximity to him, she backs away and stands
rubbing the palms of her hands together in embarrassment._] Anyhow--
anyhow it isn't my intention to give you a chance of comparing us.

FARNCOMBE.

[_Under his breath._] Oh-- Miss Parradell----!

LILY.
[_Collecting herself._] No, I-- I'm not going to let you make a
fool of yourself over _me_, if I can help it.

FARNCOMBE.

Fool----!

LILY.
[_Facing him and speaking quietly but firmly._] Recollect, however
shrewd and apt I may be, and however straight I've managed to keep
myself, still-- I'm only a Pandora girl, and should always be
remembered as one by your chums and belongings. Only a Pandora
girl.
Nothing can alter that, dear boy; and you mustn't-- you mustn't
handicap yourself by hanging _me_ round your neck.

FARNCOMBE.Her
afternoon visit became an item in her daily life. She felt a strange
fondness for the Passage des Eaux. She liked that steep lane for its
coolness and quietness and its ever-clean pavement, washed on rainy
days by the water rushing down from the heights. A strange sensation
thrilled her as she stood at the top and looked at the narrow alley
with its steep declivity, usually deserted, and only known to the few
inhabitants of the neighboring streets. Then she would venture through
an archway dividing a house fronting the Rue Raynouard, and trip down
the seven flights of broad steps, in which lay the bed of a pebbly
stream occupying half of the narrow way. The walls of the gardens on
each side bulged out, coated with a grey, leprous growth; umbrageous
trees drooped over, foliage rained down, here and there an ivy plant
thickly mantled the stonework, and the chequered verdure, which only
left glimpses of the blue sky above, made the light very soft and
greeny. Halfway down Helene would stop to take breath, gazing at the
street-lamp which hung there, and listening to the merry laughter in
the gardens, whose doors she had never seen open. At times an old
woman panted up with the aid of the black, shiny, iron handrail fixed
in the wall to the right; a lady would come, leaning on her parasol as
on a walking-stick; or a band of urchins would run down, with a great
stamping of feet. But almost always Helene found herself alone, and
this steep, secluded, shady descent was to her a veritable delight
--like a path in the depths of a forest. At the bottom she would raise
her eyes, and the sight of the narrow, precipitous alley she had just
descended made her feel somewhat frightened.

She glided into the old woman's room with the quiet and coolness of
the Passage des Eaux clinging to her garments. This woefully wretched
den no longer affected her painfully. She moved about there as if in
her own rooms, opening the round attic window to admit the fresh air,
and pushing the table into a corner if it came in her way. The
garret's bareness, its whitewashed walls and rickety furniture,
realized to her mind an existence whose simplicity she had sometimes
dreamt of in her girlhood. But what especially charmed her was the
kindly emotion she experienced there. Playing the part of sick nurse,
hearing the constant bewailing of the old woman, all she saw and felt
within the four walls left her quivering with deep pity. In the end
she awaited with evident impatience Doctor Deberle's customary visit.
She questioned him as to Mother Fetu's condition; but from this they
glided to other subjects, as they stood near each other, face to face.
A closer acquaintance was springing up between them, and they were
surprised to find they possessed similar tastes. They understood one
another without speaking a word, each heart engulfed in the same
overflowing charity. Nothing to Helene seemed sweeter than this mutual
feeling, which arose in such an unusual way, and to which she yielded
without resistance, filled as she was with divine pity. At first she
had felt somewhat afraid of the doctor; in her own drawing-room she
would have been cold and distrustful, in harmony with her nature.
Here, however, in this garret they were far from the world, sharing
the one chair, and almost happy in the midst of the wretchedness and
poverty which filled their souls with emotion. A week passed, and they
knew one another as though they had been intimate for years. Mother
Fetu's miserable abode was filled with sunshine, streaming from this
fellowship of kindliness.

The old woman grew better very slowly. The doctor was surprised, and
charged her with coddling herself when she related that she now felt a
dreadful weight in her legs. She always kept up her monotonous
moaning, lying on her back and rolling her head to and fro; but she
closed her eyes, as though to give her visitors an opportunity for
unrestrained talk. One day she was to all appearance sound asleep, but
beneath their lids her little black eyes continued watching. At last,
however, she had to rise from her bed; and next day Helene presented
her with the promised bonnet and gown. When the doctor made his
appearance that afternoon the old woman's laggard memory seemed
suddenly stirred. "Gracious goodness!" said she, "I've forgotten my
neighbor's soup-pot; I promised to attend to it!"

Then she disappeared, closing the door behind her and leaving the
couple alone. They did not notice that they were shut in, but
continued their conversation. The doctor urged Helene to spend the
afternoon occasionally in his garden in the Rue Vineuse.

"My wife," said he, "must return your visit, and she will in person
repeat my invitation. It would do your daughter good."

"But I don't refuse," she replied, laughing. "I do not require to be
fetched with ceremony. Only--only--I am afraid of being indiscreet. At
any rate, we will see."

Their talk continued, but at last the doctor exclaimed in a tone of
surprise: "Where on earth can Mother Fetu have gone? It must be a
quarter of an hour since she went to see after her neighbor's
soup-pot."

Helene then saw that the door was shut, but it did not shock her at
the moment. She continued to talk of Madame Deberle, of whom she spoke
highly to her husband; but noticing that the doctor constantly glanced
towards the door, she at last began to feel uncomfortable.

"It's very strange that she does not come back!" she remarked in her
turn.

Their conversation then dropped. Helene, not knowing what to do,
opened the window; and when she turned round they avoided looking at
one another. The laughter of children came in through the circular
window, which, with its bit of blue sky, seemed like a full round
moon. They could not have been more alone--concealed from all
inquisitive looks, with merely this bit of heaven gazing in on them.
The voices of the children died away in the distance; and a quivering
silence fell. No one would dream of finding them in that attic, out of
the world. Their confusion grew apace, and in the end Helene,
displeased with herself, gave the doctor a steady glance.

"I have a great many visits to pay yet," he at once exclaimed. "As she
doesn't return, I must leave."

He quitted the room, and Helene then sat down. Immediately afterwards
Mother Fetu returned with many protestations:

"Oh! oh! I can scarcely crawl; such a faintness came over me! Has the
dear good doctor gone? Well, to be sure, there's not much comfort
here! Oh, you are both angels from heaven, coming to spend your time
with one so unfortunate as myself! But God in His goodness will
requite you. The pain has gone down into my feet to-day, and I had to
sit down on a step. Oh, I should like to have some chairs! If I only
had an easy-chair! My mattress is so vile too that I am quite ashamed
when you come. The whole place is at your disposal, and I would throw
myself into the fire if you required it. Yes. Heaven knows it; I
always repeat it in my prayers! Oh, kind Lord, grant their utmost
desires to these good friends of mine--in the name of the Father, the
Son, and the Holy Ghost!"

As Helene listened she experienced a singular feeling of discomfort.
Mother Fetu's bloated face filled her with disgust. Never before in
this stifling attic had she been affected in a like way; its sordid
misery seemed to stare her in the face; the lack of fresh air, the
surrounding wretchedness, quite sickened her. So she made all haste to
leave, feeling hurt by the blessings which Mother Fetu poured after
her.

In the Passage des Eaux an additional sorrow came upon her. Halfway
up, on the right-hand side of the path, the wall was hollowed out, and
here there was an excavation, some disused well, enclosed by a
railing. During the last two days when passing she had heard the
wailings of a cat rising from this well, and now, as she slowly
climbed the path, these wailings were renewed, but so pitifully that
they seemed instinct with the agony of death. The thought that the
poor brute, thrown into the disused well, was slowly dying there of
hunger, quite rent Helene's heart. She hastened her steps, resolving
that she would not venture down this lane again for a long time, lest
the cat's death-call should reach her ears.

The day was a Tuesday. In the evening, on the stroke of seven, as
Helene was finishing a tiny bodice, the two wonted rings at the bell
were heard, and Rosalie opened the door.

"His reverence is first to-night!" she exclaimed. "Oh, here comes
Monsieur Rambaud too!"

They were very merry at dinner. Jeanne was nearly well again now, and
the two brothers, who spoiled her, were successful in procuring her
permission to eat some salad, of which she was excessively fond,
notwithstanding Doctor Bodin's formal prohibition. When she was going
to bed, the child in high spirits hung round her mother's neck and
pleaded:

"Oh! mamma, darling! let me go with you to-morrow to see the old woman
you nurse!"

But the Abbe and Monsieur Rambaud were the first to scold her for
thinking of such a thing. They would not hear of her going amongst the
poor, as the sight affected her too grieviously. The last time she had
been on such an expedition she had twice swooned, and for three days
her eyes had been swollen with tears, that had flowed even in her
sleep.

"Oh! I will be good!" she pleaded. "I won't cry, I promise."

"It is quite useless, my darling," said her mother, caressing her.
"The old woman is well now. I shall not go out any more; I'll stay all
day with you!"


                             CHAPTER IV.

During the following week Madame Deberle paid a return visit to Madame
Grandjean, and displayed an affability that bordered on affection.

"You know what you promised me," she said, on the threshold, as she
was going off. "The first fine day we have, you must come down to the
garden, and bring Jeanne with you. It is the doctor's strict
injunction."

"Very well," Helene answered, with a smile, "it is understood; we will
avail ourselves of your kindness."

Three days later, on a bright February afternoon, she accompanied her
daughter down to the garden. The porter opened the door connecting the
two houses. At the near end of the garden, in a kind of greenhouse
built somewhat in the style of a Japanese pavilion, they found Madame
Deberle and her sister Pauline, both idling away their time, for some
embroidery, thrown on the little table, lay there neglected.

"Oh, how good of you to come!" cried Juliette. "You must sit down
here. Pauline, move that table away! It is still rather cool you know
to sit out of doors, but from this pavilion we can keep a watch on the
children. Now, little ones, run away and play; but take care not to
fall!"

The large door of the pavilion stood open, and on each side were
portable mirrors, whose covers had been removed so that they allowed
one to view the garden's expanse as from the threshold of a tent. The
garden, with a green sward in the centre, flanked by beds of flowers,
was separated from the Rue Vineuse by a plain iron railing, but
against this grew a thick green hedge, which prevented the curious
from gazing in. Ivy, clematis, and woodbine clung and wound around the
railings, and behind this first curtain of foliage came a second one
of lilacs and laburnums. Even in the winter the ivy leaves and the
close network of branches sufficed to shut off the view. But the great
charm of the garden lay in its having at the far end a few lofty
trees, some magnificent elms, which concealed the grimy wall of a
five-story house. Amidst all the neighboring houses these trees gave
the spot the aspect of a nook in some park, and seemed to increase the
dimensions of this little Parisian garden, which was swept like a
drawing-room. Between two of the elms hung a swing, the seat of which
was green with damp.

Helene leaned forward the better to view the scene.

"Oh, it is a hole!" exclaimed Madame Deberle carelessly. "Still, trees
are so rare in Paris that one is happy in having half a dozen of one's
own."

"No, no, you have a very pleasant place," murmured Helene.

The sun filled the pale atmosphere that day with a golden dust, its
rays streaming slowly through the leafless branches of the trees.
These assumed a ruddier tint, and you could see the delicate purple
gems softening the cold grey of the bark. On the lawn and along the
walks the grass and gravel glittered amidst the haze that seemed to
ooze from the ground. No flower was in blossom; only the happy flush
which the sunshine cast upon the soil revealed the approach of spring.

"At this time of year it is rather dull," resumed Madame Deberle. "In
June it is as cozy as a nest; the trees prevent any one from looking
in, and we enjoy perfect privacy." At this point she paused to call:
"Lucien, you must come away from that watertap!"

The lad, who was doing the honors of the garden, had led Jeanne
towards a tap under the steps. Here he had turned on the water, which
he allowed to splash on the tips of his boots. It was a game that he
delighted in. Jeanne, with grave face, looked on while he wetted his
feet.

"Wait a moment!" said Pauline, rising. "I'll go and stop his
nonsense!"

But Juliette held her back.

"You'll do no such thing; you are even more of a madcap than he is.
The other day both of you looked as if you had taken a bath. How is it
that a big girl like you cannot remain two minutes seated? Lucien!"
she continued directing her eyes on her son, "turn off the water at
once!"

The child, in his fright, made an effort to obey her. But instead of
turning the tap off, he turned it on all the more, and the water
gushed forth with a force and a noise that made him lose his head. He
recoiled, splashed up to the shoulders.

"Turn off the water at once!" again ordered his mother, whose cheeks
were flushing with anger.

Jeanne, hitherto silent, then slowly, and with the greatest caution,
ventured near the tap; while Lucien burst into loud sobbing at sight
of this cold stream, which terrified him, and which he was powerless
to stop. Carefully drawing her skirt between her legs, Jeanne
stretched out her bare hands so as not to wet her sleeves, and closed
the tap without receiving a sprinkle. The flow instantly ceased.
Lucien, astonished and inspired with respect, dried his tears and
gazed with swollen eyes at the girl.

"Oh, that child puts me beside myself!" exclaimed Madame Deberle, her
complexion regaining its usual pallor, while she stretched herself
out, as though wearied to death.

Helene deemed it right to intervene. "Jeanne," she called, "take his
hand, and amuse yourselves by walking up and down."

Jeanne took hold of Lucien's hand, and both gravely paced the paths
with little steps. She was much taller than her companion, who had to
stretch his arm up towards her; but this solemn amusement, which
consisted in a ceremonious circuit of the lawn, appeared to absorb
them and invest them with a sense of great importance. Jeanne, like a
genuine lady, gazed about, preoccupied with her own thoughts; Lucien
every now and then would venture a glance at her; but not a word was
said by either.

"How droll they are!" said Madame Deberle, smiling, and again at her
ease. "I must say that your Jeanne is a dear, good child. She is so
obedient, so well behaved--"

"Yes, when she is in the company of others," broke in Helene. "She is
a great trouble at times. Still, she loves me, and does her best to be
good so as not to vex me."

Then they spoke of children; how girls were more precocious than boys;
though it would be wrong to deduce too much from Lucien's
unintelligent face. In another year he would doubtless lose all his
gawkiness and become quite a gallant. Finally, Madame Deberle resumed
her embroidery, making perhaps two stitches in a minute. Helene, who
was only happy when busy, begged permission to bring her work the next
time she came. She found her companions somewhat dull, and whiled away
the time in examining the Japanese pavilion. The walls and ceiling
were hidden by tapestry worked in gold, with designs showing bright
cranes in full flight, butterflies, and flowers and views in which
blue ships were tossing upon yellow rivers. Chairs, and ironwood
flower-stands were scattered about; on the floor some fine mats were
spread; while the lacquered furnishings were littered with trinkets,
small bronzes and vases, and strange toys painted in all the hues of
the rainbow. At the far end stood a grotesque idol in Dresden china,
with bent legs and bare, protruding stomach, which at the least
movement shook its head with a terrible and amusing look.

"Isn't it horribly ugly?" asked Pauline, who had been watching Helene
as she glanced round. "I say, sister, you know that all these
purchases of yours are so much rubbish! Malignon calls your Japanese
museum 'the sixpenny bazaar.' Oh, by the way, talking of him, I met
him. He was with a lady, and such a lady--Florence, of the Varietes
Theatre."

"Where was it?" asked Juliette immediately. "How I shall tease him!"

"On the boulevards. He's coming here to-day, is he not?"

She was not vouchsafed any reply. The ladies had all at once become
uneasy owing to the disappearance of the children, and called to them.
However, two shrill voices immediately answered:

"We are here!"

Half hidden by a spindle tree, they were sitting on the grass in the
middle of the lawn.

"What are you about?"

"We have put up at an inn," answered Lucien. "We are resting in our
room."

Greatly diverted, the women watched them for a time. Jeanne seemed
quite contented with the game. She was cutting the grass around her,
doubtless with the intention of preparing breakfast. A piece of wood,
picked up among the shrubs, represented a trunk. And now they were
talking. Jeanne, with great conviction in her tone, was declaring that
they were in Switzerland, and that they would set out to see the
glaciers, which rather astonished Lucien.

"Ha, here he is!" suddenly exclaimed Pauline.

Madame Deberle turned, and caught sight of Malignon descending the
steps. He had scarcely time to make his bow and sit down before she
attacked him.

"Oh," she said, "it is nice of you to go about everywhere saying that
I have nothing but rubbishy ornaments about me!"

"You mean this little saloon of yours? Oh yes," said he, quite at his
ease. "You haven't anything worth looking at here!"

"What! not my china figure?" she asked, quite hurt.

"No, no, everything is quite _bourgeois_. It is necessary for a person
to have some taste. You wouldn't allow me to select the things--"

"Your taste, forsooth! just talk about your taste!" she retorted,
flushing crimson and feeling quite angry. "You have been seen with a
lady--"

"What lady?" he asked, surprised by the violence of the attack.

"A fine choice, indeed! I compliment you on it. A girl whom the whole
of Paris knows--"

She suddenly paused, remembering Pauline's presence.

"Pauline," she said, "go into the garden for a minute."

"Oh no," retorted the girl indignantly. "It's so tiresome; I'm always
being sent out of the way."

"Go into the garden," repeated Juliette, with increased severity in
her tone.

The girl stalked off with a sullen look, but stopped all at once, to
exclaim: "Well, then, be quick over your talk!"

As soon as she was gone, Madame Deberle returned to the charge. "How
can you, a gentleman, show yourself in public with that actress
Florence? She is at least forty. She is ugly enough to frighten one,
and all the gentlemen in the stalls thee and thou her on first
nights."

"Have you finished?" called out Pauline, who was strolling sulkily
under the trees. "I'm not amusing myself here, you know."

Malignon, however, defended himself. He had no knowledge of this girl
Florence; he had never in his life spoken a word to her. They had
possibly seen him with a lady: he was sometimes in the company of the
wife of a friend of his. Besides, who had seen him? He wanted proofs,
witnesses.

"Pauline," hastily asked Madame Deberle, raising her voice, "did you
not meet him with Florence?"

"Yes, certainly," replied her sister. "I met them on the boulevards
opposite Bignon's."

Thereupon, glorying in her victory over Malignon, whose face wore an
embarrassed smile, Madame Deberle called out: "You can come back,
Pauline; I have finished."

Malignon, who had a box at the Folies-Dramatiques for the following
night, now gallantly placed it at Madame Deberle's service, apparently
not feeling the slightest ill-will towards her; moreover, they were
always quarreling. Pauline wished to know if she might go to see the
play that was running, and as Malignon laughed and shook his head, she
declared it was very silly; authors ought to write plays fit for girls
to see. She was only allowed such entertainments as _La Dame Blanche_
and the classic drama could offer.

Meantime, the ladies had ceased watching the children, and all at once
Lucien began to raise terrible shrieks.

"What have you done to him, Jeanne?" asked Helene.

"I have done nothing, mamma," answered the little girl. "He has thrown
himself on the ground."

The truth was, the children had just set out for the famous glaciers.
As Jeanne pretended that they were reaching the mountains, they had
lifted their feet very high, as though to step over the rocks. Lucien,
however, quite out of breath with his exertions, at last made a false
step, and fell sprawling in the middle of an imaginary ice-field.
Disgusted, and furious with child-like rage, he no sooner found
himself on the ground than he burst into tears.

"Lift him up," called Helene.

"He won't let me, mamma. He is rolling about."

And so saying, Jeanne drew back, as though exasperated and annoyed by
such a display of bad breeding. He did not know how to play; he would
certainly cover her with dirt. Her mouth curled, as though she were a
duchess compromising herself by such companionship. Thereupon Madame
Deberle, irritated by Lucien's continued wailing, requested her sister
to pick him up and coax him into silence. Nothing loth, Pauline ran,
cast herself down beside the child, and for a moment rolled on the
ground with him. He struggled with her, unwilling to be lifted, but
she at last took him up by the arms, and to appease him, said, "Stop
crying, you noisy fellow; we'll have a swing!"

Lucien at once closed his lips, while Jeanne's solemn looks vanished,
and a gleam of ardent delight illumined her face. All three ran
towards the swing, but it was Pauline who took possession of the seat.

"Push, push!" she urged the children; and they pushed with all the
force of their tiny hands; but she was heavy, and they could scarcely
stir the swing.

"Push!" she urged again. "Oh, the big sillies, they can't!"

In the pavilion, Madame Deberle had just felt a slight chill. Despite
the bright sunshine she thought it rather cold, and she requested
Malignon to hand her a white cashmere burnous that was hanging from
the handle of a window fastening. Malignon rose to wrap the burnous
round her shoulders, and they began chatting familiarly on matters
which had little interest for Helene. Feeling fidgety, fearing that
Pauline might unwittingly knock the children down, she therefore
stepped into the garden, leaving Juliette and the young man to wrangle
over some new fashion in bonnets which apparently deeply interested
them.

Jeanne no sooner saw her mother than she ran towards her with a
wheedling smile, and entreaty in every gesture. "Oh, mamma, mamma!"
she implored. "Oh, mamma!"

"No, no, you mustn't!" replied Helene, who understood her meaning very
well. "You know you have been forbidden."

Swinging was Jeanne's greatest delight. She would say that she
believed herself a bird; the breeze blowing in her face, the lively
rush through the air, the continued swaying to and fro in a motion as
rythmic as the beating of a bird's wings, thrilled her with an
exquisite pleasure; in her ascent towards cloudland she imagined
herself on her way to heaven. But it always ended in some mishap. On
one occasion she had been found clinging to the ropes of the swing in
a swoon, her large eyes wide open, fixed in a vacant stare; at another
time she had fallen to the ground, stiff, like a swallow struck by a
shot.

"Oh, mamma!" she implored again. "Only a little, a very, very little!"

In the end her mother, in order to win peace, placed her on the seat.
The child's face lit up with an angelic smile, and her bare wrists
quivered with joyous expectancy. Helene swayed her very gently.

"Higher, mamma, higher!" she murmured.

But Helene paid no heed to her prayer, and retained firm hold of the
rope. She herself was glowing all over, her cheeks flushed, and she
thrilled with excitement at every push she gave to the swing. Her
wonted sedateness vanished as she thus became her daughter's playmate.

"That will do," she declared after a time, taking Jeanne in her arms.

"Oh, mamma, you must swing now!" the child whispered, as she clung to
her neck.

She took a keen delight in seeing her mother flying through the air;
as she said, her pleasure was still more intense in gazing at her than
in having a swing herself. Helene, however, asked her laughingly who
would push her; when she went in for swinging, it was a serious
matter; why, she went higher than the treetops! While she was speaking
it happened that Monsieur Rambaud made his appearance under the
guidance of the doorkeeper. He had met Madame Deberle in Helene's
rooms, and thought he would not be deemed presuming in presenting
himself here when unable to find her. Madame Deberle proved very
gracious, pleased as she was with the good-natured air of the worthy
man; however, she soon returned to a lively discussion with Malignon.

"_Bon ami_[*] will push you, mamma! _Bon ami_ will push you!" Jeanne
called out, as she danced round her mother.

[*] Literally "good friend;" but there is no proper equivalent for the
    expression in English.

"Be quiet! We are not at home!" said her mother with mock gravity.

"Bless me! if it will please you, I am at your disposal," exclaimed
Monsieur Rambaud. "When people are in the country--"

Helene let herself be persuaded. When a girl she had been accustomed
to swing for hours, and the memory of those vanished pleasures created
a secret craving to taste them once more. Moreover, Pauline, who had
sat down with Lucien at the edge of the lawn, intervened with the
boldness of a girl freed from the trammels of childhood.

"Of course he will push you, and he will swing me after you. Won't
you, sir?"

This determined Helene. The youth which dwelt within her, in spite of
the cold demureness of her great beauty, displayed itself in a
charming, ingenuous fashion. She became a thorough school-girl,
unaffected and gay. There was no prudishness about her. She laughingly
declared that she must not expose her legs, and asked for some cord to
tie her skirts securely round her ankles. That done, she stood upright
on the swing, her arms extended and clinging to the ropes.

Well, we did walk away together, and we did part good friends. But we
didn't part at all till some hours later, in his rooms.

We didn't part till I'd made him stand by me and listen to me while I
had a long jaw with my brother on the 'phone.

LILY.That day Helene had for the first time abandoned her
widow's weeds; she was wearing a grey dress set off with mauve bows.
Standing upright, she began to swing, almost touching the ground, and
as if rocking herself to sleep.

"Quicker! quicker!" she exclaimed.

Monsieur Rambaud, with his hands ready, caught the seat as it came
back to him, and gave it a more vigorous push. Helene went higher,
each ascent taking her farther. However, despite the motion, she did
not lose her sedateness; she retained almost an austre demeanor; her
eyes shone very brightly in her beautiful, impassive face; her
nostrils only were inflated, as though to drink in the air.

Not a fold of her skirts was out of place, but a plait of her hair
slipped down.

"Quicker! quicker!" she called.

An energetic push gave her increased impetus. Up in the sunshine she
flew, even higher and higher. A breeze sprung up with her motion, and
blew through the garden; her flight was so swift that they could
scarcely distinguish her figure aright. Her face was now all smiles,
and flushed with a rosy red, while her eyes sparkled here, then there,
like shooting stars. The loosened plait of hair rustled against her
neck. Despite the cords which bound them, her skirts now waved about,
and you could divine that she was at her ease, her bosom heaving in
its free enjoyment as though the air were indeed her natural place.

"Quicker! quicker!"

Monsieur Rambaud, his face red and bedewed with perspiration, exerted
all his strength. A cry rang out. Helene went still higher.

"Oh, mamma! Oh, mamma!" repeated Jeanne in her ecstasy.

She was sitting on the lawn gazing at her mother, her little hands
clasped on her bosom, looking as though she herself had drunk in all
the air that was stirring. Her breath failed her; with a rythmical
movement of the shoulders she kept time with the long strokes of the
swing. And she cried, "Quicker! quicker!" while her mother still went
higher, her feet grazing the lofty branches of the trees.

"Higher, mamma! oh, higher, mamma!"

But Helene was already in the very heavens. The trees bent and cracked
as beneath a gale. Her skirts, which were all they could see, flapped
with a tempestuous sound. When she came back with arms stretched out
and bosom distended she lowered her head slightly and for a moment
hovered; but then she rose again and sank backwards, her head tilted,
her eyes closed, as though she had swooned. These ascensions and
descents which made her giddy were delightful. In her flight she
entered into the sunshine--the pale yellow February sunshine that
rained down like golden dust. Her chestnut hair gleamed with amber
tints; and a flame seemed to have leaped up around her, as the mauve
bows on her whitening dress flashed like burning flowers. Around her
the springtide was maturing into birth, and the purple-tinted gems of
the trees showed like delicate lacquer against the blue sky.

Jeanne clasped her hands. Her mother seemed to her a saint with a
golden glory round her head, winging her way to paradise, and she
again stammered: "Oh, mamma! oh! mamma!"

Madame Deberle and Malignon had now grown interested, and had stepped
under the trees. Malignon declared the lady to be very bold.

"I should faint, I'm sure," said Madame Deberle, with a frightened
air.

Helene heard them, for she dropped these words from among the
branches: "Oh, my heart is all right! Give a stronger push, Monsieur
Rambaud!"

And indeed her voice betrayed no emotion. She seemed to take no heed
of the two men who were onlookers. They were doubtless nothing to her.
Her tress of hair had become entangled, and the cord that confined her
skirts must have given way, for the drapery flapped in the wind like a
flag. She was going still higher.

All at once, however, the exclamation rang out:

"Enough, Monsieur Rambaud, enough!"

Doctor Deberle had just appeared on the house steps. He came forward,
embraced his wife tenderly, took up Lucien and kissed his brow. Then
he gazed at Helene with a smile.

"Enough, enough!" she still continued exclaiming.

"Why?" asked he. "Do I disturb you?"

She made no answer; a look of gravity had suddenly come over her face.
The swing, still continuing its rapid flights, owing to the impetus
given to it, would not stop, but swayed to and fro with a regular
motion which still bore Helene to a great height. The doctor,
surprised and charmed, beheld her with admiration; she looked so
superb, so tall and strong, with the pure figure of an antique statue
whilst swinging thus gently amid the spring sunshine. But she seemed
annoyed, and all at once leaped down.

"Stop! stop!" they all cried out.

From Helene's lips came a dull moan; she had fallen upon the gravel of
a pathway, and her efforts to rise were fruitless.

"Good heavens!" exclaimed the doctor, his face turning very pale. "How
imprudent!"

They all crowded round her. Jeanne began weeping so bitterly that
Monsieur Rambaud, with his heart in his mouth, was compelled to take
her in his arms. The doctor, meanwhile, eagerly questioned Helene.

"Is it the right leg you fell on? Cannot you stand upright?" And as
she remained dazed, without answering, he asked: "Do you suffer?"

"Yes, here at the knee; a dull pain," she answered, with difficulty.

He at once sent his wife for his medicine case and some bandages, and
repeated:

"I must see, I must see. No doubt it is a mere nothing."

He knelt down on the gravel and Helene let him do so; but all at once
she struggled to her feet and said: "No, no!"

"But I must examine the place," he said.

A slight quiver stole over her, and she answered in a yet lower tone:

"It is not necessary. It is nothing at all."

He looked at her, at first astounded. Her neck was flushing red; for a
moment their eyes met, and seemed to read each other's soul; he was
disconcerted, and slowly rose, remaining near her, but without
pressing her further.

Helene had signed to Monsieur Rambaud. "Fetch Doctor Bodin," she
whispered in his ear, "and tell him what has happened to me."

Ten minutes later, when Doctor Bodin made his appearance, she, with
superhuman courage, regained her feet, and leaning on him and Monsieur
Rambaud, contrived to return home. Jeanne followed, quivering with
sobs.

"I shall wait," said Doctor Deberle to his brother physician. "Come
down and remove our fears."

In the garden a lively colloquy ensued. Malignon was of opinion that
women had queer ideas. Why on earth had that lady been so foolish as
to jump down? Pauline, excessively provoked at this accident, which
deprived her of a pleasure, declared it was silly to swing so high. On
his side Doctor Deberle did not say a word, but seemed anxious.

"It is nothing serious," said Doctor Bodin, as he came down again
--"only a sprain. Still, she will have to keep to an easy-chair for at
least a fortnight."

Thereupon Monsieur Deberle gave a friendly slap on Malignon's
shoulder. He wished his wife to go in, as it was really becoming too
cold. For his own part, taking Lucien in his arms, he carried him into
the house, covering him with kisses the while.


                              CHAPTER V.

Both windows of the bedroom were wide open, and in the depths below
the house, which was perched on the very summit of the hill, lay
Paris, rolling away in a mighty flat expanse. Ten o'clock struck; the
lovely February morning had all the sweetness and perfume of spring.

Helene reclined in an invalid chair, reading in front of one of the
windows, her knee still in bandages. She suffered no pain; but she had
been confined to her room for a week past, unable even to take up her
customary needlework. Not knowing what to do, she had opened a book
which she had found on the table--she, who indulged in little or no
reading at any time. This book was the one she used every night as a
shade for the night-lamp, the only volume which she had taken within
eighteen months from the small but irreproachable library selected by
Monsieur Rambaud. Novels usually seemed to her false to life and
puerile; and this one, Sir Walter Scott's "Ivanhoe," had at first
wearied her to death. However, a strange curiosity had grown upon her,
and she was finishing it, at times affected to tears, and at times
rather bored, when she would let it slip from her hand for long
minutes and gaze fixedly at the far-stretching horizon.

That morning Paris awoke from sleep with a smiling indolence. A mass
of vapor, following the valley of the Seine, shrouded the two banks
from view. This mist was light and milky, and the sun, gathering
strength, was slowly tinging it with radiance. Nothing of the city was
distinguishable through this floating muslin. In the hollows the haze
thickened and assumed a bluish tint; while over certain broad expanses
delicate transparencies appeared, a golden dust, beneath which you
could divine the depths of the streets; and up above domes and
steeples rent the mist, rearing grey outlines to which clung shreds of
the haze which they had pierced. At times cloudlets of yellow smoke
would, like giant birds, heavy of wing, slowly soar on high, and then
mingle with the atmosphere which seemed to absorb them. And above all
this immensity, this mass of cloud, hanging in slumber over Paris, a
sky of extreme purity, of a faint and whitening blue, spread out its
mighty vault. The sun was climbing the heavens, scattering a spray of
soft rays; a pale golden light, akin in hue to the flaxen tresses of a
child, was streaming down like rain, filling the atmosphere with the
warm quiver of its sparkle. It was like a festival of the infinite,
instinct with sovereign peacefulness and gentle gaiety, whilst the
city, chequered with golden beams, still remained lazy and sleepy,
unwilling to reveal itself by casting off its coverlet of lace.

For eight days it had been Helene's diversion to gaze on that mighty
expanse of Paris, and she never wearied of doing so. It was as
unfathomable and varying as the ocean--fair in the morning, ruddy with
fire at night, borrowing all the joys and sorrows of the heavens
reflected in its depths. A flash of sunshine came, and it would roll
in waves of gold; a cloud would darken it and raise a tempest. Its
aspect was ever changing. A complete calm would fall, and all would
assume an orange hue; gusts of wind would sweep by from time to time,
and turn everything livid; in keen, bright weather there would be a
shimmer of light on every housetop; whilst when showers fell, blurring
both heaven and earth, all would be plunged in chaotic confusion. At
her window Helene experienced all the hopes and sorrows that pertain
to the open sea. As the keen wind blew in her face she imagined it
wafted a saline fragrance; even the ceaseless noise of the city seemed
to her like that of a surging tide beating against a rocky cliff.

The book fell from her hands. She was dreaming, with a far-away look
in her eyes. When she stopped reading thus it was from a desire to
linger and understand what she had already perused. She took a delight
in denying her curiosity immediate satisfaction. The tale filled her
soul with a tempest of emotion. Paris that morning was displaying the
same vague joy and sorrow as that which disturbed her heart. In this
lay a great charm--to be ignorant, to guess things dimly, to yield to
slow initiation, with the vague thought that her youth was beginning
again.

How full of lies were novels! She was assuredly right in not reading
them. They were mere fables, good for empty heads with no proper
conception of life. Yet she remained entranced, dreaming unceasingly
of the knight Ivanhoe, loved so passionately by two women--Rebecca,
the beautiful Jewess, and the noble Lady Rowena. She herself thought
she could have loved with the intensity and patient serenity of the
latter maiden. To love! to love! She did not utter the words, but they
thrilled her through and through in the very thought, astonishing her,
and irradiating her face with a smile. In the distance some fleecy
cloudlets, driven by the breeze, now floated over Paris like a flock
of swans. Huge gaps were being cleft in the fog; a momentary glimpse
was given of the left bank, indistinct and clouded, like a city of
fairydom seen in a dream; but suddenly a thick curtain of mist swept
down, and the fairy city was engulfed, as though by an inundation. And
then the vapors, spreading equally over every district, formed, as it
were, a beautiful lake, with milky, placid waters. There was but one
denser streak, indicating the grey, curved course of the Seine. And
slowly over those milky, placid waters shadows passed, like vessels
with pink sails, which the young woman followed with a dreamy gaze. To
love! to love! She smiled as her dream sailed on.

However, she again took up her book. She had reached the chapter
describing the attack on the castle, wherein Rebecca nurses the
wounded Ivanhoe, and recounts to him the incidents of the fight, which
she gazes at from a window. Helene felt that she was in the midst of a
beautiful falsehood, but roamed through it as through some mythical
garden, whose trees are laden with golden fruit, and where she imbibed
all sorts of fancies. Then, at the conclusion of the scene, when
Rebecca, wrapped in her veil, exhales her love beside the sleeping
knight, Helene again allowed the book to slip from her hand; her heart
was so brimful of emotion that she could read no further.

Heavens! could all those things be true? she asked, as she lay back in
her easy-chair, numbed by her enforced quiescence, and gazing on
Paris, shrouded and mysterious, beneath the golden sun. The events of
her life now arose before her, conjured up by the perusal of the
novel. She saw herself a young girl in the house of her father,
Mouret, a hatter at Marseilles. The Rue des Petites-Maries was black
and dismal, and the house, with its vat of steaming water ready to the
hand of the hatter, exhaled a rank odor of dampness, even in fine
weather. She also saw her mother, who was ever an invalid, and who
kissed her with pale lips, without speaking. No gleam of the sun
penetrated into her little room. Hard work went on around her; only by
dint of toil did her father gain a workingman's competency. That
summed up her early life, and till her marriage nothing intervened to
break the monotony of days ever the same. One morning, returning from
market with her mother, a basketful of vegetables on her arm, she
jostled against young Grandjean. Charles turned round and followed
them. The love-romance of her life was in this incident. For three
months she was always meeting him, while he, bashful and awkward,
could not pluck up courage to speak to her. She was sixteen years of
age, and a little proud of her lover, who, she knew, belonged to a
wealthy family. But she deemed him bad-looking, and often laughed at
him, and no thought of him disturbed her sleep in the large, gloomy,
damp house. In the end they were married, and this marriage yet filled
her with surprise. Charles worshipped her, and would fling himself on
the floor to kiss her bare feet. She beamed on him, her smile full of
kindness, as she rebuked him for such childishness. Then another dull
life began. During twelve years no event of sufficient interest had
occurred for her to bear in mind. She was very quiet and very happy,
tormented by no fever either of body or heart; her whole attention
being given to the daily cares of a poor household. Charles was still
wont to kiss her fair white feet, while she showed herself indulgent
and motherly towards him. But other feeling she had none. Then there
abruptly came before her the room in the Hotel du Var, her husband in
his coffin, and her widow's robe hanging over a chair. She had wept
that day as on the winter's night when her mother died. Then once more
the days glided on; for two months with her daughter she had again
enjoyed peace and happiness. Heaven! did that sum up everything? What,
then, did that book mean when it spoke of transcendent loves which
illumine one's existence?

While she thus reflected prolonged quivers were darting over the
sleeping lake of mist on the horizon. Suddenly it seemed to burst,
gaps appeared, a rending sped from end to end, betokening a complete
break-up. The sun, ascending higher and higher, scattering its rays in
glorious triumph, was victoriously attacking the mist. Little by
little the great lake seemed to dry up, as though some invisible
sluice were draining the plain. The fog, so dense but a moment before,
was losing its consistency and becoming transparent, showing all the
bright hues of the rainbow. On the left bank of the Seine all was of a
heavenly blue, deepening into violet over towards the Jardin des
Plantes. Upon the right bank a pale pink, flesh-like tint suffused the
Tuileries district; while away towards Montmartre there was a fiery
glow, carmine flaming amid gold. Then, farther off, the working-men's
quarters deepened to a dusty brick-color, changing more and more till
all became a slatey, bluish grey. The eye could not yet distinguish
the city, which quivered and receded like those subaqueous depths
divined through the crystalline waves, depths with awful forests of
huge plants, swarming with horrible things and monsters faintly
espied. However, the watery mist was quickly falling. It became at
last no more than a fine muslin drapery; and bit by bit this muslin
vanished, and Paris took shape and emerged from dreamland.

To love! to love! Why did these words ring in Helene's ears with such
sweetness as the darkness of the fog gave way to light? Had she not
loved her husband, whom she had tended like a child? But a bitter
memory stirred within her--the memory of her dead father, who had hung
himself three weeks after his wife's decease in a closet where her
gowns still dangled from their hooks. There he had gasped out his last
agony, his body rigid, and his face buried in a skirt, wrapped round
by the clothes which breathed of her whom he had ever worshipped. Then
Helene's reverie took a sudden leap. She began thinking of her own
home-life, of the month's bills which she had checked with Rosalie
that very morning; and she felt proud of the orderly way in which she
regulated her household. During more than thirty years she had lived
with self-respect and strength of mind. Uprightness alone impassioned
her. When she questioned her past, not one hour revealed a sin; in her
mind's eye she saw herself ever treading a straight and level path.
Truly, the days might slip by; she would walk on peacefully as before,
with no impediment in her way. The very thought of this made her
stern, and her spirit rose in angry contempt against those lying lives
whose apparent heroism disturbs the heart. The only true life was her
own, following its course amidst such peacefulness. But over Paris
there now only hung a thin smoke, a fine, quivering gauze, on the
point of floating away; and emotion suddenly took possession of her.
To love! to love! everything brought her back to that caressing phrase
--even the pride born of her virtue. Her dreaming became so light, she
no longer thought, but lay there, steeped in springtide, with moist
eyes.

At last, as she was about to resume her reading, Paris slowly came
into view. Not a breath of wind had stirred; it was as if a magician
had waved his wand. The last gauzy film detached itself, soared and
vanished in the air; and the city spread out without a shadow, under
the conquering sun. Helene, with her chin resting on her hand, gazed
on this mighty awakening.

A far-stretching valley appeared, with a myriad of buildings huddled
together. Over the distant range of hills were scattered close-set
roofs, and you could divine that the sea of houses rolled afar off
behind the undulating ground, into the fields hidden from sight. It
was as the ocean, with all the infinity and mystery of its waves.
Paris spread out as vast as the heavens on high. Burnished with the
sunshine that lovely morning, the city looked like a field of yellow
corn; and the huge picture was all simplicity, compounded of two
colors only, the pale blue of the sky, and the golden reflections of
the housetops. The stream of light from the spring sun invested
everything with the beauty of a new birth. So pure was the light that
the minutest objects became visible. Paris, with its chaotic maze of
stonework, shone as though under glass. From time to time, however, a
breath of wind passed athwart this bright, quiescent serenity; and
then the outlines of some districts grew faint, and quivered as if
they were being viewed through an invisible flame.

Helene took interest at first in gazing on the large expanse spread
under her windows, the slope of the Trocadero, and the far-stretching
quays. She had to lean out to distinguish the deserted square of the
Champ-de-Mars, barred at the farther end by the sombre Military
School. Down below, on thoroughfare and pavement on each side of the
Seine, she could see the passers-by--a busy cluster of black dots,
moving like a swarm of ants. A yellow omnibus shone out like a spark
of fire; drays and cabs crossed the bridge, mere child's toys in the
distance, with miniature horses like pieces of mechanism; and amongst
others traversing the grassy slopes was a servant girl, with a white
apron which set a bright spot in all the greenery. Then Helene raised
her eyes; but the crowd scattered and passed out of sight, and even
the vehicles looked like mere grains of sand; there remained naught
but the gigantic carcass of the city, seemingly untenanted and
abandoned, its life limited to the dull trepidation by which it was
agitated. There, in the foreground to the left, some red roofs were
shining, and the tall chimneys of the Army Bakehouse slowly poured out
their smoke; while, on the other side of the river, between the
Esplanade and the Champ-de-Mars, a grove of lofty elms clustered, like
some patch of a park, with bare branches, rounded tops, and young buds
already bursting forth, quite clear to the eye. In the centre of the
picture, the Seine spread out and reigned between its grey banks, to
which rows of casks, steam cranes, and carts drawn up in line, gave a
seaport kind of aspect. Helene's eyes were always turning towards this
shining river, on which boats passed to and fro like birds with inky
plumage. Her looks involuntarily followed the water's stately course,
which, like a silver band, cut Paris atwain. That morning the stream
rolled liquid sunlight; no greater resplendency could be seen on the
horizon. And the young woman's glance encountered first the Pont des
Invalides, next the Pont de la Concorde, and then the Pont Royal.
Bridge followed bridge, they appeared to get closer, to rise one above
the other like viaducts forming a flight of steps, and pierced with
all kinds of arches; while the river, wending its way beneath these
airy structures, showed here and there small patches of its blue robe,
patches which became narrower and narrower, more and more indistinct.
And again did Helene raise her eyes, and over yonder the stream forked
amidst a jumble of houses; the bridges on either side of the island of
La Cite were like mere films stretching from one bank to the other;
while the golden towers of Notre-Dame sprang up like boundary-marks of
the horizon, beyond which river, buildings, and clumps of trees became
naught but sparkling sunshine. Then Helene, dazzled, withdrew her gaze
from this the triumphant heart of Paris, where the whole glory of the
city appeared to blaze.

On the right bank, amongst the clustering trees of the Champs-Elysees
she saw the crystal buildings of the Palace of Industry glittering
with a snowy sheen; farther away, behind the roof of the Madeleine,
which looked like a tombstone, towered the vast mass of the Opera
House; then there were other edifices, cupolas and towers, the
Vendome Column, the church of Saint-Vincent de Paul, the tower of
Saint-Jacques; and nearer in, the massive cube-like pavilions of the
new Louvre and the Tuileries, half-hidden by a wood of chestnut trees.
On the left bank the dome of the Invalides shone with gilding; beyond
it the two irregular towers of Saint-Sulpice paled in the bright
light; and yet farther in the rear, to the right of the new spires
of Sainte-Clotilde, the bluish Pantheon, erect on a height, its fine
colonnade showing against the sky, overlooked the city, poised in the
air, as it were, motionless, with the silken hues of a captive balloon.

Helene's gaze wandered all over Paris. There were hollows, as could be
divined by the lines of roofs; the Butte des Moulins surged upward,
with waves of old slates, while the line of the principal boulevards
dipped downward like a gutter, ending in a jumble of houses whose
tiles even could no longer be seen. At this early hour the oblique sun
did not light up the house-fronts looking towards the Trocadero; not a
window-pane of these threw back its rays. The skylights on some roofs
alone sparkled with the glittering reflex of mica amidst the red of
the adjacent chimney-pots. The houses were mostly of a sombre grey,
warmed by reflected beams; still rays of light were transpiercing
certain districts, and long streets, stretching in front of Helene,
set streaks of sunshine amidst the shade. It was only on the left that
the far-spreading horizon, almost perfect in its circular sweep, was
broken by the heights of Montmartre and Pere-Lachaise. The details so
clearly defined in the foreground, the innumerable denticles of the
chimneys, the little black specks of the thousands of windows, grew
less and less distinct as you gazed farther and farther away, till
everything became mingled in confusion--the pell-mell of an endless
city, whose faubourgs, afar off, looked like shingly beaches, steeped
in a violet haze under the bright, streaming, vibrating light that
fell from the heavens.

Helene was watching the scene with grave interest when Jeanne burst
gleefully into the room.

"Oh, mamma! look here!"

The child had a big bunch of wall-flowers in her hand. She told, with
some laughter, how she had waylaid Rosalie on her return from market
to peep into her basket of provisions. To rummage in this basket was a
great delight to her.

"Look at it, mamma! It lay at the very bottom. Just smell it; what a
lovely perfume!"

From the tawny flowers, speckled with purple, there came a penetrating
odor which scented the whole room. Then Helene, with a passionate
movement, drew Jeanne to her breast, while the nosegay fell on her
lap. To love! to love! Truly, she loved her child. Was not that
intense love which had pervaded her life till now sufficient for her
wants? It ought to satisfy her; it was so gentle, so tranquil; no
lassitude could put an end to its continuance. Again she pressed her
daughter to her, as though to conjure away thoughts which threatened
to separate them. In the meantime Jeanne surrendered herself to the
shower of kisses. Her eyes moist with tears, she turned her delicate
neck upwards with a coaxing gesture, and pressed her face against her
mother's shoulder. Then she slipped an arm round her waist and thus
remained, very demure, her cheek resting on Helene's bosom. The
perfume of the wall-flowers ascended between them.

For a long time they did not speak; but at length, without moving,
Jeanne asked in a whisper:

"Mamma, you see that rosy-colored dome down there, close to the river;
what is it?"

It was the dome of the Institute, and Helene looked towards it for a
moment as though trying to recall the name.

"I don't know, my love," she answered gently.

The child appeared content with this reply, and silence again fell.
But soon she asked a second question.

"And there, quite near, what beautiful trees are those?" she said,
pointing with her finger towards a corner of the Tuileries garden.

"Those beautiful trees!" said her mother. "On the left, do you mean? I
don't know, my love."

"Ah!" exclaimed Jeanne; and after musing for a little while she added
with a pout: "We know nothing!"

Indeed they knew nothing of Paris. During eighteen months it had lain
beneath their gaze every hour of the day, yet they knew not a stone of
it. Three times only had they gone down into the city; but on
returning home, suffering from terrible headaches born of all the
agitation they had witnessed, they could find in their minds no
distinct memory of anything in all that huge maze of streets.

However, Jeanne at times proved obstinate. "Ah! you can tell me this!"
said she: "What is that glass building which glitters there? It is so
big you must know it."

She was referring to the Palais de l'Industrie. Helene, however,
hesitated.

"It's a railway station," said she. "No, I'm wrong, I think it is a
theatre."

Then she smiled and kissed Jeanne's hair, at last confessing as
before: "I do not know what it is, my love."

So they continued to gaze on Paris, troubling no further to identify
any part of it. It was very delightful to have it there before them,
and yet to know nothing of it; it remained the vast and the unknown.
It was as though they had halted on the threshold of a world which
ever unrolled its panorama before them, but into which they were
unwilling to descend. Paris often made them anxious when it wafted
them a hot, disturbing atmosphere; but that morning it seemed gay and
innocent, like a child, and from its mysterious depths only a breath
of tenderness rose gently to their faces.

Helene took up her book again while Jeanne, clinging to her, still
gazed upon the scene. In the dazzling, tranquil sky no breeze was
stirring. The smoke from the Army Bakehouse ascended perpendicularly
in light cloudlets which vanished far aloft. On a level with the
houses passed vibrating waves of life, waves of all the life pent up
there. The loud voices of the streets softened amidst the sunshine
into a languid murmur. But all at once a flutter attracted Jeanne's
notice. A flock of white pigeons, freed from some adjacent dovecot,
sped through the air in front of the window; with spreading wings like
falling snow, the birds barred the line of view, hiding the immensity
of Paris.

With eyes again dreamily gazing upward, Helene remained plunged in
reverie. She was the Lady Rowena; she loved with the serenity and
intensity of a noble mind. That spring morning, that great, gentle
city, those early wall-flowers shedding their perfume on her lap, had
little by little filled her heart with tenderness.


                             CHAPTER VI.

One morning Helene was arranging her little library, the various books
of which had got out of order during the past few days, when Jeanne
skipped into the room, clapping her hands.

"A soldier, mamma! a soldier!" she cried.

"What? a soldier?" exclaimed her mother. "What do you want, you and
your soldier?"

But the child was in one of her paroxysms of extravagant delight; she
only jumped about the more, repeating: "A soldier! a soldier!" without
deigning to give any further explanation. She had left the door wide
open behind her, and so, as Helene rose, she was astonished to see a
soldier--a very little soldier too--in the ante-room. Rosalie had gone
out, and Jeanne must have been playing on the landing, though strictly
forbidden to do so by her mother.

"What do you want, my lad?" asked Helene.

The little soldier was very much confused on seeing this lady, so
lovely and fair, in her dressing-gown trimmed with lace; he shuffled
one foot to and fro over the floor, bowed, and at last precipitately
stammered: "I beg pardon--excuse--"

But he could get no further, and retreated to the wall, still
shuffling his feet. His retreat was thus cut off, and seeing the lady
awaited his reply with an involuntary smile, he dived into his
right-hand pocket, from which he dragged a blue handkerchief, a knife,
and a hunk of bread. He gazed on each in turn, and thrust them all
back again. Then he turned his attention to the left-hand pocket, from
which were produced a twist of cord, two rusty nails, and some
pictures wrapped in part of a newspaper. All these he pushed back to
their resting-place, and began tapping his thighs with an anxious air.
And again he stammered in bewilderment:

"I beg pardon--excuse--"

But all at once he raised his finger to his nose, and exclaimed with a
loud laugh: "What a fool I am! I remember now!"

He then undid two buttons of his greatcoat, and rummaged in his
breast, into which he plunged his arm up to the elbow. After a time he
drew forth a letter, which he rustled violently before handing to
Helene, as though to shake some dust from it.

"A letter for me! Are you sure?" said she.

On the envelope were certainly inscribed her name and address in a
heavy rustic scrawl, with pothooks and hangers tumbling over one
another. When at last she made it all out, after being repeatedly
baffled by the extraordinary style and spelling, she could not but
smile again. It was a letter from Rosalie's aunt, introducing Zephyrin
Lacour, who had fallen a victim to the conscription, "in spite of two
masses having been said by his reverence." However, as Zephyrin was
Rosalie's "intended" the aunt begged that madame would be so good as
to allow the young folks to see each other on Sundays. In the three
pages which the letter comprised this question was continually
cropping up in the same words, the confusion of the epistle increasing
through the writer's vain efforts to say something she had not said
before. Just above the signature, however, she seemed to have hit the
nail on the head, for she had written: "His reverence gives his
permission"; and had then broken her pen in the paper, making a shower
of blots.

Helene slowly folded the letter. Two or three times, while deciphering
its contents, she had raised her head to glance at the soldier. He
still remained close to the wall, and his lips stirred, as though to
emphasize each sentence in the letter by a slight movement of the
chin. No doubt he knew its contents by heart.

"Then you are Zephyrin Lacour, are you not?" asked Helene.

He began to laugh and wagged his head.

"Come in, my lad; don't stay out there."

He made up his mind to follow her, but he continued standing close to
the door, while Helene sat down. She had scarcely seen him in the
darkness of the ante-room. He must have been just as tall as Rosalie;
a third of an inch less, and he would have been exempted from service.
With red hair, cut very short, he had a round, freckled, beardless
face, with two little eyes like gimlet holes. His new greatcoat, much
too large for him, made him appear still more dumpy, and with his
red-trousered legs wide apart, and his large peaked cap swinging
before him, he presented both a comical and pathetic sight--his plump,
stupid little person plainly betraying the rustic, although he wore a
uniform.

Helene desired to obtain some information from him.

"You left Beauce a week ago?" she asked.

"Yes, madame!"

"And here you are in Paris. I suppose you are not sorry?"

"No, madame."

He was losing his bashfulness, and now gazed all over the room,
evidently much impressed by its blue velvet hangings.

"Rosalie is out," Helene began again, "but she will be here very soon.
Her aunt tells me you are her sweetheart."

To this the little soldier vouchsafed no reply, but hung his head,
laughing awkwardly, and scraping the carpet with the tip of his boot.

"Then you will have to marry her when you leave the army?" Helene
continued questioning.

"Yes, to be sure!" exclaimed he, his face turning very red. "Yes, of
course; we are engaged!" And, won over by the kindly manners of the
lady, he made up his mind to speak out, his fingers still playing with
his cap. "You know it's an old story. When we were quite children, we
used to go thieving together. We used to get switched; oh yes, that's
true! I must tell you that the Lacours and the Pichons lived in the
same lane, and were next-door neighbors. And so Rosalie and myself
were almost brought up together. Then her people died, and her aunt
Marguerite took her in. But she, the minx, was already as strong as a
demon."

He paused, realizing that he was warming up, and asked hesitatingly:

"But perhaps she has told you all this?"

"Yes, yes; but go on all the same," said Helene, who was greatly
amused.

"In short," continued he, "she was awfully strong, though she was no
bigger than a tomtit. It was a treat to see her at her work! How she
did get through it! One day she gave a slap to a friend of mine--by
Jove! such a slap! I had the mark of it on my arm for a week! Yes,
that was the way it all came about. All the gossips declared we must
marry one another. Besides, we weren't ten years old before we had
agreed on that! And, we have stuck to it, madame, we have stuck to
it!"

He placed one hand upon his heart, with fingers wide apart. Helene,
however, had now become very grave. The idea of allowing a soldier in
her kitchen somewhat worried her. His reverence, no doubt, had given
his sanction, but she thought it rather venturesome. There is too much
license in the country, where lovers indulge in all sorts of
pleasantries. So she gave expression to her apprehensions. When
Zephyrin at last gathered her meaning, his first inclination was to
laugh, but his awe for Helene restrained him.

"Oh, madame, madame!" said he, "you don't know her, I can see! I have
received slaps enough from her! Of course young men like to laugh!
isn't that so? Sometimes I pinched her, and she would turn round and
hit me right on the nose. Her aunt's advice always was, 'Look here, my
girl, don't put up with any nonsense!' His reverence, too, interfered
in it, and maybe that had a lot to do with our keeping up
sweethearting. We were to have been married after I had drawn for a
soldier. But it was all my eye! Things turned out badly. Rosalie
declared she would go to service in Paris, to earn a dowry while she
was waiting for me. And so, and so--"

He swung himself about, dangling his cap, now from one hand now from
the other. But still Helene never said a word, and he at last fancied
that she distrusted him. This pained him dreadfully.

"You think, perhaps, that I shall deceive her?" he burst out angrily.
"Even, too, when I tell you we are betrothed? I shall marry her, as
surely as the heaven shines on us. I'm quite ready to pledge my word
in writing. Yes, if you like, I'll write it down for you."

Deep emotion was stirring him. He walked about the room gazing around
in the hope of finding pen and ink. Helene quickly tried to appease
him, but he still went on:

"I would rather sign a paper for you. What harm would it do you? Your
mind would be all the easier with it."

However, just at that moment Jeanne, who had again run away, returned,
jumping and clapping her hands.

"Rosalie! Rosalie! Rosalie!" she chanted in a dancing tune of her own
composition.

Through the open doorway one could hear the panting of the maid as she
climbed up the stairs laden with her basket. Zephyrin started back
into a corner of the room, his mouth wide agape from ear to ear in
silent laughter, and the gimlet holes of his eyes gleaming with rustic
roguery. Rosalie came straight into the room, as was her usual
practice, to show her mistress her morning's purchase of provisions.

"Madame," said she, "I've brought some cauliflowers. Look at them!
Only eighteen sous for two; it isn't dear, is it?"

She held out the basket half open, but on lifting her head noticed
Zephyrin's grinning face. Surprise nailed her to the carpet. Two or
three seconds slipped away; she had doubtless at first failed to
recognize him in his uniform. But then her round eyes dilated, her fat
little face blanched, and her coarse black hair waved in agitation.

"Oh!" she simply said.

But her astonishment was such that she dropped her basket. The
provisions, cauliflowers, onions, apples, rolled on to the carpet.
Jeanne gave a cry of delight, and falling on her knees, began hunting
for the apples, even under the chairs and the wardrobe. Meanwhile
Rosalie, as though paralyzed, never moved, though she repeated:

"What! it's you! What are you doing here? what are you doing here?
Say!"

Then she turned to Helene with the question: "Was it you who let him
come in?"

Zephyrin never uttered a word, but contented himself with winking
slily. Then Rosalie gave vent to her emotion in tears; and, to show
her delight at seeing him again, could hit on nothing better than to
quiz him.

"Oh! go away!" she began, marching up to him. "You look neat and
pretty I must say in that guise of yours! I might have passed you in
the street, and not even have said: 'God bless you.' Oh! you've got a
nice rig-out. You just look as if you had your sentry-box on your
back; and they've cut your hair so short that folks might take you for
the sexton's poodle. Good heavens! what a fright you are; what a
fright!"

Zephyrin, very indignant, now made up his mind to speak. "It's not my
fault, that's sure! Oh! if you joined a regiment we should see a few
things."

They had quite forgotten where they were; everything had vanished--the
room, Helene and Jeanne, who was still gathering the apples together.
With hands folded over her apron, the maid stood upright in front of
the little soldier.

"Is everything all right down there?" she asked.

"Oh, yes, excepting Guignard's cow is ill. The veterinary surgeon came
and said she'd got the dropsy."

"If she's got the dropsy, she's done for. Excepting that, is
everything all right?"

"Yes, yes! The village constable has broken his arm. Old Canivet's
dead. And, by the way, his reverence lost his purse with thirty sous
in it as he was a-coming back from Grandval. But otherwise, things are
all right."

Then silence fell on them, and they looked at one another with
sparkling eyes, their compressed lips slowly making an amorous
grimace. This, indeed, must have been the manner in which they
expressed their love, for they had not even stretched out their hands
in greeting. Rosalie, however, all at once ceased her contemplation,
and began to lament at sight of the vegetables on the floor. Such a
nice mess! and it was he who had caused it all! Madame ought to have
made him wait on the stairs! Scolding away as fast as she could, she
dropped on her knees and began putting the apples, onions, and
cauliflowers into the basket again, much to the disgust of Jeanne, who
would fain have done it all herself. And as she turned, with the
object of betaking herself into her kitchen, never deigning another
look in Zephyrin's direction, Helene, conciliated by the healthy
tranquillity of the lovers, stopped her to say:

"Listen a moment, my girl. Your aunt has asked me to allow this young
man to come and see you on Sundays. He will come in the afternoon, and
you will try not to let your work fall behind too much."

Rosalie paused, merely turning her head. Though she was well pleased,
she preserved her doleful air.

"Oh, madame, he will be such a bother," she declared. But at the same
time she glanced over her shoulder at Zephyrin, and again made an
affectionate grimace at him. The little soldier remained for a minute
stock-still, his mouth agape from ear to ear with its silent laugh.
Then he retired backwards, with his cap against his heart as he
thanked Helene profusely. The door had been shut upon him, when on the
landing he still continued bowing.

"Is that Rosalie's brother, mamma?" asked Jeanne.

Helene was quite embarrassed by the question. She regretted the
permission which she had just given in a sudden impulse of kindliness
which now surprised her. She remained thinking for some seconds, and
then replied, "No, he is her cousin."

"Ah!" said the child gravely.

Rosalie's kitchen looked out on the sunny expanse of Doctor Deberle's
garden. In the summer the branches of the elms swayed in through the
broad window. It was the cheeriest room of the suite, always flooded
with light, which was sometimes so blinding that Rosalie had put up a
curtain of blue cotton stuff, which she drew of an afternoon. The only
complaint she made about the kitchen was its smallness; and indeed it
was a narrow strip of a place, with a cooking-range on the right-hand
side, while on the left were the table and dresser. The various
utensils and furnishings, however, had all been so well arranged that
she had contrived to keep a clear corner beside the window, where she
worked in the evening. She took a pride in keeping everything,
stewpans, kettles, and dishes, wonderfully clean; and so, when the sun
veered round to the window, the walls became resplendent, the copper
vessels sparkled like gold, the tin pots showed bright discs like
silver moons, while the white-and-blue tiles above the stove gleamed
pale in the fiery glow.

On the evening of the ensuing Saturday Helene heard so great a
commotion in the kitchen that she determined to go and see what was
the matter.

"What is it?" asked she: "are you fighting with the furniture?"

"I am scouring, madame," replied Rosalie, who, sweating and
dishevelled, was squatting on the tiled floor and scrubbing it with
all the strength of her arms.

This over, she sponged it with clear water. Never had the kitchen
displayed such perfection of cleanliness. A bride might have slept in
it; all was white as for a wedding. So energetically had she exerted
her hands that it seemed as if table and dresser had been freshly
planed. And the good order of everything was a sight to see; stewpans
and pots taking rank by their size, each on its own hook, even the
frying-pan and gridiron shining brightly without one grimy stain.
Helene looked on for a moment in silence, and then with a smile
disappeared.

Every Saturday afterwards there was a similar furbishing, a tornado of
dust and water lasting for four hours. It was Rosalie's wish to
display her neatness to Zephyrin on the Sunday. That was her reception
day. A single cobweb would have filled her with shame; but when
everything shone resplendent around her she became amiable, and burst
into song. At three o'clock she would again wash her hands and don a
cap gay with ribbons. Then the curtain being drawn halfway, so that
only the subdued light of a boudoir came in, she awaited Zephyrin's
arrival amidst all this primness, through which a pleasant scent of
thyme and laurel was borne.

At half-past three exactly Zephyrin made his appearance; he would walk
about the street until the clocks of the neighborhood had struck the
half-hour. Rosalie listened to the beat of his heavy shoes on the
stairs, and opened the door the moment he halted on the landing. She
had forbidden him to ring the bell. At each visit the same greeting
passed between them.

"Is it you?"

"Yes, it's me!"

And they stood face to face, their eyes sparkling and their lips
compressed. Then Zephyrin followed Rosalie; but there was no admission
vouchsafed to him till she had relieved him of shako and sabre. She
would have none of these in her kitchen; and so the sabre and shako
were hidden away in a cupboard. Next she would make him sit down in
the corner she had contrived near the window, and thenceforth he was
not allowed to budge.

"Sit still there! You can look on, if you like, while I get madame's
dinner ready."

But he rarely appeared with empty hands. He would usually spend the
morning in strolling with some comrades through the woods of Meudon,
lounging lazily about, inhaling the fresh air, which inspired him with
regretful memories of his country home. To give his fingers something
to do he would cut switches, which he tapered and notched with
marvelous figurings, and his steps gradually slackening he would come
to a stop beside some ditch, his shako on the back of his head, while
his eyes remained fixed on the knife with which he was carving the
stick. Then, as he could never make up his mind to discard his
switches, he carried them in the afternoon to Rosalie, who would throw
up her hands, and exclaim that they would litter her kitchen. But the
truth was, she carefully preserved them; and under her bed was
gathered a bundle of these switches, of all sorts and sizes.

One day he made his appearance with a nest full of eggs, which he had
secreted in his shako under the folds of a handkerchief. Omelets made
from the eggs of wild birds, so he declared, were very nice--a
statement which Rosalie received with horror; the nest, however, was
preserved and laid away in company with the switches. But Zephyrin's
pockets were always full to overflowing. He would pull curiosities
from them, transparent pebbles found on the banks of the Seine, pieces
of old iron, dried berries, and all sorts of strange rubbish, which
not even a rag-picker would have cared for. His chief love, however,
was for pictures; as he sauntered along he would seize on all the
stray papers that had served as wrappers for chocolate or cakes of
soap, and on which were black men, palm-trees, dancing-girls, or
clusters of roses. The tops of old broken boxes, decorated with
figures of languid, blonde ladies, the glazed prints and silver paper
which had once contained sugar-sticks and had been thrown away at the
neighboring fairs, were great windfalls that filled his bosom with
pride. All such booty was speedily transferred to his pockets, the
choicer articles being enveloped in a fragment of an old newspaper.
And on Sunday, if Rosalie had a moment's leisure between the
preparation of a sauce and the tending of the joint, he would exhibit
his pictures to her. They were hers if she cared for them; only as the
paper around them was not always clean he would cut them out, a
pastime which greatly amused him. Rosalie got angry, as the shreds of
paper blew about even into her plates; and it was a sight to see with
what rustic cunning he would at last gain possession of her scissors.
At times, however, in order to get rid of him, she would give them up
without any asking.

Meanwhile some brown sauce would be simmering on the fire. Rosalie
watched it, wooden spoon in hand; while Zephyrin, his head bent and
his breadth of shoulder increased by his epaulets, continued cutting
out the pictures. His head was so closely shaven that the skin of his
skull could be seen; and the yellow collar of his tunic yawned widely
behind, displaying his sunburnt neck. For a quarter of an hour at a
time neither would utter a syllable. When Zephyrin raised his head, he
watched Rosalie while she took some flour, minced some parsley, or
salted and peppered some dish, his eyes betraying the while intense
interest. Then, at long intervals, a few words would escape him:

"By Jove! that does smell nice!"

The cook, busily engaged, would not vouchsafe an immediate reply; but
after a lengthy silence she perhaps exclaimed: "You see, it must
simmer properly."

Their talk never went beyond that. They no longer spoke of their
native place even. When a reminiscence came to them a word sufficed,
and they chuckled inwardly the whole afternoon. This was pleasure
enough, and by the time Rosalie turned Zephyrin out of doors both of
them had enjoyed ample amusement.

"Come, you will have to go! I must wait on madame," said she; and
restoring him his shako and sabre, she drove him out before her,
afterwards waiting on madame with cheeks flushed with happiness; while
he walked back to barracks, dangling his arms, and almost intoxicated
by the goodly odors of thyme and laurel which still clung to him.

During his earlier visits Helene judged it right to look after them.
She popped in sometimes quite suddenly to give an order, and there was
Zephyrin always in his corner, between the table and the window, close
to the stone filter, which forced him to draw in his legs. The moment
madame made her appearance he rose and stood upright, as though
shouldering arms, and if she spoke to him his reply never went beyond
a salute and a respectful grunt. Little by little Helene grew somewhat
easier; she saw that her entrance did not disturb them, and that their
faces only expressed the quiet content of patient lovers.

At this time, too, Rosalie seemed even more wide awake than Zephyrin.
She had already been some months in Paris, and under its influence was
fast losing her country rust, though as yet she only knew three
streets--the Rue de Passy, the Rue Franklin, and the Rue Vineuse.
Zephyrin, soldier though he was, remained quite a lubber. As Rosalie
confided to her mistress, he became more of a blockhead every day. In
the country he had been much sharper. But, added she, it was the
uniform's fault; all the lads who donned the uniform became sad dolts.
The fact is, his change of life had quite muddled Zephyrin, who, with
his staring round eyes and solemn swagger, looked like a goose.
Despite his epaulets he retained his rustic awkwardness and heaviness;
the barracks had taught him nothing as yet of the fine words and
victorious attitudes of the ideal Parisian fire-eater. "Yes, madame,"
Rosalie would wind up by saying, "you don't need to disturb yourself;
it is not in him to play any tricks!"

Thus the girl began to treat him in quite a motherly way. While
dressing her meat on the spit she would preach him a sermon, full of
good counsel as to the pitfalls he should shun; and he in all
obedience vigorously nodded approval of each injunction. Every Sunday
he had to swear to her that he had attended mass, and that he had
solemnly repeated his prayers morning and evening. She strongly
inculcated the necessity of tidiness, gave him a brush down whenever
he left her, stitched on a loose button of his tunic, and surveyed him
from head to foot to see if aught were amiss in his appearance. She
also worried herself about his health, and gave him cures for all
sorts of ailments. In return for her kindly care Zephyrin professed
himself anxious to fill her filter for her; but this proposal was
long-rejected, through the fear that he might spill the water. One
day, however, he brought up two buckets without letting a drop of
their contents fall on the stairs, and from that time he replenished
the filter every Sunday. He would also make himself useful in other
ways, doing all the heavy work and was extremely handy in running to
the greengrocer's for butter, had she forgotten to purchase any. At
last, even, he began to share in the duties of kitchen-maid. First he
was permitted to peel the vegetables; later on the mincing was
assigned to him. At the end of six weeks, though still forbidden to
touch the sauces, he watched over them with wooden spoon in hand.
Rosalie had fairly made him her helpmate, and would sometimes burst
out laughing as she saw him, with his red trousers and yellow collar,
working busily before the fire with a dishcloth over his arm, like
some scullery-servant.

One Sunday Helene betook herself to the kitchen. Her slippers deadened
the sound of her footsteps, and she reached the threshold unheard by
either maid or soldier. Zephyrin was seated in his corner over a basin
of steaming broth. Rosalie, with her back turned to the door, was
occupied in cutting some long sippets of bread for him.

"There, eat away, my dear!" she said. "You walk too much; it is that
which makes you feel so empty! There! have you enough? Do you want any
more?"

Thus speaking, she watched him with a tender and anxious look. He,
with his round, dumpy figure, leaned over the basin, devouring a
sippet with each mouthful of broth. His face, usually yellow with
freckles, was becoming quite red with the warmth of the steam which
circled round him.

"Heavens!" he muttered, "what grand juice! What do you put in it?"

"Wait a minute," she said; "if you like leeks--"

However, as she turned round she suddenly caught sight of her
mistress. She raised an exclamation, and then, like Zephyrin, seemed
turned to stone. But a moment afterwards she poured forth a torrent of
excuses.

"It's my share, madame--oh, it's my share! I would not have taken any
more soup, I swear it! I told him, 'If you would like to have my bowl
of soup, you can have it.' Come, speak up, Zephyrin; you know that was
how it came about!"

The mistress remained silent, and the servant grew uneasy, thinking
she was annoyed. Then in quavering tones she continued:

"Oh, he was dying of hunger, madame; he stole a raw carrot for me!
They feed him so badly! And then, you know, he had walked goodness
knows where all along the river-side. I'm sure, madame, you would have
told me yourself to give him some broth!"

Gazing at the little soldier, who sat with his mouth full, not daring
to swallow, Helene felt she could no longer remain stern. So she
quietly said:

"Well, well, my girl, whenever the lad is hungry you must keep him to
dinner--that's all. I give you permission"

Face to face with them, she had again felt within her that tender
feeling which once already had banished all thoughts of rigor from her
mind. They were so happy in that kitchen! The cotton curtain, drawn
half-way, gave free entry to the sunset beams. The burnished copper
pans set the end wall all aglow, lending a rosy tint to the twilight
lingering in the room. And there, in the golden shade, the lovers'
little round faces shone out, peaceful and radiant, like moons. Their
love was instinct with such calm certainty that no neglect was even
shown in keeping the kitchen utensils in their wonted good order. It
blossomed amidst the savory odors of the cooking-stove, which
heightened their appetites and nourished their hearts.

"Mamma," asked Jeanne, one evening after considerable meditation, "why
is it Rosalie's cousin never kisses her?"

"And why should they kiss one another?" asked Helene in her turn.
"They will kiss on their birthdays."


                             CHAPTER VII.

The soup had just been served on the following Tuesday evening, when
Helene, after listening attentively, exclaimed:

"What a downpour! Don't you hear? My poor friends, you will get
drenched to-night!"

"Oh, it's only a few drops," said the Abbe quietly, though his old
cassock was already wet about the shoulders.

"I've got a good distance to go," said Monsieur Rambaud. "But I shall
return home on foot all the same; I like it. Besides, I have my
umbrella."

Jeanne was reflecting as she gazed gravely on her last spoonful of
vermicelli; and at last her thoughts took shape in words: "Rosalie
said you wouldn't come because of the wretched weather; but mamma said
you would come. You are very kind; you always come."

A smile lit up all their faces. Helene addressed a nod of affectionate
approval to the two brothers. Out of doors the rain was falling with a
dull roar, and violent gusts of wind beat angrily against the
window-shutters. Winter seemed to have returned. Rosalie had carefully
drawn the red repp curtains; and the small, cosy dining-room,
illumined by the steady light of the white hanging-lamp, looked,
amidst the buffeting of the storm, a picture of pleasant, affectionate
intimacy. On the mahogany sideboard some china reflected the quiet
light; and amidst all this indoor peacefulness the four diners
leisurely conversed, awaiting the good pleasure of the servant-maid,
as they sat round the table, where all, if simple, was exquisitely
clean.

"Oh! you are waiting; so much the worse!" said Rosalie familiarly, as
she entered with a dish. "These are fillets of sole _au gratin_ for
Monsieur Rambaud; they require to be lifted just at the last moment."

Monsieur Rambaud pretended to be a gourmand, in order to amuse Jeanne,
and give pleasure to Rosalie, who was very proud of her
accomplishments as a cook. He turned towards her with the question:
"By the way, what have you got for us to-day? You are always bringing
in some surprise or other when I am no longer hungry."

"Oh," said she in reply, "there are three dishes as usual, and no
more. After the sole you will have a leg of mutton and then some
Brussels sprouts. Yes, that's the truth; there will be nothing else."

From the corner of his eye Monsieur Rambaud glanced towards Jeanne.
The child was boiling over with glee, her hands over her mouth to
restrain her laughter, while she shook her head, as though to
insinuate that the maid was deceiving them. Monsieur Rambaud thereupon
clacked his tongue as though in doubt, and Rosalie pretended great
indignation.

"You don't believe me because Mademoiselle Jeanne laughs so," said
she. "Ah, very well! believe what you like. Stint yourself, and see if
you won't have a craving for food when you get home."

When the maid had left the room, Jeanne, laughing yet more loudly, was
seized with a longing to speak out.

"You are really too greedy!" she began. "I myself went into the
kitchen--" However, she left her sentence unfinished: "No, no, I won't
tell; it isn't right, is it, mamma? There's nothing more--nothing at
all! I only laughed to cheat you."

This interlude was re-enacted every Tuesday with the same unvarying
success. Probably. [_Nodding._] Good-night. Good morning. [_He
slouches away to the door on the left and there stops, listening.
There is the sound of people approaching, singing uproariously and
shouting and laughing._] Hullo!

LUIGI.

[_At his elbow._] Ho, ho, ho, ho!

[_LUIGI goes out into the corridor and JEYES retreats behind the
counter.

The noise increases and presently FULKERSON rushes in, flourishing his
arms madly. He is followed by GLYNN and SHIRLEY who are carrying
LILY upon their interlocked hands, and by PALK who is helping to
support her.

Then come HENEAGE and NITA, GRIMWOOD and DAPHNE, TAVISH and FLO, VON
RETTENMAYER and ENID, DE CASTRO and GABRIELLE, ROPER and MRS. STIDULPH,
FARNCOMBE and JIMMIE, BLAND and EVANGELINE, COOLING and SYBIL, and
SMYTHE and OLGA. Singing the chorus of the "Mind the Paint"
song, and dancing to it wildly, they circle the saloon twice, go
out at the right-hand door at the back, return at the door on the
left, and finally disappear through the double-door and along the
landing.

The waiters, who have brought up the rear of the procession, gather,
with LUIGI, in the left-hand corner, clapping their hands, and STIDULPH
returns, entering at the right-hand door at the back._
LILY.

[_Waving her bouquet and shrieking with laughter._] Ha, ha, ha, ha!

Don't drop me! Don't drop me!

HENEAGE AND GRIMWOOD.

[_Yelling._] Whoop! Whoop!

FULKERSON.

[_Deliriously, endeavouring to stand upon his head._] Wh-o-o-op!

JIMMIE.

[_Breaking from the rank and jumping on to the further settee--
singing._] "Mind the paint! Mind the paint! A girl is not a
sinner just because she's not a saint!----"
LILY.

Ha, ha, ha! You'll drop me! Oh----!

[_As the procession passes out of sight, followed by LUIGI and the
waiters, JEYES departs at the door on the left and STIDULPH once more
goes to the counter and lights a cigarette._
END OF THE SECOND ACT.

THE THIRD ACT

_The scene is LILY'S boudoir-- a room upon the second floor of her house,
adjoining her bedroom. The decorations, though delicate, are gay,
with a good deal of pink in them._
_In the wall facing the spectator are two doors, one on the left,
the other in the centre. The left-hand door opens into the room
from the landing, where the staircase is shown; the centre door
admits to the bedroom. In the right-hand wall there are two
sash-windows giving a view of the tops of trees growing in a square;
in the opposite wall, the grate hidden by a low, painted screen,
is the fireplace._
_A prettily designed "fitment" runs along the left-hand wall and
the further wall, taking in the fireplace and doors as part of its
scheme.
On either side of the fireplace there is a cupboard with drawers
beneath it; between the door on the left and the door in the centre
is a similar cupboard; and on the right of the centre door, extending
to the right-hand wall, there is a wardrobe with sliding doors. The
cupboard doors are glazed and curtained in pink silk._
_In the middle of the room, a little to the right, there is a large
and comfortable settee, and on the left of the settee is a table
littered with books, magazines, a scent-atomizer, a small silver-framed
mirror, a case of manicure instruments, a box of cigarettes and a
match-stand, and other odds and ends.Still another surprise!"

The surprise of the day was some vanilla cream, one of the cook's
triumphs. And thus it was a sight to see her broad, silent grin, as
she deposited her burden on the table. Jeanne shouted and clapped her
hands.

"I knew it, I knew it! I saw the eggs in the kitchen!"

"But I have no more appetite," declared Monsieur Rambaud, with a look
of despair. "I could not eat any of it!"

Thereupon Rosalie became grave, full of suppressed wrath. With a
dignified air, she remarked: "Oh, indeed! A cream which I made
specially for you! Well, well! just try not to eat any of it--yes,
try!"

He had to give in and accept a large helping of the cream. Meanwhile
the Abbe remained thoughtful. He rolled up his napkin and rose before
the dessert had come to an end, as was frequently his custom. For a
little while he walked about, with his head hanging down; and when
Helene in her turn quitted the table, he cast at Monsieur Rambaud a
look of intelligence, and led the young woman into the bedroom.[*] The
door being left open behind them, they could almost immediately
afterwards be heard conversing together, though the words which they
slowly exchanged were indistinguishable.

[*] Helene's frequent use of her bedroom may seem strange to the
    English reader who has never been in France. But in the _petite
    bourgeoisie_ the bedchamber is often the cosiest of the whole
    suite of rooms, and whilst indoors, when not superintending her
    servant, it is in the bedroom that madame will spend most of her
    time. Here, too, she will receive friends of either sex, and, the
    French being far less prudish than ourselves, nobody considers
    that there is anything wrong or indelicate in the practice.

"Oh, do make haste!" said Jeanne to Monsieur Rambaud, who seemed
incapable of finishing a biscuit. "I want to show you my work."

However, he evinced no haste, though when Rosalie began to clear the
table it became necessary for him to leave his chair.

"Wait a little! wait a little!" he murmured, as the child strove to
drag him towards the bedroom, And, overcome with embarrassment and
timidity, he retreated from the doorway. Then, as the Abbe raised his
voice, such sudden weakness came over him that he had to sit down
again at the table. From his pocket he drew a newspaper.

"Now," said he, "I'm going to make you a little coach."

Jeanne at once abandoned her intention of entering the adjoining room.
Monsieur Rambaud always amazed her by his skill in turning a sheet of
paper into all sorts of playthings. Chickens, boats, bishops' mitres,
carts, and cages, were all evolved under his fingers. That day,
however, so tremulous were his hands that he was unable to perfect
anything. He lowered his head whenever the faintest sound came from
the adjacent room. Nevertheless, Jeanne took interest in watching him,
and leaned on the table at his side.

"Now," said she, "you must make a chicken to harness to the carriage."

Meantime, within the bedroom, Abbe Jouve remained standing in the
shadow thrown by the lamp-shade upon the floor. Helene had sat down in
her usual place in front of the round table; and, as on Tuesdays she
refrained from ceremony with her friends, she had taken up her
needlework, and, in the circular glare of light, only her white hands
could be seen sewing a child's cap.

"Jeanne gives you no further worry, does she?" asked the Abbe.

Helene shook her head before making a reply.

"Doctor Deberle seems quite satisfied," said she. "But the poor
darling is still very nervous. Yesterday I found her in her chair in a
fainting fit."

"She needs exercise," resumed the priest. "You stay indoors far too
much; you should follow the example of other folks and go about more
than you do."

He ceased speaking, and silence followed. He now, without doubt, had
what he had been seeking,--a suitable inlet for his discourse; but the
moment for speaking came, and he was still communing with himself.
Taking a chair, he sat down at Helene's side.

"Hearken to me, my dear child," he began. "For some time past I have
wished to talk with you seriously. The life you are leading here can
entail no good results. A convent existence such as yours is not
consistent with your years; and this abandonment of worldly pleasures
is as injurious to your child as it is to yourself. You are risking
many dangers--dangers to health, ay, and other dangers, too."

Helene raised her head with an expression of astonishment. "What do
you mean, my friend?" she asked.

"Dear me! I know the world but little," continued the priest, with
some slight embarrassment, "yet I know very well that a woman incurs
great risk when she remains without a protecting arm. To speak
frankly, you keep to your own company too much, and this seclusion in
which you hide yourself is not healthful, believe me. A day must come
when you will suffer from it."

"But I make no complaint; I am very happy as I am," she exclaimed with
spirit.

The old priest gently shook his large head.

"Yes, yes, that is all very well. You feel completely happy. I know
all that. Only, on the downhill path of a lonely, dreamy life, you
never know where you are going. Oh! I understand you perfectly; you
are incapable of doing any wrong. But sooner or later you might lose
your peace of mind. Some morning, when it is too late, you will find
that blank which you now leave in your life filled by some painful
feeling not to be confessed."

As she sat there in the shadow, a blush crimsoned Helene's face. Had
the Abbe, then, read her heart? Was he aware of this restlessness
which was fast possessing her--this heart-trouble which thrilled her
every-day life, and the existence of which she had till now been
unwilling to admit? Her needlework fell on her lap. A sensation of
weakness pervaded her, and she awaited from the priest something like
a pious complicity which would allow her to confess and particularize
the vague feelings which she buried in her innermost being. As all was
known to him, it was for him to question her, and she would strive to
answer.

"I leave myself in your hands, my friend," she murmured. "You are well
aware that I have always listened to you."

The priest remained for a moment silent, and then slowly and solemnly
said:

"My child, you must marry again."

She remained speechless, with arms dangling, in a stupor this counsel
brought upon her. She awaited other words, failing, as it were, to
understand him. And the Abbe continued putting before her the
arguments which should incline her towards marriage.

"Remember, you are still young. You must not remain longer in this
out-of-the-way corner of Paris, scarcely daring to go out, and wholly
ignorant of the world. You must return to the every-day life of
humanity, lest in the future you should bitterly regret your
loneliness. You yourself have no idea how the effects of your
isolation are beginning to tell on you, but your friends remark your
pallor, and feel uneasy."

With each sentence he paused, in the hope that she might break in and
discuss his proposition. But no; she sat there as if lifeless,
seemingly benumbed with astonishment.

"No doubt you have a child," he resumed. "That is always a delicate
matter to surmount. Still, you must admit that even in Jeanne's
interest a husband's arm would be of great advantage. Of course, we
must find some one good and honorable, who would be a true father--"

However, she did not let him finish. With violent revolt and repulsion
she suddenly spoke out: "No, no; I will not! Oh, my friend, how can
you advise me thus? Never, do you hear, never!"

Her whole heart was rising; she herself was frightened by the violence
of her refusal. The priest's proposal had stirred up that dim nook in
her being whose secret she avoided reading, and, by the pain she
experienced, she at last understood all the gravity of her ailment.
With the open, smiling glance of the priest still bent on her, she
plunged into contention.

"No, no; I do not wish it! I love nobody!"

And, as he still gazed at her, she imagined he could read her lie on
her face. She blushed and stammered:

"Remember, too, I only left off my mourning a fortnight ago. No, it
could not be!"

"My child!" quietly said the priest, "I thought over this a great deal
before speaking. I am sure your happiness is wrapped up in it. Calm
yourself; you need never act against your own wishes."

The conversation came to a sudden stop. Helene strove to keep pent
within her bosom the angry protests that were rushing to her lips. She
resumed her work, and, with head lowered, contrived to put in a few
stitches. And amid the silence, Jeanne's shrill voice could be heard
in the dining-room.

"People don't put a chicken to a carriage; it ought to be a horse! You
don't know how to make a horse, do you?"

"No, my dear; horses are too difficult," said Monsieur Rambaud. "But
if you like I'll show you how to make carriages."

This was always the fashion in which their game came to an end.
Jeanne, all ears and eyes, watched her kindly playfellow folding the
paper into a multitude of little squares, and afterwards she followed
his example; but she would make mistakes and then stamp her feet in
vexation. However, she already knew how to manufacture boats and
bishops' mitres.

"You see," resumed Monsieur Rambaud patiently, "you make four corners
like that; then you turn them back--"

With his ears on the alert, he must during the last moment have heard
some of the words spoken in the next room; for his poor hands were now
trembling more and more, while his tongue faltered, so that he could
only half articulate his sentences.

Helene, who was unable to quiet herself, now began the conversation
anew. "Marry again! And whom, pray?" she suddenly asked the priest, as
she laid her work down on the table. "You have some one in view, have
you not?"

Abbe Jouve rose from his chair and stalked slowly up and down. Without
halting, he nodded assent.

"Well! tell me who he is," she said.

For a moment he lingered before her erect, then, shrugging his
shoulders, said: "What's the good, since you decline?"

"No matter, I want to know," she replied. "How can I make up my mind
when I don't know?"

He did not answer her immediately, but remained standing there, gazing
into her face. A somewhat sad smile wreathed his lips. At last he
exclaimed, almost in a whisper: "What! have you not guessed?"

No, she could not guess. She tried to do so, with increasing wonder,
whereupon he made a simple sign--nodding his head in the direction of
the dining-room.

"He!" she exclaimed, in a muffled tone, and a great seriousness fell
upon her. She no longer indulged in violent protestations; only sorrow
and surprise remained visible on her face. She sat for a long time
plunged in thought, her gaze turned to the floor. Truly, she had never
dreamed of such a thing; and yet, she found nothing in it to object
to. Monsieur Rambaud was the only man in whose hand she could put her
own honestly and without fear. She knew his innate goodness; she did
not smile at his _bourgeois_ heaviness. But despite all her regard for
him, the idea that he loved her chilled her to the soul.

Meanwhile the Abbe had again begun walking from one to the other end
of the room, and on passing the dining-room door he gently called
Helene. "Come here and look!"

She rose and did as he wished.

Monsieur Rambaud had ended by seating Jeanne in his own chair; and he,
who had at first been leaning against the table, had now slipped down
at the child's feet. He was on his knees before her, encircling her
with one of his arms. On the table was the carriage drawn by the
chicken, with some boats, boxes, and bishops' mitres.

"Now, do you love me well?" he asked her. "Tell me that you love me
well!"

"Of course, I love you well; you know it."

He stammered and trembled, as though he were making some declaration
of love.

"And what would you say if I asked you to let me stay here with you
always?"

"Oh, I should be quite pleased. We would play together, wouldn't we?
That would be good fun."

"Ah, but you know I should always be here."

Jeanne had taken up a boat which she was twisting into a gendarme's
hat. "You would need to get mamma's leave," she murmured.

By this reply all his fears were again stirred into life. His fate was
being decided.

"Of course," said he. "But if mamma gave me leave, would you say yes,
too?"

Jeanne, busy finishing her gendarme's hat, sang out in a rapturous
strain: "I would say yes! yes! yes! I would say yes! yes! yes! Come,
look how pretty my hat is!"

Monsieur Rambaud, with tears in his eyes, rose to his knees and kissed
her, while she threw her arms round his neck. He had entrusted the
asking of Helene's consent to his brother, whilst he himself sought to
secure that of Jeanne.

"You see," said the priest, with a smile, "the child is quite
content."

Helene still retained her grave air, and made no further inquiry. The
Abbe, however, again eloquently took up his plea, and emphasized his
brother's good qualities. Was he not a treasure-trove of a father for
Jeanne? She was well acquainted with him; in trusting him she gave no
hostages to fortune. Then, as she still remained silent, the Abbe with
great feeling and dignity declared that in the step he had taken he
had not thought of his brother, but of her and her happiness.

"I believe you; I know how you love me," Helene promptly answered.
"Wait; I want to give your brother his answer in your presence."

The clock struck ten. Monsieur Rambaud made his entry into the
bedroom. With outstretched hands she went to meet him.

"I thank you for your proposal, my friend," said she. "I am very
grateful; and you have done well in speaking--"

She was gazing calmly into his face, holding his big hand in her
grasp. Trembling all over, he dared not lift his eyes.

"Yet I must have time to consider," she resumed. "You will perhaps
have to give me a long time."

"Oh! as long as you like--six months, a year, longer if you please,"
exclaimed he with a light heart, well pleased that she had not
forthwith sent him about his business.

His excitement brought a faint smile to her face. "But I intend that
we shall still continue friends," said she. "You will come here as
usual, and simply give me your promise to remain content till I speak
to you about the matter. Is that understood?"

He had withdrawn his hand, and was now feverishly hunting for his hat,
signifying his acquiescence by a continuous bobbing of the head. Then,
at the moment of leaving, he found his voice once more.

"Listen to me," said he. "You now know that I am there--don't you?
Well, whatever happens I shall always be there. That's all the Abbe
should have told you. In ten years, if you like; you will only have to
make a sign. I shall obey you!"

And it was he who a last time took Helene's hand and gripped it as
though he would crush it. On the stairs the two brothers turned round
with the usual good-bye:

"Till next Tuesday!"

"Yes, Tuesday," answered Helene.

On returning to her room a fresh downfall of rain beating against the
shutters filled her with grave concern. Good heavens! what an
obstinate downpour, and how wet her poor friends would get! She opened
the window and looked down into the street. Sudden gusts of wind were
making the gaslights flicker, and amid the shiny puddles and
shimmering rain she could see the round figure of Monsieur Rambaud, as
he went off with dancing gait, exultant in the darkness, seemingly
caring nothing for the drenching torrent.

Jeanne, however, was very grave, for she had overheard some of her
playfellow's last words. She had just taken off her little boots, and
was sitting on the edge of the bed in her nightgown, in deep
cogitation. On entering the room to kiss her, her mother discovered
her thus.

"Good-night, Jeanne; kiss me."

Then, as the child did not seem to hear her, Helene sank down in front
of her, and clasped her round the waist, asking her in a whisper: "So
you would be glad if he came to live with us?"

The question seemed to bring no surprise to Jeanne. She was doubtless
pondering over this very matter. She slowly nodded her head.

"But you know," said her mother, "he would be always beside us--night
and day, at table--everywhere!"

A great trouble dawned in the clear depths of the child's eyes. She
nestled her cheek against her mother's shoulder, kissed her neck, and
finally, with a quiver, whispered in her ear: "Mamma, would he kiss
you?"

A crimson flush rose to Helene's brow. In her first surprise she was
at a loss to answer, but at last she murmured: "He would be the same
as your father, my darling!"

Then Jeanne's little arms tightened their hold, and she burst into
loud and grievous sobbing. "Oh! no, no!" she cried chokingly. "I don't
want it then! Oh! mamma, do please tell him I don't. Go and tell him I
won't have it!"

She gasped, and threw herself on her mother's bosom, covering her with
tears and kisses. Helene did her utmost to appease her, assuring her
she would make it all right; but Jeanne was bent on having a definite
answer at once.

"Oh! say no! say no, darling mother! You know it would kill me. Never!
Oh, never! Eh?"

"Well, I'll promise it will never be. Now, be good and lie down."

For some minutes longer the child, speechless with emotion, clasped
her mother in her arms, as though powerless to tear herself away, and
intent on guarding her against all who might seek to take her from
her. After some time Helene was able to put her to bed; but for a part
of the night she had to watch beside her. Jeanne would start violently
in her sleep, and every half-hour her eyes would open to make sure of
her mother's presence, and then she would doze off again, with her
lips pressed to Helene's hand.


                            CHAPTER VIII.

It was a month of exquisite mildness. The April sun had draped the
garden in tender green, light and delicate as lace. Twining around the
railing were the slender shoots of the lush clematis, while the
budding honeysuckle filled the air with its sweet, almost sugary
perfume. On both sides of the trim and close-shaven lawn red geraniums
and white stocks gave the flower beds a glow of color; and at the end
of the garden the clustering elms, hiding the adjacent houses, reared
the green drapery of their branches, whose little leaves trembled with
the least breath of air.

For more than three weeks the sky had remained blue and cloudless. It
was like a miraculous spring celebrating the new youth and blossoming
that had burst into life in Helene's heart. Every afternoon she went
down into the garden with Jeanne. A place was assigned her against the
first elm on the right. A chair was ready for her; and on the morrow
she would still find on the gravel walk the scattered clippings of
thread that had fallen from her work on the previous afternoon.

"You are quite at home," Madame Deberle repeated every evening,
displaying for Helene one of those affections of hers, which usually
lasted some six months. "You will come to-morrow, of course; and try
to come earlier, won't you?"

Helene, in truth, felt thoroughly at her ease there. By degrees she
became accustomed to this nook of greenery, and looked forward to her
afternoon visit with the longing of a child. What charmed her most in
this garden was the exquisite trimness of the lawn and flower beds.
Not a single weed interfered with the symmetry of the plants. Helene
spent her time there, calmly and restfully. The neatly laid out flower
beds, and the network of ivy, the withered leaves of which were
carefully removed by the gardener, could exercise no disturbing
influence on her spirit. Seated beneath the deep shadow of the
elm-trees, in this quiet spot which Madame Deberle's presence perfumed
with a faint odor of musk, she could have imagined herself in a
drawing-room; and only the sight of the blue sky, when she raised her
head, reminded her that she was out-of-doors, and prompted her to
breathe freely.

Often, without seeing a soul, the two women would thus pass the
afternoon. Jeanne and Lucien played at their feet. There would be long
intervals of silence, and then Madame Deberle, who disliked reverie,
would chatter for hours, quite satisfied with the silent acquiescence
of Helene, and rattling off again if the other even so much as nodded.
She would tell endless stories concerning the ladies of her
acquaintance, get up schemes for parties during the coming winter,
vent magpie opinions on the day's news and the society trifling which
filled her narrow brain, the whole intermingled with affectionate
outbursts over the children, and sentimental remarks on the delights
of friendship. Helene allowed her to squeeze her hands. She did not
always lend an attentive ear; but, in this atmosphere of unceasing
tenderness, she showed herself greatly touched by Juliette's caresses,
and pronounced her to be a perfect angel of kindness.

Sometimes, to Madame Deberle's intense delight, a visitor would drop
in. Since Easter she had ceased receiving on Saturdays, as was usual
at this time of the year. But she dreaded solitude, and a casual
unceremonious visit paid her in her garden gave her the greatest
pleasure. She was now busily engaged in settling on the watering-place
where she would spend her holiday in August. To every visitor she
retailed the same talk; discoursed on the fact that her husband would
not accompany her to the seaside; and then poured forth a flood of
questions, as she could not make up her mind where to go. She did not
ask for herself, however; no, it was all on Lucien's account. When the
foppish youth Malignon came he seated himself astride a rustic chair.
He, indeed, loathed the country; one must be mad, he would declare, to
exile oneself from Paris with the idea of catching influenza beside
the sea. However, he took part in the discussions on the merits of the
various watering-places, all of which were horrid, said he; apart from
Trouville there was not a place worthy of any consideration whatever.
Day after day Helene listened to the same talk, yet without feeling
wearied; indeed, she even derived pleasure from this monotony, which
lulled her into dreaming of one thing only. The last day of the month
came, and still Madame Deberle had not decided where to go.

As Helene was leaving one evening, her friend said to her: "I must go
out to-morrow; but that needn't prevent you from coming down here.
Wait for me; I shan't be back late."

Helene consented; and, alone in the garden, there spent a delicious
afternoon. Nothing stirred, save the sparrows fluttering in the trees
overhead. This little sunny nook entranced her, and, from that day,
her happiest afternoons were those on which her friend left her alone.

A closer intimacy was springing up between the Deberles and herself.
She dined with them like a friend who is pressed to stay when the
family sits down to table; when she lingered under the elm-trees and
Pierre came down to announce dinner, Juliette would implore her to
remain, and she sometimes yielded. They were family dinners, enlivened
by the noisy pranks of the children. Doctor Deberle and Helene seemed
good friends, whose sensible and somewhat reserved natures sympathized
well. Thus it was that Juliette frequently declared: "Oh, you two
would get on capitally! Your composure exasperates me!"

The doctor returned from his round of visits at about six o'clock
every evening. He found the ladies in the garden, and sat down beside
them. On the earlier occasions, Helene started up with the idea of
leaving her friends to themselves, but her sudden departure displeased
Juliette greatly, and she now perforce had to remain. She became
almost a member of this family, which appeared to be so closely
united. On the doctor's arrival his wife held up her cheek to him,
always with the same loving gesture, and he kissed her; then, as
Lucien began clambering up his legs, he kept him on his knees while
chatting away. The child would clap his tiny hands on his father's
mouth, pull his hair, and play so many pranks that in the upshot he
had to be put down, and told to go and play with Jeanne. The fun would
bring a smile to Helene's face, and she neglected her work for the
moment, to gaze at father, mother, and child. The kiss of the husband
and wife gave her no pain, and Lucien's tricks filled her with soft
emotion. It might have been said that she had found a haven of refuge
amidst this family's quiet content.

Meanwhile the sun would sink into the west, gilding the tree tops with
its rays. Serene peacefulness fell from the grey heavens. Juliette,
whose curiosity was insatiable, even in company with strangers,
plagued her husband with ceaseless questions, and often lacked the
patience to wait his replies. "Where have you been? What have you been
about?"

Thereupon he would describe his round of visits to them, repeat any
news of what was going on, or speak of some cloth or piece of
furniture he had caught a glimpse of in a shop window. While he was
speaking, his eyes often met those of Helene, but neither turned away
the head. They gazed into each other's face for a moment with grave
looks, as though heart were being revealed to heart; but after a
little they smiled and their eyes dropped. Juliette, fidgety and
sprightly, though she would often assume a studied languor, allowed
them no opportunity for lengthy conversation, but burst with her
interruptions into any talk whatever. Still they exchanged a few
words, quite commonplace, slowly articulated sentences which seemed to
assume a deep meaning, and to linger in the air after having been
spoken. They approvingly punctuated each word the other uttered, as
though they had thoughts in common. It was an intimate sympathy that
was growing up between them, springing from the depths of their
beings, and becoming closer even when they were silent. Sometimes
Juliette, rather ashamed of monopolizing all the talk, would cease her
magpie chatter.

"Dear me!" she would exclaim, "you are getting bored, aren't you? We
are talking of matters which can have no possible interest for you."

"Oh, never mind me," Helene answered blithely. "I never tire. It is a
pleasure to me to listen and say nothing."

She was uttering no untruth. It was during the lengthy periods of
silence that she experienced most delight in being there. With her
head bent over her work, only lifting her eyes at long intervals to
exchange with the doctor those interminable looks that riveted their
hearts the closer, she willingly surrendered herself to the egotism of
her emotion. Between herself and him, she now confessed it, there
existed a secret sentiment, a something very sweet--all the sweeter
because no one in the world shared it with them. But she kept her
secret with a tranquil mind, her sense of honor quite unruffled, for
no thought of evil ever disturbed her. How good he was to his wife and
child! She loved him the more when he made Lucien jump or kissed
Juliette on the cheek. Since she had seen him in his own home their
friendship had greatly increased. She was now as one of the family;
she never dreamt that the intimacy could be broken. And within her own
breast she called him Henri--naturally, too, from hearing Juliette
address him so. When her lips said "Sir," through all her being
"Henri" was re-echoed.

One day the doctor found Helene alone under the elms. Juliette now
went out nearly every afternoon.

"Hello! is my wife not with you?" he exclaimed.

"No, she has left me to myself," she answered laughingly. "It is true
you have come home earlier than usual."

The children were playing at the other end of the garden. He sat down
beside her. Their _tete-a-tete_ produced no agitation in either of
them. For nearly an hour they spoke of all sorts of matters, without
for a moment feeling any desire to allude to the tenderness which
filled their hearts. What was the good of referring to that? Did they
not well know what might have been said? They had no confession to
make. Theirs was the joy of being together, of talking of many things,
of surrendering themselves to the pleasure of their isolation without
a shadow of regret, in the very spot where every evening he embraced
his wife in her presence.

That day he indulged in some jokes respecting her devotion to work.
"Do you know," said he, "I do not even know the color of your eyes?
They are always bent on your needle."

She raised her head and looked straight into his face, as was her
custom. "Do you wish to tease me?" she asked gently.

But he went on. "Ah! they are grey--grey, tinged with blue, are they
not?"

This was the utmost limit to which they dared go; but these words, the
first that had sprung to his lips, were fraught with infinite
tenderness. From that day onwards he frequently found her alone in the
twilight. Despite themselves, and without their having any knowledge
of it, their intimacy grew apace. They spoke in an altered voice, with
caressing inflections, which were not apparent when others were
present. And yet, when Juliette came in, full of gossip about her day
in town, they could keep up the talk they had already begun without
even troubling themselves to draw their chairs apart. It seemed as
though this lovely springtide and this garden, with its blossoming
lilac, were prolonging within their hearts the first rapture of love.

Towards the end of the month, Madame Deberle grew excited over a grand
idea. The thought of giving a children's ball had suddenly struck her.
The season was already far advanced, but the scheme took such hold on
her foolish brain that she hurried on the preparations with reckless
haste. She desired that the affair should be quite perfect; it was to
be a fancy-dress ball. And, in her own home, and in other people's
houses, everywhere, in short, she now spoke of nothing but her ball.
The conversations on the subject which took place in the garden were
endless. The foppish Malignon thought the project rather stupid, still
he condescended to take some interest in it, and promised to bring a
comic singer with whom he was acquainted.

One afternoon, while they were all sitting under the trees, Juliette
introduced the grave question of the costumes which Lucien and Jeanne
should wear.

"It is so difficult to make up one's mind," said she. "I have been
thinking of a clown's dress in white satin."

"Oh, that's too common!" declared Malignon. "There will be a round
dozen of clowns at your ball. Wait, you must have something novel."
Thereupon he began gravely pondering, sucking the head of his cane all
the while.

Pauline came up at the moment, and proclaimed her desire to appear as
a soubrette.

"You!" screamed Madame Deberle, in astonishment. "You won't appear in
costume at all! Do you think yourself a child, you great stupid? You
will oblige me by coming in a white dress."

"Oh, but it would have pleased me so!" exclaimed Pauline, who, despite
her eighteen years and plump girlish figure, liked nothing better than
to romp with a band of little ones.

Meanwhile Helene sat at the foot of her tree working away, and raising
her head at times to smile at the doctor and Monsieur Rambaud, who
stood in front of her conversing. Monsieur Rambaud had now become
quite intimate with the Deberle family.

"Well," said the doctor, "and how are you going to dress, Jeanne?"

He got no further, for Malignon burst out: "I've got it! I've got it!
Lucien must be a marquis of the time of Louis XV."

He waved his cane with a triumphant air; but, as no one of the company
hailed his idea with enthusiasm, he appeared astonished. "What, don't
you see it? Won't it be for Lucien to receive his little guests? So
you place him, dressed as a marquis, at the drawing-room door, with a
large bouquet of roses on his coat, and he bows to the ladies."

"But there will be dozens of marquises at the ball!" objected
Juliette.

"What does that matter?" replied Malignon coolly. "The more marquises
the greater the fun. I tell you it is the best thing you can hit upon.
The master of the house must be dressed as a marquis, or the ball will
be a complete failure."

Such was his conviction of his scheme's success that at last it was
adopted by Juliette with enthusiasm. As a matter of fact, a dress in
the Pompadour style, white satin embroidered with posies, would be
altogether charming.

"And what about Jeanne?" again asked the doctor.

The little girl had just buried her head against her mother's shoulder
in the caressing manner so characteristic of her; and as an answer was
about to cross Helene's lips, she murmured:

"Oh! mamma, you know what you promised me, don't you?"

"What was it?" asked those around her.

Then, as her daughter gave her an imploring look, Helene laughingly
replied: "Jeanne does not wish her dress to be known."

"Yes, that's so," said the child; "you don't create any effect when
you tell your dress beforehand."

Every one was tickled with this display of coquetry, and Monsieur
Rambaud thought he might tease the child about it. For some time past
Jeanne had been ill-tempered with him, and the poor man, at his wits'
end to hit upon a mode of again gaining her favor, thought teasing her
the best method of conciliation. Keeping his eyes on her face, he
several times repeated: "I know; I shall tell, I shall tell!"

Jeanne, however, became quite livid. Her gentle, sickly face assumed
an expression of ferocious anger; her brow was furrowed by two deep
wrinkles, and her chin drooped with nervous agitation.

"You!" she screamed excitedly; "you will say nothing!" And, as he
still feigned a resolve to speak, she rushed at him madly, and shouted
out: "Hold your tongue! I will have you hold your tongue! I will! I
will!"

Helene had been unable to prevent this fit of blind anger, such as
sometimes took possession of the child, and with some harshness
exclaimed: "Jeanne, take care; I shall whip you!"

But Jeanne paid no heed, never once heard her. Trembling from head to
foot, stamping on the ground, and choking with rage, she again and
again repeated, "I will! I will!" in a voice that grew more and more
hoarse and broken; and her hands convulsively gripped hold of Monsieur
Rambaud's arm, which she twisted with extraordinary strength. In vain
did Helene threaten her. At last, perceiving her inability to quell
her by severity, and grieved to the heart by such a display before so
many people, she contented herself by saying gently: "Jeanne, you are
grieving me very much."

The child immediately quitted her hold and turned her head. And when
she caught sight of her mother, with disconsolate face and eyes
swimming with repressed tears, she on her side burst into loud sobs,
and threw herself on Helene's neck, exclaiming in her grief: "No,
mamma! no, mamma!"

She passed her hands over her mother's face, as though to prevent her
weeping. Helene, however, slowly put her from her, and then the little
one, broken-hearted and distracted, threw herself on a seat a short
distance off, where her sobs broke out louder than ever. Lucien, to
whom she was always held up as an example to follow, gazed at her
surprised and somewhat pleased. And then, as Helene folded up her
work, apologizing for so regrettable an incident, Juliette remarked to
her:

"Dear me! we have to pardon children everything. Besides, the little
one has the best of hearts, and is grieved so much, poor darling, that
she has been already punished too severely."

So saying she called Jeanne to come and kiss her; but the child
remained on her seat, rejecting the offer of forgiveness, and still
choking with tears.

Monsieur Rambaud and the doctor, however, walked to her side, and the
former, bending over her, asked, in tones husky with emotion: "Tell
me, my pet, what has vexed you? What have I done to you?"

"Oh!" she replied, drawing away her hands and displaying a face full
of anguish, "you wanted to take my mamma from me!"

The doctor, who was listening, burst into laughter. Monsieur Rambaud
at first failed to grasp her meaning.

"What is this you're talking of?"

"Yes, indeed, the other Tuesday! Oh! you know very well; you were on
your knees, and asked me what I should say if you were to stay with
us!"

The smile vanished from the doctor's face; his lips became ashy pale,
and quivered. He did his utmost to gain the good will of the
people, living a simple, friendly family life, and trying to merit
the term of the "citizen king," and in the earlier years of his
reign he was successful.

The country was prosperous, and a great colony was settled in Algiers,
and endured a long and desperate war with the wild Arab tribes. A colony
was also established in New Caledonia, in the Pacific, and attempts
were carried out to compensate thus for the losses of colonial
possessions which France had sustained in wars with England.

Discontents, however, began to arise, on the one hand from those who
remembered only the successes of Buonaparte, and not the miseries
they had caused, and on the other from the working-classes, who
declared that the _bourgeois_, or tradespeople, had gained everything
by the revolution of July, but they themselves nothing.

Louis Philippe did his best to gratify and amuse the people by sending
for the remains of Napoleon, and giving him a magnificent funeral
and splendid monument among his old soldiers--the Invalides; but his
popularity was waning. In 1842 his eldest son, the Duke of Orleans, a
favourite with the people, was killed by a fall from his carriage,
and this was another shock to his throne.

Two young grandsons were left; and the king had also several sons, one
of whom, the Duke of Montpensier, he gave in marriage to Louise, the
sister and heiress presumptive to the Queen of Spain; though, by treaty
with the other European Powers, it had been agreed that she should
not marry a French prince unless the queen had children of her
own. Ambition for his family was a great offence to his subjects,
and at the same time a nobleman, the Duke de Praslin, who had
murdered his wife, committed suicide in prison to avoid public
execution; and the republicans declared, whether justly or unjustly,
that this had been allowed rather than let a noble die a felon's
death.

3.

The Revolution of 1848.--In spite of the increased prosperity of the
country, there was general disaffection.

One word, one only. Are you going to get
married?"

"Yes, perhaps. What concern is it of yours?" she retorted, in a tone
of icy indifference.

He made a passionate gesture, and exclaimed:

"It is impossible!"

"Why should it be?" she asked, still keeping her eyes fixed on his
face.

Her glance stayed the words upon his lips, and he was forced to
silence. For a moment longer he remained near her, pressing his hands
to his brow, and then fled away, with a feeling of suffocation in his
throat, dreading lest he might give expression to his despair; while
she, with assumed tranquillity, once more turned to her work.

But the spell of those delicious afternoons was gone. Next day shone
fair and sunny, and Helene seemed ill at ease from the moment she
found herself alone with him. The pleasant intimacy, the happy
trustfulness, which sanctioned their sitting side by side in blissful
security, and revelling in the unalloyed joy of being together, no
longer existed. Despite his intense carefulness to give her no cause
for alarm, he would sometimes gaze at her and tremble with sudden
excitement, while his face crimsoned with a rush of blood. From her
own heart had fled its wonted happy calm; quivers ran through her
frame; she felt languid; her hands grew weary, and forsook their work.

She now no longer allowed Jeanne to wander from her side. Between
himself and her the doctor found this constant onlooker, watching him
with large, clear eyes. But what pained Helene most was that she now
felt ill at ease in Madame Deberle's company. When the latter returned
of an afternoon, with her hair swept about by the wind, and called her
"my dear" while relating the incidents of some shopping expedition,
she no longer listened with her former quiet smile. A storm arose from
the depths of her soul, stirring up feelings to which she dared not
give a name. Shame and spite seemed mingled in them. However, her
honorable nature gained the mastery, and she gave her hand to
Juliette, but without being able to repress the shudder which ran
through her as she pressed her friend's warm fingers.

The weather had now broken up. Frequent rain forced the ladies to take
refuge in the Japanese pavilion. The garden, with its whilom exquisite
order, became transformed into a lake, and no one dared venture on the
walks, on account of the mud. However, whenever the sun peeped out
from behind the clouds, the dripping greenery soon dried; pearls hung
from each little blossom of the lilac trees; and under the elms big
drops fell splashing on the ground.

"At last I've arranged it; it will be on Saturday," said Madame
Deberle one day. "My dear, I'm quite tired out with the whole affair.
Now, you'll be here at two o'clock, won't you? Jeanne will open the
ball with Lucien."

And thereupon, surrendering to a flow of tenderness, in ecstasy over
the preparations for her ball, she embraced both children, and,
laughingly catching hold of Helene, pressed two resounding kisses on
her cheeks.

"That's my reward!" she exclaimed merrily. "You know I deserve it; I
have run about enough. You'll see what a success it will be!"

But Helene remained chilled to the heart, while the doctor, with
Lucien clinging to his neck, gazed at them over the child's fair head.


                             CHAPTER IX.

In the hall of the doctor's house stood Pierre, in dress coat and
white cravat, throwing open the door as each carriage rolled up. Puffs
of dank air rushed in; the afternoon was rainy, and a yellow light
illumined the narrow hall, with its curtained doorways and array of
green plants. It was only two o'clock, but the evening seemed as near
at hand as on a dismal winter's day.

However, as soon as the servant opened the door of the first
drawing-room, a stream of light dazzled the guests. The shutters had
been closed, and the curtains carefully drawn, and no gleam from the
dull sky could gain admittance. The lamps standing here and there on
the furniture, and the lighted candles of the chandelier and the
crystal wall-brackets, gave the apartment somewhat the appearance of a
brilliantly illuminated chapel. Beyond the smaller drawing-room, whose
green hangings rather softened the glare of the light, was the large
black-and-gold one, decorated as magnificently as for the ball which
Madame Deberle gave every year in the month of January.

The children were beginning to arrive, while Pauline gave her
attention to the ranging of a number of chairs in front of the
dining-room doorway, where the door had been removed from its
hinges and replaced by a red curtain.

"Papa," she cried, "just lend me a hand! We shall never be ready."

Monsieur Letellier, who, with his arms behind his back, was gazing at
the chandelier, hastened to give the required assistance. Pauline
carried the chairs about herself. She had paid due deference to her
sister's request, and was robed in white; only her dress opened
squarely at the neck and displayed her bosom.

"At last we are ready," she exclaimed: "they can come when they like.
But what is Juliette dreaming about? She has been ever so long
dressing Lucien!"

Just at that moment Madame Deberle entered, leading the little
marquis, and everybody present began raising admiring remarks. "Oh!
what a love! What a darling he is!" His coat was of white satin
embroidered with flowers, his long waistcoat was embroidered with
gold, and his knee-breeches were of cherry-colored silk. Lace
clustered round his chin, and delicate wrists. A sword, a mere toy
with a great rose-red knot, rattled against his hip.

"Now you must do the honors," his mother said to him, as she led him
into the outer room.

For eight days past he had been repeating his lesson, and struck a
cavalier attitude with his little legs, his powdered head thrown
slightly back, and his cocked hat tucked under his left arm. As each
of his lady-guests was ushered into the room, he bowed low, offered
his arm, exchanged courteous greetings, and returned to the threshold.
Those near him laughed over his intense seriousness in which there was
a dash of effrontery. This was the style in which he received
Marguerite Tissot, a little lady five years old, dressed in a charming
milkmaid costume, with a milk-can hanging at her side; so too did he
greet the Berthier children, Blanche and Sophie, the one masquerading
as Folly, the other dressed in soubrette style; and he had even the
hardihood to tackle Valentine de Chermette, a tall young lady of some
fourteen years, whom her mother always dressed in Spanish costume, and
at her side his figure appeared so slight that she seemed to be
carrying him along. However, he was profoundly embarrassed in the
presence of the Levasseur family, which numbered five girls, who made
their appearance in a row of increasing height, the youngest being
scarcely two years old, while the eldest was ten. All five were
arrayed in Red Riding-Hood costumes, their head-dresses and gowns
being in poppy-colored satin with black velvet bands, with which their
lace aprons strikingly contrasted. At last Lucien, making up his mind,
bravely flung away his three-cornered hat, and led the two elder
girls, one hanging on each arm, into the drawing-room, closely
followed by the three others. There was a good deal of laughter at it,
but the little man never lost his self-possession for a moment.

In the meantime Madame Deberle was taking her sister to task in a
corner.

"Good gracious! is it possible! what a fearfully low-necked dress you
are wearing!"

"Dear, dear! what have I done now? Papa hasn't said a word," answered
Pauline coolly. "If you're anxious, I'll put some flowers at my
breast."

She plucked a handful of blossoms from a flower-stand where they were
growing and allowed them to nestle in her bosom; while Madame Deberle
was surrounded by several mammas in stylish visiting-dresses, who were
already profuse in their compliments about her ball. As Lucien was
passing them, his mother arranged a loose curl of his powdered hair,
while he stood on tip-toe to whisper in her ear:

"Where's Jeanne?"

"She will be here immediately, my darling. Take good care not to fall.
Run away, there comes little Mademoiselle Guiraud. Ah! she is wearing
an Alsatian costume."

The drawing-room was now filling rapidly; the rows of chairs fronting
the red curtain were almost all occupied, and a hubbub of children's
voices was rising. The boys were flocking into the room in groups.
There were already three Harlequins, four Punches, a Figaro, some
Tyrolese peasants, and a few Highlanders. Young Master Berthier was
dressed as a page. Little Guiraud, a mere bantling of two-and-a-half
summers, wore his clown's costume in so comical a style that every one
as he passed lifted him up and kissed him.

"Here comes Jeanne," exclaimed Madame Deberle, all at once. "Oh, she
is lovely!"

A murmur ran round the room; heads were bent forward, and every one
gave vent to exclamations of admiration. Jeanne was standing on the
threshold of the outer room, awaiting her mother, who was taking
off her cloak in the hall. The child was robed in a Japanese dress
of unusual splendor. The gown, embroidered with flowers and
strange-looking birds, swept to her feet, which were hidden from view;
while beneath her broad waist-ribbon the flaps, drawn aside, gave a
glimpse of a green petticoat, watered with yellow. Nothing could be
more strangely bewitching than her delicate features seen under the
shadow of her hair, coiled above her head with long pins thrust
through it, while her chin and oblique eyes, small and sparkling,
pictured to the life a young lady of Yeddo, strolling amidst the
perfume of tea and benzoin. The reins of government were, however,
tightly held, and nothing was so much avoided as the letting men think
or act for themselves, while their eyes were to be dazzled with
splendour and victory.

In 1853, when Russia was attacking Turkey, the Emperor united with
England in opposition, and the two armies together besieged Sebastopol,
and fought the battles of Alma and Inkermann, taking the city after
nearly a year's siege; and then making what is known as the Treaty
of Paris, which guaranteed the safety of Turkey so long as the subject
Christian nations were not misused. In 1859 Napoleon III. joined
in an attack on the Austrian power in Italy, and together with
Victor Emanuel, King of Sardinia, and the Italians, gained two great
victories at Magenta and Solferino; but made peace as soon as it
was convenient to him, without regard to his promises to the King
of Sardinia, who was obliged to purchase his consent to becoming
King of United Italy by yielding up to France his old inheritance
of Savoy and Nice.

Meantime discontent began to spring up at home, and the Red Republican
spirit was working on.

The huge fortunes made by the successful only added to the sense of
contrast; secret societies were at work, and the Emperor, after twenty
years of success, felt his popularity waning.

5. The Franco-German War.

--In 1870 the Spaniards, who had deposed their queen, Isabel II.,
made choice of a relation of the King of Prussia as their king.
There had long been bitter jealousy between France and Prussia,
and, though the prince refused the offer of Spain, the French showed
such an overbearing spirit that a war broke out.

The real desire of France was to obtain the much-coveted frontier of
the Rhine, and the Emperor heated their armies with boastful
proclamations which were but the prelude to direful defeats, at
Weissenburg, Wörth, and Forbach.

At Sedan, the Emperor was forced to surrender himself as a prisoner,
and the tidings no sooner arrived at Paris than the whole of the
people turned their wrath on him and his family.

His wife, the Empress Eugènie, had to flee, a republic was declared,
and the city prepared to stand a siege. The Germans advanced, and put
down all resistance in other parts of France.
Thereupon he advanced towards the group of ladies, with a courteous
greeting. Mademoiselle Aurelie, who was amongst them, engaged his
attention for the moment to point out to him a nephew whom she had
brought with her. He was all complaisance. Helene, without speaking,
gave him her hand, encased in its black glove, but he dared not clasp
it with marked force.

"Oh! here you are!" said Madame Deberle, as she appeared beside them.
"I have been looking for you everywhere. It is nearly three o'clock;
they had better begin."

"Certainly; at once," was his reply.

The drawing-room was now crowded. All round it, in the brilliant glare
thrown from the chandelier, sat the fathers and mothers, their walking
costumes serving to fringe the circle with less vivid colors. Some
ladies, drawing their chairs together, formed groups; men standing
motionless along the walls filled up the gaps; while in the doorway
leading to the next room a cluster of frock-coated guests could be
seen crowding together and peering over each other's shoulders. The
light fell wholly on the little folks, noisy in their glee, as they
rustled about in their seats in the centre of the large room. There
were almost a hundred children packed together; in an endless variety
of gay costumes, bright with blue and red. It was like a sea of fair
heads, varying from pale yellow to ruddy gold, with here and there
bows and flowers gleaming vividly--or like a field of ripe grain,
spangled with poppies and cornflowers, and waving to and fro as though
stirred by a breeze. At times, amidst this confusion of ribbons and
lace, of silk and velvet, a face was turned round--a pink nose, a pair
of blue eyes, a smiling or pouting little mouth. There were some, no
higher than one's boots, who were buried out of sight between big lads
of ten years of age, and whom their mothers sought from a distance,
but in vain. A few of the boys looked bored and foolish by the side of
girls who were busy spreading out their skirts. Some, however, were
already very venturesome, jogging the elbows of their fair neighbors
with whom they were unacquainted, and laughing in their faces. But the
royalty of the gathering remained with the girls, some of whom,
clustering in groups, stirred about in such a way as to threaten
destruction to their chairs, and chattered so loudly that the grown-up
folks could no longer hear one another speaking. And all eyes were
intently gazing at the red curtain.

Slowly was it drawn aside, and in the recess of the doorway appeared a
puppet-show. There was a hushed silence. Then all at once Punch sprang
in, with so ferocious a yell that baby Guiraud could not restrain a
responsive cry of terror and delight. It was one of those bloodthirsty
dramas in which Punch, having administered a sound beating to the
magistrate, murders the policeman, and tramples with ferocious glee on
every law, human and divine. At every cudgelling bestowed on the
wooden heads the pitiless audience went into shrieks of laughter; and
the sharp thrusts delivered by the puppets at each other's breasts,
the duels in which they beat a tattoo on one another's skulls as
though they were empty pumpkins, the awful havoc of legs and arms,
reducing the characters to a jelly, served to increase the roars of
laughter which rang out from all sides. But the climax of enjoyment
was reached when Punch sawed off the policeman's head on the edge of
the stage; an operation provocative of such hysterical mirth that the
rows of juveniles were plunged into confusion, swaying to and fro with
glee till they all but fell on one another. One tiny girl, but four
years old, all pink and white, considered the spectacle so entrancing
that she pressed her little hands devoutly to her heart. Others burst
into applause, while the boys laughed, with mouths agape, their deeper
voices mingling with the shrill peals from the girls.

"How amused they are!" whispered the doctor. He had returned to his
place near Helene. She was in high spirits like the children. Behind
her, he sat inhaling the intoxicating perfume which came from her
hair. And as one puppet on the stage dealt another an exceptionally
hard knock she turned to him and exclaimed: "Do you know, it is
awfully funny!"

The youngsters, crazy with excitement, were now interfering with the
action of the drama. They were giving answers to the various
characters. One young lady, who must have been well up in the plot,
was busy explaining what would next happen.

"He'll beat his wife to death in a minute! Now they are going to hang
him!"

The youngest of the Levasseur girls, who was two years old, shrieked
out all at once:

"Mamma, mamma, will they put him on bread and water?"

All sorts of exclamations and reflections followed. Meanwhile Helene,
gazing into the crowd of children, remarked: "I cannot see Jeanne. Is
she enjoying herself?"

Then the doctor bent forward, with head perilously near her own, and
whispered: "There she is, between that harlequin and the Norman
peasant maiden! You can see the pins gleaming in her hair. She is
laughing very heartily."

He still leaned towards her, her cool breath playing on his cheek.
Till now no confession had escaped them; preserving silence, their
intimacy had only been marred for a few days past by a vague sensation
of discomfort. But amidst these bursts of happy laughter, gazing upon
the little folks before her, Helene became once more, in sooth, a very
child, surrendering herself to her feelings, while Henri's breath beat
warm upon her neck. The whacks from the cudgel, now louder than ever,
filled her with a quiver which inflated her bosom, and she turned
towards him with sparkling eyes.

"Good heavens! what nonsense it all is!" she said each time. "See how
they hit one another!"

"Oh! their heads are hard enough!" he replied, trembling.

This was all his heart could find to say. Their minds were fast
lapsing into childhood once more. Punch's unedifying life was
fostering languor within their breasts. When the drama drew to its
close with the appearance of the devil, and the final fight and
general massacre ensued, Helene in leaning back pressed against
Henri's hand, which was resting on the back of her arm-chair; while
the juvenile audience, shouting and clapping their hands, made the
very chairs creak with their enthusiasm.

The red curtain dropped again, and the uproar was at its height when
Malignon's presence was announced by Pauline, in her customary style:
"Ah! here's the handsome Malignon!"

He made his way into the room, shoving the chairs aside, quite out of
breath.

"Dear me! what a funny idea to close the shutters!" he exclaimed,
surprised and hesitating. "People might imagine that somebody in the
house was dead." Then, turning towards Madame Deberle, who was
approaching him, he continued: "Well, you can boast of having made me
run about! Ever since the morning I have been hunting for Perdiguet;
you know whom I mean, my singer fellow. But I haven't been able to lay
my hands on him, and I have brought you the great Morizot instead."

The great Morizot was an amateur who entertained drawing-rooms by
conjuring with juggler-balls. A gipsy table was assigned to him, and
on this he accomplished his most wonderful tricks; but it all passed
off without the spectators evincing the slightest interest. The poor
little darlings were pulling serious faces; some of the tinier mites
fell fast asleep, sucking their thumbs. The older children turned
their heads and smiled towards their parents, who were themselves
yawning behind their hands. There was thus a general feeling of relief
when the great Morizot decided to take his table away.

"Oh! he's awfully clever," whispered Malignon into Madame Deberle's
neck.

But the red curtain was drawn aside once again, and an entrancing
spectacle brought all the little folks to their feet.

Along the whole extent of the dining-room stretched the table, laid
and bedecked as for a grand dinner, and illumined by the bright
radiance of the central lamp and a pair of large candelabra. There
were fifty covers laid; in the middle and at either end were shallow
baskets, full of flowers; between these towered tall _epergnes_,
filled to overflowing with crackers in gilded and colored paper. Then
there were mountains of decorated cakes, pyramids of iced fruits,
piles of sandwiches, and, less prominent, a whole host of
symmetrically disposed plates, bearing sweetmeats and pastry: buns,
cream puffs, and _brioches_ alternating with dry biscuits, cracknals,
and fancy almond cakes. Jellies were quivering in their glass dishes.
Whipped creams waited in porcelain bowls. And round the table sparkled
the silver helmets of champagne bottles, no higher than one's hand,
made specially to suit the little guests. It all looked like one of
those gigantic feasts which children conjure up in dreamland--a feast
served with the solemnity that attends a repast of grown-up folks--a
fairy transformation of the table to which their own parents sat down,
and on which the horns of plenty of innumerable pastry-cooks and toy
dealers had been emptied.

"Come, come, give the ladies your arms!" said Madame Deberle, her face
covered with smiles as she watched the delight of the children.

But the filing off in couples proved a lure. Lucien, who had
triumphantly taken Jeanne's arm, went first. But the others following
behind fell somewhat into confusion, and the mothers were forced to
come and assign them places, remaining close at hand, especially
behind the babies, whom they watched lest any mischance should befall
them. Truth to tell, the guests at first seemed rather uncomfortable;
they looked at one another, felt afraid to lay hands on the good
things, and were vaguely disquieted by this new social organization in
which everything appeared to be topsy-turvy, the children seated at
table while their parents remained standing. At length the older ones
gained confidence and commenced the attack. And when the mothers
entered into the fray, and cut up the large cakes, helping those in
their vicinity, the feast speedily became very animated and noisy. The
exquisite symmetry of the table was destroyed as though by a tempest.
The two Berthier girls, Blanche and Sophie, laughed at the sight of
their plates, which had been filled with something of everything--jam,
custard, cake, and fruit. The five young ladies of the Levasseur
family took sole possession of a corner laden with dainties, while
Valentine, proud of her fourteen years, acted the lady's part, and
looked after the comfort of her little neighbors. Lucien, however,
impatient to display his politeness, uncorked a bottle of champagne,
but in so clumsy a way that the whole contents spurted over his cherry
silk breeches. There was quite a to-do about it.

"Kindly leave the bottles alone! I am to uncork the champagne,"
shouted Pauline.

She bustled about in an extraordinary fashion, purely for her own
amusement. On the entry of a servant with the chocolate pot, she
seized it and filled the cups with the greatest glee, as active in the
performance as any restaurant waiter. Next she took round some ices
and glasses of syrup and water, set them down for a moment to stuff a
little baby-girl who had been overlooked, and then went off again,
asking every one questions.

"What is it you wish, my pet? Eh? A cake? Yes, my darling, wait a
moment; I am going to pass you the oranges. Now eat away, you little
stupids, you shall play afterwards."

Madame Deberle, calm and dignified, declared that they ought to be
left alone, and would acquit themselves very well.

At one end of the room sat Helene and some other ladies laughing at
the scene which the table presented; all the rosy mouths were eating
with the full strength of their beautiful white teeth. And nothing
could eclipse in drollery the occasional lapses from the polished
behavior of well-bred children to the outrageous freaks of young
savages. With both hands gripping their glasses, they drank to the
very dregs, smeared their faces, and stained their dresses. The clamor
grew worse. The last of the dishes were plundered. Jeanne herself
began dancing on her chair as she heard the strains of a quadrille
coming from the drawing-room; and on her mother approaching to upbraid
her with having eaten too much, she replied: "Oh! mamma, I feel so
happy to-day!"

But now the other children were rising as they heard the music. Slowly
the table thinned, until there only remained a fat, chubby infant
right in the middle. He seemingly cared little for the attractions of
the piano; with a napkin round his neck, and his chin resting on the
tablecloth--for he was a mere chit--he opened his big eyes, and
protruded his lips each time that his mamma offered him a spoonful of
chocolate. The contents of the cup vanished, and he licked his lips as
the last mouthful went down his throat, with eyes more agape than
ever.

"By Jove! my lad, you eat heartily!" exclaimed Malignon, who was
watching him with a thoughtful air.

Now came the division of the "surprise" packets. Each child, on
leaving the table, bore away one of the large gilt paper twists, the
coverings of which were hastily torn off and from them poured forth a
host of toys, grotesque hats made of tissue paper, birds and
butterflies. But the joy of joys was the possession of a cracker.
Every "surprise" packet had its cracker; and these the lads pulled at
gallantly, delighted with the noise, while the girls shut their eyes,
making many tries before the explosion took place. For a time the
sharp crackling of all this musketry alone could be heard; and the
uproar was still lasting when the children returned to the
drawing-room, where lively quadrille music resounded from the piano.

"I could enjoy a cake," murmured Mademoiselle Aurelie, as she sat
down.

At the table, which was now deserted, but covered with all the litter
of the huge feast, a few ladies--some dozen or so, who had preferred
to wait till the children had retired--now sat down. As no servant
could be found, Malignon bustled hither and thither in attendance. He
poured out all that remained in the chocolate pot, shook up the dregs
of the bottles, and was even successful in discovering some ices. But
amidst all these gallant doings of his, he could not quit one idea,
and that was--why had they decided on closing the shutters?

"You know," he asserted, "the place looks like a cellar."

Helene had remained standing, engaged in conversation with Madame
Deberle. As the latter directed her steps towards the drawing-room,
her companion prepared to follow, when she felt a gentle touch. Behind
her was the doctor, smiling; he was ever near her.

"Are you not going to take anything?" he asked. And the trivial
question cloaked so earnest an entreaty that her heart was filled with
profound emotion. She knew well enough that each of his words was
eloquent of another thing. The excitement springing from the gaiety
which pulsed around her was slowly gaining on her. Some of the fever
of all these little folks, now dancing and shouting, coursed in her
own veins. With flushed cheeks and sparkling eyes, she at first
declined.

"No, thank you, nothing at all."

But he pressed her, and in the end, ill at ease and anxious to get rid
of him, she yielded. "Well, then, a cup of tea."

He hurried off and returned with the cup, his hands trembling as he
handed it to her. While she was sipping the tea he drew nearer to her,
his lips quivering nervously with the confession springing from his
heart. She in her turn drew back from him, and, returning him the
empty cup, made her escape while he was placing it on a sideboard,
thus leaving him alone in the dining-room with Mademoiselle Aurelie,
who was slowly masticating, and subjecting each dish in succession to
a close scrutiny.

Within the drawing-room the piano was sending forth its loudest
strains, and from end to end of the floor swept the ball with its
charming drolleries. A circle of onlookers had gathered round the
quadrille party with which Lucien and Jeanne were dancing. The little
marquis became rather mixed over the figures; he only got on well when
he had occasion to take hold of Jeanne; and then he gripped her by the
waist and whirled around. Jeanne preserved her equilibrium, somewhat
vexed by his rumpling her dress; but the delights of the dance taking
full possession of her, she caught hold of him in her turn and lifted
him off his feet. The white satin coat embroidered with nosegays
mingled with the folds of the gown woven with flowers and strange
birds, and the two little figures of old Dresden ware assumed all the
grace and novelty of some whatnot ornaments. The quadrille over,
Helene summoned Jeanne to her side, in order to rearrange her dress.

"It is his fault, mamma," was the little one's excuse. "He rubs
against me--he's a dreadful nuisance."

Around the drawing-room the faces of the parents were wreathed with
smiles. As soon as the music began again all the little ones were once
more in motion. Seeing, however, that they were observed they felt
distrustful, remained grave, and checked their leaps in order to keep
up appearances. Some of them knew how to dance; but the majority were
ignorant of the steps, and their limbs were evidently a source of
embarrassment to them. But Pauline interposed: "I must see to them!
Oh, you little stupids!"

She threw herself into the midst of the quadrille, caught hold of two
of them, one grasping her right hand the other her left, and managed
to infuse such life into the dance that the wooden flooring creaked
beneath them. The only sounds now audible rose from the hurrying
hither and thither of tiny feet beating wholly out of time, the piano
alone keeping to the dance measure. Some more of the older people
joined in the fun. Helene and Madame Deberle, noticing some little
maids who were too bashful to venture forth, dragged them into the
thickest of the throng. It was they who led the figures, pushed the
lads forward, and arranged the dancing in rings; and the mothers
passed them the youngest of the babies, so that they might make them
skip about for a moment, holding them the while by both hands. The
ball was now at its height. The dancers enjoyed themselves to their
hearts' content, laughing and pushing each other about like some
boarding school mad with glee over the absence of the teacher.
Nothing, truly, could surpass in unalloyed gaiety this carnival of
youngsters, this assemblage of miniature men and women--akin to a
veritable microcosm, wherein the fashions of every people mingled with
the fantastic creations of romance and drama. The ruddy lips and blue
eyes, the faces breathing love, invested the dresses with the fresh
purity of childhood. The scene realized to the mind the merrymaking of
a fairy-tale to which trooped Cupids in disguise to honor the
betrothal of some Prince Charming.

"I'm stifling!" exclaimed Malignon. "I'm off to inhale some fresh
air."

As he left the drawing-room he threw the door wide open. The daylight
from the street then entered in a lurid stream, bedimming the glare of
lamps and candles. In this fashion every quarter of an hour Malignon
opened the door to let in some fresh air.

Still there was no cessation of the piano-playing. Little Guiraud, in
her Alsatian costume, with a butterfly of black ribbon in her golden
hair, swung round in the dance with a harlequin twice her height. A
Highlander whirled Marguerite Tissot round so madly that she lost her
milk-pail. The two Berthier girls, Blanche and Sophie, who were
inseparables, were dancing together; the soubrette in the arms of
Folly, whose bells were jingling merrily. A glance could not be thrown
over the assemblage without one of the Levasseur girls coming into
view; the Red Riding-Hoods seemed to increase in number; caps and
gowns of gleaming red satin slashed with black velvet everywhere
leaped into sight. Meanwhile some of the older boys and girls had
found refuge in the adjacent saloon, where they could dance more at
their ease. Valentine de Chermette, cloaked in the mantilla of a
Spanish senorita, was executing some marvellous steps in front of a
young gentleman who had donned evening dress. Suddenly there was a
burst of laughter which drew every one to the sight; behind a door in
a corner, baby Guiraud, the two-year-old clown, and a mite of a girl
of his own age, in peasant costume, were holding one another in a
tight embrace for fear of tumbling, and gyrating round and round like
a pair of slyboots, with cheek pressed to cheek.

"I'm quite done up," remarked Helene, as she leaned against the
dining-room door.

She fanned her face, flushed with her exertions in the dance. Her
bosom rose and fell beneath the transparent grenadine of her bodice.
And she was still conscious of Henri's breath beating on her
shoulders; he was still close to her--ever behind her. Now it flashed
on her that he would speak, yet she had no strength to flee from his
avowal. He came nearer and whispered, breathing on her hair: "I love
you! oh, how I love you!"

She tingled from head to foot, as though a gust of flame had beaten on
her. O God! he had spoken; she could no longer feign the pleasurable
quietude of ignorance. She hid behind her fan, her face purple with
blushes. The children, whirling madly in the last of the quadrilles,
were making the floor ring with the beating of their feet. There were
silvery peals of laughter, and bird-like voices gave vent to
exclamations of pleasure. A freshness arose from all that band of
innocents galloping round and round like little demons.

"I love you! oh, how I love you!"

She shuddered again; she would listen no further. With dizzy brain she
fled into the dining-room, but it was deserted, save that Monsieur
Letellier sat on a chair, peacefully sleeping. Henri had followed her,
and had the hardihood to seize her wrists even at the risk of a
scandal, his face convulsed with such passion that she trembled before
him. And he still repeated the words:

"I love you! I love you!"

"Leave me," she murmured faintly. "You are mad--"

And, close by, the dancing still went on, with the trampling of tiny
feet. Blanche Berthier's bells could be heard ringing in unison with
the softer notes of the piano; Madame Deberle and Pauline were
clapping their hands, by way of beating time. It was a polka, and
Helene caught a glimpse of Jeanne and Lucien, as they passed by
smiling, with arms clasped round each other.

But with a sudden jerk she freed herself and fled to an adjacent room
--a pantry into which streamed the daylight. That sudden brightness
blinded her. She was terror-stricken--she dared not return to the
drawing-room with the tale of passion written so legibly on her face.
So, hastily crossing the garden, she climbed to her own home, the
noises of the ball-room still ringing in her ears.


                              CHAPTER X.

Upstairs, in her own room, in the peaceful, convent-like atmosphere
she found there, Helene experienced a feeling of suffocation. Her room
astonished her, so calm, so secluded, so drowsy did it seem with its
blue velvet hangings, while she came to it hotly panting with the
emotion which thrilled her. Was this indeed her room, this dreary,
lifeless nook, devoid of air? Hastily she threw open a window, and
leaned out to gaze on Paris.

The rain had ceased, and the clouds were trooping off like some herd
of monsters hurrying in disorderly array into the gloom of the
horizon. A blue gap, that grew larger by degrees, had opened up above
the city. But Helene, her elbows trembling on the window-rail, still
breathless from her hasty ascent, saw nothing, and merely heard her
heart beating against her swelling breast. She drew a long breath, but
it seemed to her that the spreading valley with its river, its two
millions of people, its immense city, its distant hills, could not
hold air enough to enable her to breathe peacefully and regularly
again.

For some minutes she remained there distracted by the fever of passion
which possessed her. It seemed as though a torrent of sensations and
confused ideas were pouring down on her, their roar preventing her
from hearing her own voice or understanding aught. There was a buzzing
in her ears, and large spots of light swam slowly before her eyes.
Then she suddenly found herself examining her gloved hands, and
remembering that she had omitted to sew on a button that had come off
the left-hand glove. And afterwards she spoke aloud, repeating several
times, in tones that grew fainter and fainter: "I love you! I love
you! oh, how I love you!"

Instinctively she buried her face in her hands, and pressed her
fingers to her eyelids as though to intensify the darkness in which
she sought to plunge. It was a wish to annihilate herself, to see no
more, to be utterly alone, girt in by the gloom of night. Her
breathing grew calmer. Paris blew its mighty breath upon her face; she
knew it lay before her, and though she had no wish to look on it, she
felt full of terror at the thought of leaving the window, and of no
longer having beneath her that city whose vastness lulled her to rest.

Ere long she grew unmindful of all around her. The love-scene and
confession, despite her efforts, again woke to life in her mind. In
the inky darkness Henri appeared to her, every feature so distinct and
vivid that she could perceive the nervous twitching of his lips. He
came nearer and hung over her. And then she wildly darted back. But,
nevertheless, she felt a burning breath on her shoulders and a voice
exclaimed: "I love you! I love you!" With a mighty effort she put the
phantom to flight, but it again took shape in the distance, and slowly
swelled to its whilom proportions; it was Henri once more following
her into the dining-room, and still murmuring: "I love you! I love
you!" These words rang within her breast with the sonorous clang of a
bell; she no longer heard anything but them, pealing their loudest
throughout her frame. Nevertheless, she desired to reflect, and again
strove to escape from the apparition. He had spoken; never would she
dare to look on his face again. The brutal passion of the man had
tainted the tenderness of their love. She conjured up past hours, in
which he had loved her without being so cruel as to say it; hours
spent in the garden amidst the tranquillity of the budding springtime
God! he had spoken--the thought clung to her so stubbornly, lowered on
her in such immensity and with such weight, that the instant
destruction of Paris by a thunderbolt before her eyes would have
seemed a trivial matter. Her heart was rent by feelings of indignant
protest and haughty anger, commingling with a secret and unconquerable
pleasure, which ascended from her inner being and bereft her of her
senses. He had spoken, and was speaking still, he sprang up
unceasingly before her, uttering those passionate words: "I love you!
I love you!"--words that swept into oblivion all her past life as wife
and mother.

In spite of her brooding over this vision, she retained some
consciousness of the vast expanse which stretched beneath her, beyond
the darkness that curtained her sight. A loud rumbling arose, and
waves of life seemed to surge up and circle around her. Echoes, odors,
and even light streamed against her face, though her hands were still
nervously pressed to it. At times sudden gleams appeared to pierce her
closed eyelids, and amidst the radiance she imagined she saw
monuments, steeples, and domes standing out in the diffuse light of
dreamland. Then she lowered her hands and, opening her eyes, was
dazzled. The vault of heaven expanded before her, and Henri had
vanished.

A line of clouds, a seeming mass of crumbling chalk-hills, now barred
the horizon far away. Across the pure, deep blue heavens overhead,
merely a few light, fleecy cloudlets were slowly drifting, like a
flotilla of vessels with full-blown sails. On the north, above
Montmartre, hung a network of extreme delicacy, fashioned as it were
of pale-hued silk, and spread over a patch of sky as though for
fishing in those tranquil waters. Westward, however, in the direction
of the slopes of Meudon, which Helene could not see, the last drops of
the downpour must still have been obscuring the sun, for, though the
sky above was clear, Paris remained gloomy, dismal beneath the vapor
of the drying house-roofs. It was a city of uniform hue--the
bluey-grey of slate, studded with black patches of trees--but withal
very distinct, with the sharp outlines and innumberable windows of its
houses. The Seine gleamed with the subdued brightness of old silver.
The edifices on either bank looked as though they had been smeared
with soot. The Tower of St. Jacques rose up like some rust-eaten
museum curio, whilst the Pantheon assumed the aspect of a gigantic
catafalque above the darkened district which it overlooked. Gleams of
light peeped only from the gilding of the dome of the Invalides, like
lamps burning in the daytime, sad and vague amidst the crepuscular
veil of mourning in which the city was draped. All the usual effects
of distance had vanished; Paris resembled a huge yet minutely executed
charcoal drawing, showing very vigorously through its cloudy veil,
under the limpid heavens.

Gazing upon this dismal city, Helene reflected that she really knew
nothing of Henri. She felt strong and brave now that his image no
longer pursued her. A rebellious impulse stirred her soul to reject
the mastery which this man had gained over her within a few weeks. No,
she did not know him. She knew nothing of him, of his actions or his
thoughts; she could not even have determined whether he possessed
talent. Perhaps he was even more lacking in qualities of the heart
than of the mind. And thus she gave way to every imagining, her heart
full of bitterness, ever finding herself confronted by her ignorance,
that barrier which separated her from Henri, and checked her in her
efforts to know him. She knew nothing, she would never know anything.
She pictured him, hissing out those burning words, and creating within
her the one trouble which had, till now, broken in on the quiet
happiness of her life. Whence had he sprung to lay her life desolate
in this fashion? She suddenly thought that but six weeks before she
had had no existence for him, and this thought was insufferable.
Angels in heaven! to live no more for one another, to pass each other
without recognition, perhaps never to meet again! In her despair she
clasped her hands, and her eyes filled with tears.

Then Helene gazed fixedly on the towers of Notre-Dame in the far
distance. A ray of light from between two clouds tinged them with
gold. Her brain was heavy, as though surcharged with all the
tumultuous thoughts hurtling within it. It made her suffer; she would
fain have concerned herself with the sight of Paris, and have sought
to regain her life-peace by turning on that sea of roofs the tranquil
glances of past days. To think that at other times, at the same hour,
the infinitude of the city--in the stillness of a lovely twilight--had
lulled her into tender musing!

At present Paris was brightening in the sunshine. After the first ray
had fallen on Notre-Dame, others had followed, streaming across the
city. The luminary, dipping in the west, rent the clouds asunder, and
the various districts spread out, motly with ever-changing lights and
shadows. For a time the whole of the left bank was of a leaden hue,
while the right was speckled with spots of light which made the verge
of the river resemble the skin of some huge beast of prey. Then these
resemblances varied and vanished at the mercy of the wind, which drove
the clouds before it. Above the burnished gold of the housetops dark
patches floated, all in the same direction and with the same gentle
and silent motion. Some of them were very large, sailing along with
all the majestic grace of an admiral's ship, and surrounded by smaller
ones, preserving the regular order of a squadron in line of battle.
Then one vast shadow, with a gap yawning like a serpent's mouth,
trailed along, and for a while hid Paris, which it seemed ready to
devour. And when it had reached the far-off horizon, looking no larger
than a worm, a gush of light streamed from a rift in a cloud, and fell
into the void which it had left. The golden cascade could be seen
descending first like a thread of fine sand, then swelling into a huge
cone, and raining in a continuous shower on the Champs-Elysees
district, which it inundated with a splashing, dancing radiance. For a
long time did this shower of sparks descend, spraying continuously
like a fusee.

Ah, well! this love was her fate, and Helene ceased to resist. She
could battle no longer against her feelings. And in ceasing to
struggle she tasted immeasurable delight. Why should she grudge
herself happiness any longer? The memory of her past life inspired her
with disgust and aversion. How had she been able to drag on that cold,
dreary existence, of which she was formerly so proud? A vision rose
before her of herself as a young girl living in the Rue des
Petites-Maries, at Marseilles, where she had ever shivered; she saw
herself a wife, her heart's blood frozen in the companionship of a big
child of a husband, with little to take any interest in, apart from the
cares of her household; she saw herself through every hour of her life
following the same path with the same even tread, without a trouble to
mar her peace; and now this monotony in which she had lived, her heart
fast asleep, enraged her beyond expression. To think that she had
fancied herself happy in thus following her path for thirty years, her
passions silent, with naught but the pride of virtue to fill the blank
in her existence. How she had cheated herself with her integrity and
nice honor, which had girt her round with the empty joys of piety! No,
no; she had had enough of it; she wished to live! And an awful spirit
of ridicule woke within her as she thought of the behests of reason.
Her reason, forsooth! she felt a contemptuous pity for it; during all
the years she had lived it had brought her no joy to be compared with
that she had tasted during the past hour. She had denied the
possibility of stumbling, she had been vain and idiotic enough to
think that she would go on to the end without her foot once tripping
against a stone. Ah, well! to-day she almost longed to fall. Oh that
she might disappear, after tasting for one moment the happiness which
she had never enjoyed!

Within her soul, however, a great sorrow lingered, a heart-burning and
a consciousness of a gloomy blank. Then argument rose to her lips. Was
she not free? In her love for Henri she deceived nobody; she could
deal as she pleased with her love. Then, did not everything exculpate
her? What had been her life for nearly two years? Her widowhood, her
unrestricted liberty, her loneliness--everything, she realized, had
softened and prepared her for love. Love must have been smouldering
within her during the long evenings spent between her two old friends,
the Abbe and his brother, those simple hearts whose serenity had
lulled it to rest; it had been growing whilst she remained shut up
within those narrow walls, far away from the world, and gazed on Paris
rumbling noisily on the horizon; it had been growing even when she
leaned from that window in the dreamy mood which she had scarce been
conscious of, but which little by little had rendered her so weak. And
a recollection came to her of that radiant spring morning when Paris
had shone out fair and clear, as though in a glass mirror, when it had
worn the pure, sunny hue of childhood, as she lazily surveyed it,
stretched in her easy-chair with a book upon her knees. That morning
love had first awoke--a scarcely perceptible feeling that she had been
unable to define, and against which she had believed herself strongly
armed. To-day she was in the same place, but devoured by overpowering
passion, while before her eyes the dying sun illumined the city with
flame. It seemed to her that one day had sufficed for all, that this
was the ruddy evening following upon that limpid morning; and she
imagined she could feel those fiery beams scorching her heart.

But a change had come over the sky. The sun, in its descent towards
the slopes of Meudon, had just burst through the last clouds in all
its splendor. The azure vault was illuminated with glory; deep on the
horizon the crumbling ridge of chalk clouds, blotting out the distant
suburbs of Charenton and Choisy-le-Roi, now reared rocks of a tender
pink, outlined with brilliant crimson; the flotilla of cloudlets
drifting slowly through the blue above Paris, was decked with purple
sails; while the delicate network, seemingly fashioned of white silk
thread, above Montmartre, was suddenly transformed into golden cord,
whose meshes would snare the stars as soon as they should rise.

Beneath the flaming vault of heaven lay Paris, a mass of yellow,
striped with huge shadows. On the vast square below Helene, in an
orange-tinted haze, cabs and omnibuses crossed in all directions,
amidst a crowd of pedestrians, whose swarming blackness was softened
and irradiated by splashes of light. The students of a seminary were
hurrying in serried ranks along the Quai de Billy, and the trail of
cassocks acquired an ochraceous hue in the diffuse light. Farther
away, vehicles and foot-passengers faded from view; it was only by
their gleaming lamps that you were made aware of the vehicles which,
one behind the other, were crossing some distant bridge. On the left
the straight, lofty, pink chimneys of the Army Bakehouse were belching
forth whirling clouds of flesh-tinted smoke; whilst, across the river,
the beautiful elms of the Quai d'Orsay rose up in a dark mass
transpierced by shafts of light.

The Seine, whose banks the oblique rays were enfilading, was rolling
dancing wavelets, streaked with scattered splashes of blue, green, and
yellow; but farther up the river, in lieu of this blotchy coloring,
suggestive of an Eastern sea, the waters assumed a uniform golden hue,
which became more and more dazzling. You might have thought that some
ingot were pouring forth from an invisible crucible on the horizon,
broadening out with a coruscation of bright colors as it gradually
grew colder. And at intervals over this brilliant stream, the bridges,
with curves growing ever more slender and delicate, threw, as it were,
grey bars, till there came at last a fiery jumble of houses, above
which rose the towers of Notre-Dame, flaring red like torches. Right
and left alike the edifices were all aflame. The glass roof of the
Palais de l'Industrie appeared like a bed of glowing embers amidst the
Champs-Elysees groves. Farther on, behind the roof of the Madeline,
the huge pile of the Opera House shone out like a mass of burnished
copper; and the summits of other buildings, cupolas, and towers, the
Vendome column, the church of Saint-Vincent de Paul, the tower of
Saint-Jacques, and, nearer in, the pavilions of the new Louvre and the
Tuileries, were crowned by a blaze, which lent them the aspect of
sacrificial pyres. The dome of the Invalides was flaring with such
brilliancy that you instinctively feared lest it should suddenly
topple down and scatter burning flakes over the neighborhood. Beyond
the irregular towers of Saint-Sulpice, the Pantheon stood out against
the sky in dull splendor, like some royal palace of conflagration
reduced to embers. Then, as the sun declined, the pyre-like edifices
gradually set the whole of Paris on fire. Flashes sped over the
housetops, while black smoke lingered in the valleys. Every frontage
turned towards the Trocadero seemed to be red-hot, the glass of the
windows glittering and emitting a shower of sparks, which darted
upwards as though some invisible bellows were ever urging the huge
conflagration into greater activity. Sheaves of flame were also ever
rising afresh from the adjacent districts, where the streets opened,
now dark and now all ablaze. Even far over the plain, from a ruddy
ember-like glow suffusing the destroyed faubourgs, occasional flashes
of flame shot up as from some fire struggling again into life. Ere
long a furnace seemed raging, all Paris burned, the heavens became yet
more empurpled, and the clouds hung like so much blood over the vast
city, colored red and gold.

With the ruddy tints falling upon her, yielding to the passion which
was devouring her, Helene was still gazing upon Paris all ablaze, when
a little hand was placed on her shoulder, and she gave a start. It was
Jeanne, calling her. "Mamma! mamma!"

She turned her head, and the child went on: "At last! Didn't you hear
me before? FARNCOMBE.

Pluck?

JEYES.

The pluck to snap my fingers at the world and propose marriage to
a Pandora girl. Besides, my mother was alive then, and-- [_abruptly,
with a wild look_] would you like to know what _she_ used to call
these Pandora women, Farncombe?Had it not been for Pauline, who came with me to the
bottom of the staircase, I shouldn't have dared to cross the road."

With a pretty gesture, she brought her face close to her mother's
lips, and, without pausing, whispered the question: "Do you love me?"

Helene kissed her somewhat absently. She was amazed and impatient at
her early return. Had an hour really gone by since she had fled from
the ball-room? However, to satisfy the child, who seemed uneasy, she
told her that she had felt rather unwell. The fresh air was doing her
good; she only needed a little quietness.

"Oh! don't fear; I'm too tired," murmured Jeanne. "I am going to stop
here, and be very, very good. But, mamma dear, I may talk, mayn't I?"

She nestled close to Helene, full of joy at the prospect of not being
undressed at once. She was in ecstasies over her embroidered purple
gown and green silk petticoat; and she shook her head to rattle the
pendants hanging from the long pins thrust through her hair. At last
there burst from her lips a rush of hasty words. Despite her seeming
demureness, she had seen everything, heard everything, and remembered
everything; and she now made ample amends for her former assumed
dignity, silence, and indifference.

"Do you know, mamma, it was an old fellow with a grey beard who made
Punch move his arms and legs? I saw him well enough when the curtain
was drawn aside. Yes, and the little boy Guiraud began to cry. How
stupid of him, wasn't it? They told him the policeman would come and
put some water in his soup; and at last they had to carry him off, for
he wouldn't stop crying. And at lunch, too, Marguerite stained her
milkmaid's dress all over with jam. Her mamma wiped it off and said to
her: 'Oh, you dirty girl!' She even had a lot of it in her hair. I
never opened my mouth, but it did amuse me to see them all rush at the
cakes! Were they not bad-mannered, mamma dear?"

She paused for a few seconds, absorbed in some reminiscence, and then
asked, with a thoughtful air: "I say, mamma, did you eat any of those
yellow cakes with white cream inside? Oh! they were nice! they were
nice! I kept the dish beside me the whole time."

Helene was not listening to this childish chatter. But Jeanne talked
to relieve her excited brain. She launched out again, giving the
minutest details about the ball, and investing each little incident
with the greatest importance.

"You did not see that my waistband came undone just as we began
dancing. A lady, whose name I don't know, pinned it up for me. So I
said to her: 'Madame, I thank you very much.' But while I was dancing
with Lucien the pin ran into him, and he asked me: 'What have you got
in front of you that pricks me so?' Of course I knew nothing about it,
and told him I had nothing there to prick him. However, Pauline came
and put the pin in its proper place. Ah! but you've no idea how they
pushed each other about; and one great stupid of a boy gave Sophie a
blow on the back which made her fall. The Levasseur girls jumped about
with their feet close together. I am pretty certain that isn't the way
to dance. But the best of it all came at the end. You weren't there;
so you can't know. We all took one another by the arms, and then
whirled round; it was comical enough to make one die laughing.
Besides, some of the big gentlemen were whirling around as well. It's
true; I am not telling fibs. Why, don't you believe me, mamma dear?"

Helene's continued silence was beginning to vex Jeanne. She nestled
closer, and gave her mother's hand a shake. But, perceiving that she
drew only a few words from her, she herself, by degrees, lapsed into
silence, into thought of the incidents of that ball of which her heart
was full. Both mother and daughter now sat mutely gazing on Paris all
aflame. It seemed to them yet more mysterious than ever, as it lay
there illumined by blood-red clouds, like some city of an old-world
tale expiating its lusts under a rain of fire.

"Did you have any round dances?" all at once asked Helene, as if
wakening with a start.

"Yes, yes!" murmured Jeanne, engrossed in her turn.

"And the doctor--did he dance!"

"I should think so; he had a turn with me. He lift me up and asked me:
'Where is your mamma? where is your mamma?' and then he kissed me."

Helene unconsciously smiled. What need had she of knowing Henri well?
It appeared sweeter to her not to know him--ay, never to know him well
--and to greet him simply as the one whose coming she had awaited so
long. Why should she feel astonished or disquieted? At the fated hour
he had met her on her life-journey. Her frank nature accepted whatever
might be in store; and quietude, born of the knowledge that she loved
and was beloved, fell on her mind. She told her heart that she would
prove strong enough to prevent her happiness from being marred.

But night was coming on and a chilly breeze arose. Jeanne, still
plunged in reverie, began to shiver. She reclined her head on her
mother's bosom, and, as though the question were inseparably connected
with her deep meditation, she murmured a second time: "Do you love
me?"

Then Helene, her face still glad with smiles, took her head within her
hands and for a moment examined her face closely. Next she pressed a
long kiss near her mouth, over a ruddy spot on her skin. It was there,
she could divine it, that Henri had kissed the child!

The gloomy ridge of the Meudon hills was already partially concealing
the disc of the sun. Over Paris the slanting beams of light had yet
lengthened. The shadow cast by the dome of the Invalides--increased to
stupendous proportions--covered the whole of the Saint-Germain
district; while the Opera-House, the Saint-Jacques tower, the columns
and the steeples, threw streaks of darkness over the right bank
dwellings. The lines of house-fronts, the yawning streets, the islands
of roofs, were burning with a more sullen glow. The flashes of fire
died away in the darkening windows, as though the houses were reduced
to embers. Distant bells rang out; a rumbling noise fell on the ears,
and then subsided. With the approach of night the expanse of sky grew
more vast, spreading a vault of violet, streaked with gold and purple,
above the ruddy city. But all at once the conflagration flared afresh
with formidable intensity, a last great flame shot up from Paris,
illumining its entire expanse, and even its hitherto hidden suburbs.
Then it seemed as if a grey, ashy dust were falling; and though the
clustering districts remained erect, they wore the gloomy,
unsubstantial aspect of coals which had ceased to burn.


                             CHAPTER XI.

One morning in May, Rosalie ran in from the kitchen, dish-cloth in
hand, screaming out in the familiar fashion of a favorite servant:
"Oh, madame, come quick! His reverence the Abbe is digging the ground
down in the doctor's garden."

Helene made no responsive movement, but Jeanne had already rushed to
have a look. On her return, she exclaimed:

"How stupid Rosalie is! he is not digging at all. He is with the
gardener, who is putting some plants into a barrow. Madame Deberle is
plucking all her roses."

"They must be for the church," quietly said Helene, who was busy with
some tapestry-work.

A few minutes later the bell rang, and Abbe Jouve made his appearance.
He came to say that his presence must not be expected on the following
Tuesday. His evenings would be wholly taken up with the ceremonies
incident to the month of Mary. The parish priest had assigned him the
task of decorating the church. It would be a great success. All the
ladies were giving him flowers. He was expecting two palm-trees about
fourteen feet high, and meant to place them to the right and left of
the altar.

"Oh! mamma, mamma!" murmured Jeanne, listening, wonderstruck.

"Well," said Helene, with a smile, "since you cannot come to us, my
old friend, we will go to see you. Why, you've quite turned Jeanne's
head with your talk about flowers."

She had few religious tendencies; she never even went to mass, on the
plea that her daughter's health suffered from the shivering fits which
seized her when she came out of a church. In her presence the old
priest avoided all reference to religion. It was his wont to say, with
good-natured indulgence, that good hearts carve out their own
salvation by deeds of loving kindness and charity. God would know when
and how to touch her.

Till the evening of the following day Jeanne thought of nothing but
the month of Mary. She plagued her mother with questions; she dreamt
of the church adorned with a profusion of white roses, filled with
thousands of wax tapers, with the sound of angels' voices, and sweet
perfumes. And she was very anxious to go near the altar, that she
might have a good look at the Blessed Virgin's lace gown, a gown worth
a fortune, according to the Abbe. But Helene bridled her excitement
with a threat not to take her should she make herself ill beforehand.

However, the evening came at last, and they set out. The nights were
still cold, and when they reached the Rue de l'Annonciation, where the
church of Notre-Dame-de-Grace stands, the child was shivering all
over.

"The church is heated," said her mother. "We must secure a place near
a hot-air pipe."

She pushed open the padded door, and as it gently swung back to its
place they found themselves in a warm atmosphere, with brilliant
lights streaming on them, and chanting resounding in their ears. The
ceremony had commenced, and Helene, perceiving that the nave was
crowded, signified her intention of going down one of the aisles. But
there seemed insuperable obstacles in her way; she could not get near
the altar. Holding Jeanne by the hand, she for a time patiently
pressed forward, but at last, despairing of advancing any farther,
took the first unoccupied chairs she could find. A pillar hid half of
the choir from view.

"I can see nothing," said the child, grievously discontented. "This is
a very nasty place."

However, Helene signed to her to keep silent, and she lapsed into a
fit of sulks. In front of her she could only perceive the broad back
of a fat old lady. When her mother next turned towards her she was
standing upright on her chair.

"Will you come down!" said Helene in a low voice. "You are a
nuisance."

But Jeanne was stubborn.

"Hist! mamma," she said, "there's Madame Deberle. Look! she is down
there in the centre, beckoning to us."

The young woman's annoyance on hearing this made her very impatient,
and she shook her daughter, who still refused to sit down. During the
three days that had intervened since the ball, Helene had avoided any
visit to the doctor's house on the plea of having a great deal to do.

"Mamma," resumed Jeanne with a child's wonted stubbornness, "she is
looking at you; she is nodding good-day to you."

At this intimation Helene was forced to turn round and exchange
greetings; each bowed to the other. Madame Deberle, in a striped silk
gown trimmed with white lace, sat in the centre of the nave but a
short distance from the choir, looking very fresh and conspicuous. She
had brought her sister Pauline, who was now busy waving her hand. The
chanting still continued, the elder members of the congregation
pouring forth a volume of sound of falling scale, while now and then
the shrill voice of the children punctuated the slow, monotonous
rhythm of the canticle.

"They want us to go over to them, you see," exclaimed Jeanne, with
some triumph in her remark.

"It is useless; we shall be all right here."

"Oh, mamma, do let us go over to them! There are two chairs empty."

"No, no; come and sit down."

However, the ladies smilingly persisted in making signs, heedless to
the last degree of the slight scandal they were causing; nay,
delighted at being the observed of all observers. Helene thus had to
yield. She pushed the gratified Jeanne before her, and strove to make
her way through the congregation, her hands all the while trembling
with repressed anger. It was no easy business. Devout female
worshippers, unwilling to disturb themselves, glared at her with
furious looks, whilst all agape they kept on singing. She pressed on
in this style for five long minutes, the tempest of voices ringing
around her with ever-increasing violence. Whenever she came to a
standstill, Jeanne, squeezing close beside her, gazed at those
cavernous, gaping mouths. However, at last they reached the vacant
space in front of the choir, and then had but a few steps to make.

"Come, be quick," whispered Madame Deberle. "The Abbe told me you
would be coming, and I kept two chairs for you."

Helene thanked her, and, to cut the conversation short, at once began
turning over the leaves of her missal. But Juliette was as worldly
here as elsewhere; as much at her ease, as agreeable and talkative, as
in her drawing-room. She bent her head towards Helene and resumed:

"You have become quite invisible. I intended to pay you a visit
to-morrow. Surely you haven't been ill, have you?"

"No, thank you. I've been very busy."

"Well, listen to me. You must come and dine with us to-morrow. Quite a
family dinner, you know."

"You are very kind. We will see."

She seemed to retire within herself, intent on following the service,
and on saying nothing more. Pauline had taken Jeanne beside her that
she might be nearer the hot-air flue over which she toasted herself
luxuriously, as happy as any chilly mortal could be. Steeped in the
warm air, the two girls raised themselves inquisitively and gazed
around on everything, the low ceiling with its woodwork panels, the
squat pillars, connected by arches from which hung chandeliers, and
the pulpit of carved oak; and over the ocean of heads which waved with
the rise and fall of the canticle, their eyes wandered towards the
dark corners of the aisles, towards the chapels whose gilding faintly
gleamed, and the baptistery enclosed by a railing near the chief
entrance. However, their gaze always returned to the resplendent
choir, decorated with brilliant colors and dazzling gilding. A crystal
chandelier, flaming with light, hung from the vaulted ceiling; immense
candelabra, filled with rows of wax tapers, that glittered amidst the
gloom of the church like a profusion of stars in orderly array,
brought out prominently the high altar, which seemed one huge bouquet
of foliage and flowers. Over all, standing amidst a profusion of
roses, a Virgin, dressed in satin and lace, and crowned with pearls,
was holding a Jesus in long clothes on her arm.

"I say, are you warm?" asked Pauline. "It's nice, eh?"

But Jeanne, in ecstasy, was gazing on the Virgin amongst the flowers.
The scene thrilled her. A fear crept over her that she might do
something wrong, and she lowered her eyes in the endeavor to restrain
her tears by fixing her attention on the black-and-white pavement. The
vibrations of the choir-boys' shrill voices seemed to stir her tresses
like puffs of air.

Meanwhile Helene, with face bent over her prayer-book, drew herself
away whenever Juliette's lace rustled against her. She was in no wise
prepared for this meeting. Despite the vow she had sworn within
herself, to be ever pure in her love for Henri, and never yield to
him, she felt great discomfort at the thought that she was a
traitoress to the confiding, happy woman who sat by her side. She was
possessed by one idea--she would not go to that dinner. She sought for
reasons which would enable her to break off these relations so hateful
to her honor. But the swelling voices of the choristers, so near to
her, drove all reflection from her mind; she could decide on no
precise course, and surrendered herself to the soothing influences of
the chant, tasting a pious joy such as she had never before found
inside a church.

"Have you been told about Madame de Chermette?" asked Juliette, unable
any longer to restrain her craving for a gossip.

"No, I know nothing."

"Well, well; just imagine. You have seen her daughter, so womanish and
tall, though she is only fifteen, haven't you? There is some talk
about her getting married next year to that dark young fellow who is
always hanging to her mother's skirts. People are talking about it
with a vengeance."

"Ah!" muttered Helene, who was not paying the least attention.

Madame Deberle went into particulars, but of a sudden the chant
ceased, and the organ-music died away in a moan. Astounded at the
loudness of her own voice breaking upon the stillness which ensued,
she lapsed into silence. A priest made his appearance at this moment
in the pulpit. There was a rustling, and then he spoke. No, certainly
not, Helene would not join that dinner-party. With her eyes fixed on
the priest she pictured to herself the next meeting with Henri, that
meeting which for three days she had contemplated with terror; she saw
him white with anger, reproaching her for hiding herself, and she
dreaded lest she might not display sufficient indifference. Amidst her
dream the priest had disappeared, his thrilling tones merely reaching
her in casual sentences: "No hour could be more ineffable than that
when the Virgin, with bent head, answered: 'I am the handmaiden of the
Lord!'"

Yes, she would be brave; all her reason had returned to her. She would
taste the joy of being loved, but would never avow her love, for her
heart told her that such an avowal would cost her peace. And how
intensely would she love, without confessing it, gratified by a word,
a look from Henri, exchanged at lengthy intervals on the occasion of a
chance meeting! It was a dream that brought her some sense of the
infinite. The church around her became a friend and comforter. The
priest was now exclaiming:

"The angel vanished and Mary plunged into contemplation of the divine
mystery working within her, her heart bathed in sunshine and love."

"He speaks very well," whispered Madame Deberle, leaning towards her.
"And he's quite young, too, scarcely thirty, don't you think?"

Madame Deberle was affected. Religion pleased her because the emotions
it prompted were in good taste. To present flowers for the decoration
of churches, to have petty dealings with the priests, who were so
polite and discreet, to come to church attired in her best and assume
an air of worldly patronage towards the God of the poor--all this had
for her special delights; the more so as her husband did not interest
himself in religion, and her devotions thus had all the sweetness of
forbidden fruit. Helene looked at her and answered with a nod; her
face was ashy white with faintness, while the other's was lit up by
smiles. There was a stirring of chairs and a rustling of
handkerchiefs, as the priest quitted the pulpit with the final
adjuration

"Oh! give wings unto your love, souls imbued with Christian piety. God
has made a sacrifice of Himself for your sakes, your hearts are full
of His presence, your souls overflow with His grace!"

Of a sudden the organ sounded again, and the litanies of the Virgin
began with their appeals of passionate tenderness. Faint and distant
the chanting rolled forth from the side-aisles and the dark recesses
of the chapels, as though the earth were giving answer to the angel
voices of the chorister-boys. A rush of air swept over the throng,
making the flames of the tapers leap, while amongst the flowers,
fading as they exhaled their last perfume, the Divine Mother seemed to
incline her head to smile on her infant Jesus.

All at once, seized with an instinctive dread, Helene turned. "You're
not ill, Jeanne, are you?" she asked.

The child, with face ashy white and eyes glistening, her spirit borne
aloft by the fervent strains of the litanies, was gazing at the altar,
where in imagination she could see the roses multiplying and falling
in cascades.

"No, no, mamma," she whispered; "I am pleased, I am very well
pleased." And then she asked: "But where is our dear old friend?"

She spoke of the Abbe. Pauline caught sight of him; he was seated in
the choir, but Jeanne had to be lifted up in order that she might
perceive him.

"Oh! He is looking at us," said she; "he is blinking." According to
Jeanne, the Abbe blinked when he laughed inwardly. Helene hastened to
exchange a friendly nod with him. And then the tranquillity within her
seemed to increase, her future serenity appeared to be assured, thus
endearing the church to her and lulling her into a blissful condition
of patient endurance. Censers swung before the altar and threads of
smoke ascended; the benediction followed, and the holy monstrance was
slowly raised and waved above the heads lowered to the earth. Helene
was still on her knees in happy meditation when she heard Madame
Deberle exclaiming: "It's over now; let us go."

There ensued a clatter of chairs and a stamping of feet which
reverberated along the arched aisles. Pauline had taken Jeanne's hand,
and, walking away in front with the child, began to question her:

"Have you ever been to the theatre?"

"No. Is it finer than this?"

As she spoke, the little one, giving vent to great gasps of wonder,
tossed her head as though ready to express the belief that nothing
could be finer. To her question, however, Pauline deigned no reply,
for she had just come to a standstill in front of a priest who was
passing in his surplice. Everything was made to depend upon the
central government. The Ministers of Religion, of Justice, of Police,
of Education, etc., have the regulation of all interior affairs,
and appoint all who work under them, so that nobody learns how to
act alone; and as the Government has been in fact ever since dependent
on the will of the people of Paris, the whole country is helplessly
in their hands.

The army, as in almost all foreign nations, is raised by
conscription--that is, by drawing lots among the young men liable
to serve, and who can only escape by paying a substitute to serve
in their stead; and this is generally the first object of the savings
of a family.

All feudal claims had been done away with, and with them the right of
primogeniture; and, indeed, it is not possible for a testator to
avoid leaving his property to be shared among his family, though
he can make some small differences in the amount each receives, and
thus estates are continually freshly divided, and some portions become
very small indeed. French peasants are, however, most eager to own
land, and are usually very frugal, sober, and saving; and the country
has gone on increasing in prosperity and comfort.

It is true that, probably from the long habit of concealing any
wealth they might possess, the French farmers and peasantry care
little for display, or what we should call comfort, and live rough
hard-working lives even while well off and with large hoards of
wealth; but their condition has been wonderfully changed for the
better ever since the Revolution.

All this has continued under the numerous changes that have taken
place in the forms of government.

CHAPTER VIII.

FRANCE SINCE THE REVOLUTION.

1. The Restoration.
"Yes, yes" Mother Fetu hastened to add as she turned her ferret-like
eyes on the ladies, "it is the good doctor. I have seen him there all
through the service; he has never budged from the pavement; he has
been waiting for you, no doubt. Ah! he's a saint of a man! I swear
that to be the truth in the face of God who hears us. Yes, I know you,
madame; he is a husband who deserves to be happy. May Heaven hearken
to your prayers, may every blessing fall on you! In the name of the
Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost!"

Amidst the myriad furrows of her face, which was wrinkled like a
withered apple, her little eyes kept gleaming in malicious unrest,
darting a glance now on Juliette, now on Helene, so that it was
impossible to say with any certainty whom she was addressing while
speaking of "the good doctor." She followed them, muttering on without
a stop, mingling whimpering entreaty with devout outbursts.

Henri's reserve alike astonished and moved Helene. He scarcely had the
courage to raise his eyes towards her. On his wife quizzing him about
the opinions which restrained him from entering a church, he merely
explained that to smoke a cigar was his object in coming to meet them;
but Helene understood that he had wished to see her again, to prove to
her how wrong she was in fearing some fresh outrage. Doubtless, like
herself, he had sworn to keep within the limits of reason. She never
questioned whether his sincerity could be real. She simply experienced
a feeling of unhappiness at seeing him unhappy. Thus it came about,
that on leaving them it the Rue Vineuse, she said cheerfully:

"Well, it is settled then; to-morrow at seven."

In this way the old friendship grew closer than ever, and a charming
life began afresh. To Helene it seemed as if Henri had never yielded
to that moment of folly; it was but a dream of hers; each loved the
other, but they would never breathe a word of their love, they were
content with knowing its existence. They spent delicious hours, in
which, without their tongues giving evidence of their passion, they
displayed it constantly; a gesture, an inflexion of the voice
sufficed, ay, even a silence. Everything insensibly tended towards
their love, plunged them more and more deeply into a passion which
they bore away with them whenever they parted, which was ever with
them, which formed, as it were, the only atmosphere they could
breathe. And their excuse was their honesty; with eyes wide open they
played this comedy of affection; not even a hand-clasp did they allow
each other and their restraint infused unalloyed delight into the
simple greetings with which they met.

Every evening the ladies went to church. Madame Deberle was enchanted
with the novel pleasure she was enjoying. It was so different from
evening dances, concerts, and first nights; she adored fresh
sensations, and nuns and priests were now constantly in her company.
The store of religion which she had acquired in her school-days now
found new life in her giddy brain, taking shape in all sorts of
trivial observances, as though she were reviving the games of her
childhood. Helene, who on her side had grown up without any religious
training, surrendered herself to the bliss of these services of the
month of Mary, happy also in the delight with which they appeared to
inspire Jeanne. They now dined earlier; they gave Rosalie no peace
lest she should cause them to be late, and prevent their securing good
seats. Then they called for Juliette on the way. One day Lucien was
taken, but he behaved so badly that he was afterward left at home. On
entering the warm church, with its glare of wax candles, a feeling of
tenderness and calm, which by degrees grew necessary to Helene, came
over her. When doubts sprang up within her during the day, and the
thought of Henri filled her with indefinable anxiety, with the evening
the church once more brought her peace. The chants arose overflowing
with divine passion; the flowers, newly culled, made the close
atmosphere of the building still heavier. It was here that she
breathed all the first rapture of springtide, amidst that adoration of
woman raised to the status of a cult; and her senses swam as she
contemplated the mystery of love and purity--Mary, virgin and mother,
beaming beneath her wreath of white roses. Each day she remained
longer on her knees. She found herself at times with hands joined in
entreaty. When the ceremony came to an end, there followed the
happiness of the return home. Henri awaited their appearance at the
door; the evenings grew warmer, and they wended their way through the
dark, still streets of Passy, while scarce a word passed between them.

"How devout you are getting, my dear!" said Madame Deberle one night,
with a laugh.

Yes, it was true; Helene was widely opening the portals of her heart
to pious thoughts. Never could she have fancied that such happiness
would attend her love. She returned to the church as to a spot where
her heart would melt, for under its roof she could give free vent to
her tears, remain thoughtless, plunged in speechless worship. For an
hour each evening she put no restraint on herself. The bursting love
within her, prisoned throughout the day, at length escaped from her
bosom on the wings of prayer, amidst the pious quiver of the throng.
The muttered supplications, the bendings of the knee, the reverences
--words and gestures seemingly interminable--all lulled her to rest;
to her they ever expressed the same thing; it was always the same
passion speaking in the same phrase, or the same gesture. She felt a
need of faith, and basked enraptured by the Divine goodness.

Helene was not the only person whom Juliette twitted; she feigned a
belief that Henri himself was becoming religious. What, had he not now
entered the church to wait for them?--he, atheist and scoffer, who had
been wont to assert that he had sought for the soul with his scalpel,
and had not yet discovered its existence! As soon as she perceived him
standing behind a pillar in the shadow of the pulpit, she would
instantly jog Helene's arm.

"Look, look, he is there already! Do you know, he wouldn't confess
when we got married! See how funny he looks; he gazes at us with so
comical an expression; quick, look!"

Helene did not at the moment raise her head. The service was coming to
an end, clouds of incense were rising, and the organ-music pealed
forth joyfully. But her neighbor was not a woman to leave her alone,
and she was forced to speak in answer.

"Yes, yes, I see him," she whispered, albeit she never turned her
eyes.

She had on her own side divined his presence amidst the song of praise
that mounted from the worshipping throng. It seemed to her that
Henri's breath was wafted on the wings of the music and beat against
her neck, and she imagined she could see behind her his glances
shedding their light along the nave and haloing her, as she knelt,
with a golden glory. And then she felt impelled to pray with such
fervor that words failed her. The expression on his face was sober, as
unruffled as any husband might wear when looking for ladies in a
church, the same, indeed, as if he had been waiting for them in the
lobby of a theatre. But when they came together, in the midst of the
slowly-moving crowd of worshippers, they felt that the bonds of their
love had been drawn closer by the flowers and the chanting; and they
shunned all conversation, for their hearts were on their lips.

A fortnight slipped away, and Madame Deberle grew wearied. She ever
jumped from one thing to the other, consumed with the thirst of doing
what every one else was doing. For the moment charity bazaars had
become her craze; she would toil up sixty flights of stairs of an
afternoon to beg paintings of well-known artists, while her evenings
were spent in presiding over meetings of lady patronesses, with a bell
handy to call noisy members to order. Thus it happened that one
Thursday evening Helene and her daughter went to church without their
companions. On the conclusion of the sermon, while the choristers were
commencing the _Magnificat_, the young woman, forewarned by some
impulse of her heart, turned her head. Henri was there, in his usual
place. Thereupon she remained with looks riveted to the ground till
the service came to an end, waiting the while for the return home.

"Oh, how kind of you to come!" said Jeanne, with all a child's
frankness, as they left the church. "I should have been afraid to go
alone through these dark streets."

Henri, however, feigned astonishment, asserting that he had expected
to meet his wife. Helene allowed the child to answer him, and followed
them without uttering a word. As the trio passed under the porch a
pitiful voice sang out: "Charity, charity! May God repay you!"

Every night Jeanne dropped a ten-sou piece into Mother Fetu's hand.
When the latter saw the doctor alone with Helene, she nodded her head
knowingly, instead of breaking out into a storm of thanks, as was her
custom. The church was now empty, and she began to follow them,
mumbling inaudible sentences. Sometimes, instead of returning by the
Rue de Passy, the ladies, when the night was fine, went homewards by
the Rue Raynouard, the way being thus lengthened by five or six
minutes' walk. That night also Helene turned into the Rue Raynouard,
craving for gloom and stillness, and entranced by the loneliness of
the long thoroughfare, which was lighted by only a few gas-lamps,
without the shadow of a single passer-by falling across its pavement.

At this hour Passy seemed out of the world; sleep had already fallen
over it; it had all the quietude of a provincial town. On each side of
the street loomed mansions, girls' schools, black and silent, and
dining places, from the kitchens of which lights still streamed. There
was not, however, a single shop to throw the glare of its frontage
across the dimness. To Henri and Helene the loneliness was pregnant
with intense charm. He had not ventured to offer her his arm. Jeanne
walked between them in the middle of the road, which was gravelled
like a walk in some park. At last the houses came to an end, and then
on each side were walls, over which spread mantling clematis and
clusters of lilac blossoms. Immense gardens parted the mansions, and
here and there through the railings of an iron gate they could catch
glimpses of a gloomy background of verdure, against which the
tree-dotted turf assumed a more delicate hue. The air was filled with
the perfume of irises growing in vases which they could scarce
distinguish. All three paced on slowly through the warm spring night,
which was steeping them in its odors, and Jeanne, with childish
artlessness, raised her face to the heavens, and exclaimed:

"Oh, mamma, see what a number of stars!"

But behind them, like an echo of their own, came the footfall of
Mother Fetu. Nearer and nearer she approached, till they could hear
her muttering the opening words of the Angelic Salutation "_Ave Marie,
gratia plena_," repeating them over and over again with the same
confused persistency. She was telling her beads on her homeward way.

"I have still something left--may I give it to her?" Jeanne asked her
mother.

And thereupon, without waiting for a reply, she left them, running
towards the old woman, who was on the point of entering the Passage
des Eaux. Mother Fetu clutched at the coin, calling upon all the
angels of Heaven to bless her. As she spoke, however, she grasped the
child's hand and detained her by her side, then asking in changed
tones:

"The other lady is ill, is she not?"

"No," answered Jeanne, surprised.

"May Heaven shield her! May it shower its favors on her and her
husband! Don't run away yet, my dear little lady. Let me say an _Ave
Maria_ for your mother's sake, and you will join in the 'Amen' with
me. Oh! your mother will allow you; you can catch her up."

Meanwhile Henri and Helene trembled as they found themselves suddenly
left alone in the shadow cast by a line of huge chestnut trees that
bordered the road. They quietly took a few steps. The chestnut trees
had strewn the ground with their bloom, and they were walking upon
this rosy-tinted carpet. On a sudden, however, they came to a stop,
their hearts filled with such emotion that they could go no farther.

"Forgive me," said Henri simply.

"Yes, yes," ejaculated Helene. "But oh! be silent, I pray you."

She had felt his hand touch her own, and had started back. Fortunately
Jeanne ran towards them at the moment.

"Mamma, mamma!" she cried; "she made me say an _Ave_; she says it will
bring you good luck."

The three then turned into the Rue Vineuse, while Mother Fetu crept
down the steps of the Passage des Eaux, busy completing her rosary.

The month slipped away. Two or three more services were attended by
Madame Deberle. One Sunday, the last one, Henri once more ventured to
wait for Helene and Jeanne. The walk home thrilled them with joy. The
month had been one long spell of wondrous bliss. The little church
seemed to have entered into their lives to soothe their love and
render its way pleasant. At first a great peace had settled on
Helene's soul; she had found happiness in this sanctuary where she
imagined she could without shame dwell on her love; however, the
undermining had continued, and when her holy rapture passed away she
was again in the grip of her passion, held by bonds that would have
plucked at her heartstrings had she sought to break them asunder.
Henri still preserved his respectful demeanor, but she could not do
otherwise than see the passion burning in his face. She dreaded some
outburst, and even grew afraid of herself.

One afternoon, going homewards after a walk with Jeanne, she passed
along the Rue de l'Annonciation and entered the church. The child was
complaining of feeling very tired. Until the last day she had been
unwilling to admit that the evening services exhausted her, so intense
was the pleasure she derived from them; but her cheeks had grown
waxy-pale, and the doctor advised that she should take long walks.

"Sit down here," said her mother. "It will rest you; we'll only stay
ten minutes."

She herself walked towards some chairs a short way off, and knelt
down. She had placed Jeanne close to a pillar. Workmen were busy at
the other end of the nave, taking down the hangings and removing the
flowers, the ceremonials attending the month of Mary having come to an
end the evening before. With her face buried in her hands Helene saw
nothing and heard nothing; she was eagerly catechising her heart,
asking whether she ought not to confess to Abbe Jouve what an awful
life had come upon her. He would advise her, perhaps restore her lost
peace. Still, within her there arose, out of her very anguish, a
fierce flood of joy. She hugged her sorrow, dreading lest the priest
might succeed in finding a cure for it. Ten minutes slipped away, then
an hour. She was overwhelmed by the strife raging within her heart.

At last she raised her head, her eyes glistening with tears, and saw
Abbe Jouve gazing at her sorrowfully. It was he who was directing the
workmen. Having recognized Jeanne, he had just come forward.

"Why, what is the matter, my child?" he asked of Helene, who hastened
to rise to her feet and wipe away her tears.

She was at a loss what answer to give; she was afraid lest she should
once more fall on her knees and burst into sobs. He approached still
nearer, and gently resumed:

"I do not wish to cross-question you, but why do you not confide in
me? Confide in the priest and forget the friend."

"Some other day," she said brokenly, "some other day, I promise you."

