Produced by Nick Hodson of London, England


THE WORLD OF ICE, BY R.M. BALLANTYNE.


CHAPTER ONE.

SOME OF THE dramatis personae INTRODUCED--RETROSPECTIVE GLANCES--CAUSES
OF FUTURE EFFECTS--OUR HERO'S EARLY LIFE AT SEA--A PIRATE--A TERRIBLE
FIGHT AND ITS CONSEQUENCES--BUZZBY'S HELM LASHED AMIDSHIPS--A WHALING
CRUISE BEGUN.

Nobody ever caught John Buzzby asleep by any chance whatever.  No weasel
was ever half so sensitive on that point as he was.  Wherever he
happened to be (and in the course of his adventurous life he had been to
nearly all parts of the known world) he was the first awake in the
morning and the last asleep at night; he always answered promptly to the
first call, and was never known by any man living to have been seen with
his eyes shut, except when he winked, and that operation he performed
less frequently than other men.

John Buzzby was an old salt--a regular true-blue jack tar of the old
school, who had been born and bred at sea; had visited foreign parts
innumerable; had weathered more storms than he could count, and had
witnessed more strange sights than he could remember.  He was tough, and
sturdy, and grizzled, and broad, and square, and massive--a first-rate
specimen of a John Bull, and, according to himself, "always kept his
weather-eye open."  This remark of his was apt to create confusion in
the minds of his hearers, for John meant the expression to be understood
figuratively, while, in point of fact, he almost always kept one of his
literal eyes open and the other partially closed, but as he reversed the
order of arrangement frequently, he might have been said to keep his
lee-eye as much open as the weather one.  This peculiarity gave to his
countenance an expression of earnest thoughtfulness mingled with humour.
Buzzby was fond of being thought old, and he looked much older than he
really was.  Men guessed his age at fifty-five, but they were ten years
out in their reckoning, for John had numbered only forty-five summers,
and was as tough and muscular as ever he had been--although not quite so
elastic.

John Buzzby stood on the pier of the seaport town of Grayton watching
the active operations of the crew of a whaling ship which was on the
point of starting for the icebound seas of the frozen regions, and
making sundry remarks to a stout, fair-haired boy of fifteen, who stood
by his side gazing at the ship with an expression of deep sadness.

"She's a trim-built craft and a good sea-boat, I'll be bound, Master
Fred," observed the sailor, "but she's too small by half, accordin' to
my notions, and I _have_ seen a few whalers in my day.  Them
bow-timbers, too, are scarce thick enough for goin' bump agin the ice o'
Davis Straits.  Howsome'iver, I've seen worse craft drivin' a good trade
in the Polar Seas."

"She's a first-rate craft in all respects, and you have too high an
opinion of your own judgment," replied the youth indignantly.  "Do you
suppose that my father, who is an older man than yourself, and as good a
sailor, would buy a ship, and fit her out, and go off to the
whale-fishery in her if he did not think her a good one?"

"Ah!  Master Fred, you're a chip of the old block--neck or nothing--
carry on all sail till you tear the masts out of her!  Reef the
t'gallant sails of your temper, boy, and don't run foul of an old man
who has been all but a wet-nurse to ye--taught ye to walk, and swim, and
pull an oar, and build ships, and has hauled ye out o' the sea when ye
fell in--from the time ye could barely stump along on two legs, lookin'
like as if ye was more nor half seas over."

"Well, Buzzby," replied the boy, laughing, "if you've been all that to
me, I think you _have_ been a wet-nurse too!  But why do you run down my
father's ship?  Do you think I'm going to stand that?  No, not even from
you, old boy."

"Hallo! youngster," shouted a voice from the deck of the vessel in
question, "run up and tell your father we're all ready, and if he don't
make haste he'll lose the tide, so he will, and that'll make us have to
start on a Friday, it will, an' that'll not do for me no how, it won't;
so make sail and look sharp about it, do--won't you?"

"What a tongue he's got," remarked Buzzby.  "Before I'd go to sea with a
first mate who jawed like that I'd be a landsman.  Don't ever you git to
talk too much, Master Fred, wotever ye do.  My maxim is--and it has
served me through life, uncommon,--`Keep your weather-eye open and your
tongue housed 'xcept when you've got occasion to use it.'  If that
fellow'd use his eyes more and his tongue less he'd see your father
comin' down the road there, right before the wind; with his old sister
in tow."

"How I wish he would have let me go with him!" muttered Fred to himself
sorrowfully.

"No chance now, I'm a-feared," remarked his companion.  "The gov'nor's
as stiff as a nor'wester.  Nothin' in the world can turn him once he's
made up his mind, but a regular sou'easter.  Now, if you had been _my_
son, and yonder tight craft _my_ ship, I would have said, come, at once.
But your father knows best, lad, and you're a wise son to obey orders
cheerfully, without question.  That's another o' my maxims: `Obey orders
an' ax no questions.'"

Frederick Ellice, senior, who now approached, whispering words of
consolation into the ear of his weeping sister, might, perhaps, have
just numbered fifty years.  He was a fine, big, bold, hearty Englishman,
with a bald head, grizzled locks, a loud but not harsh voice, a rather
quick temper, and a kind, earnest, enthusiastic heart.  Like Buzzby, he
had spent nearly all his life at sea, and had become so thoroughly
accustomed to walking on an unstable foundation, that he felt quite
uncomfortable on solid ground, and never remained more than a few months
at a time on shore.  He was a man of good education and gentlemanly
manners, and had worked his way up in the merchant service, step by
step, until he obtained the command of a West India trader.

A few years previous to the period in which our tale opens, an event
occurred which altered the course of Captain Ellice's life, and for a
long period plunged him into the deepest affliction.  This was the loss
of his wife at sea, under peculiarly distressing circumstances.

At the age of thirty Captain Ellice had married a pretty blue-eyed girl,
who resolutely refused to become a sailor's bride, unless she should be
permitted to accompany her husband to sea.  This was without much
difficulty agreed to, and forthwith Alice Bremner became Mrs Ellice,
and went to sea.  It was during her third voyage to the West Indies that
our hero, Fred, was born, and it was during this, and succeeding
voyages, that Buzzby became "all but a wet-nurse" to him.

Mrs Ellice was a loving, gentle, seriously-minded woman.  She devoted
herself, heart and soul, to the training of her boy, and spent many a
pleasant hour in that little unsteady cabin, in endeavouring to instil
into his infant mind the blessed truths of Christianity, and in making
the name of Jesus familiar to his ear.  As Fred grew older, his mother
encouraged him to hold occasional intercourse with the sailors, for her
husband's example taught her the value of a bold, manly spirit, and she
knew that it was impossible for her to instil _that_ into him, but she
was careful to guard him from the evil that he might chance to learn
from the men, by committing him to the tender care of Buzzby.  To do the
men justice, however, this was almost unnecessary, for they felt that a
mother's watchful eye was on the child, and no unguarded word fell from
their lips while he was romping about the forecastle.

When it was time for Fred to go to school, Mrs Ellice gave up her
roving life, and settled in her native town of Grayton, where she
resided with her widowed sister, Amelia Bright, and her niece Isobel.
Here Fred received the rudiments of an excellent education at a private
academy.  At the age of twelve, however, Master Fred became restive,
and, during one of his father's periodical visits home, begged to be
taken to sea.  Captain Ellice agreed; Mrs Ellice insisted on
accompanying them, and in a few weeks they were once again on their old
home, the ocean, and Fred was enjoying his native air in company with
his friend Buzzby, who stuck to the old ship like one of her own stout
timbers.

But this was destined to be a disastrous voyage.  One evening, after
crossing the line, they descried a suspicious-looking schooner to
windward, bearing down upon them under a cloud of canvas.

"What do you think of her, Buzzby?" enquired Captain Ellice, handing his
glass to the seaman.

Buzzby gazed in silence and with compressed lips for some time; then he
returned the glass, at the same time muttering the word: "Pirate."

"I thought so," said the captain in a deep, unsteady voice.  "There is
but one course for us, Buzzby," he continued, glancing towards his wife,
who, all unconscious of their danger, sat near the taffrail, employed
with her needle; "these fellows show no mercy, because they expect none,
either from God or man.  We must fight to the last.  Go, prepare the men
and get out the arms.  I'll tell my wife."

Buzzby went forward, but the captain's heart failed him, and he took two
or three rapid, hesitating turns on the quarter-deck ere he could make
up his mind to speak.

"Alice," he said at length abruptly, "yonder vessel is a pirate."

Mrs Ellice looked up in surprise, and her face grew pale as her eye met
the troubled gaze of her husband.

"Are you quite sure, Frederick?"

"Yes, quite.  Would God that I were left alone to--but--nay, do not be
alarmed; perhaps I am wrong; it may be a--a clipper-built trading
vessel.  If not, Alice, we must make some show of fighting, and try to
frighten them.  Meanwhile you must go below."

The captain spoke encouragingly as he led his wife to the cabin, but his
candid countenance spoke too truthfully, and she felt that his look of
anxious concern bade her fear the worst.

Pressing her fervently to his heart, Captain Ellice sprang on deck.

By this time the news had spread through the ship, and the crew,
consisting of upwards of thirty men, were conversing earnestly in knots
of four or five while they sharpened and buckled on cutlasses, or loaded
pistols and carbines.

"Send the men aft, Mr Thompson," said the captain, as he paced the deck
to and fro, casting his eyes occasionally on the schooner, which was
rapidly nearing the vessel.  "Take another pull at these
main-topsail-halyards, and send the steward down below for my sword and
pistols.  Let the men look sharp; we've no time to lose, and hot work is
before us."

"I will go for your sword, Father," cried Fred, who had just come on
deck.

"Boy, boy, you must go below; you can be of no use here."

"But, Father, you know that I'm not _afraid_."

"I know that, boy; I know it well; but you're too young to fight; you're
not strong enough; besides, you must comfort and cheer your mother, she
may want you."

"I am old enough and strong enough to load and fire a pistol, Father;
and I heard one of the men say we would need all the hands on board, and
more if we had them; besides, it was my mother who told me what was
going on, and sent me on deck to _help you to fight_."

A momentary gleam of pride lit up the countenance of the captain as he
said hastily: "You may stay, then," and turned towards the men, who now
stood assembled on the quarterdeck.

Addressing the crew in his own blunt, vigorous style, he said: "Lads,
yon rascally schooner is a pirate, as you all know well enough.  I need
not ask you if you are ready to fight--I see by your looks you are.  But
that's not enough--you must make up your minds to fight _well_.  You
know that pirates give no quarter.  I see the decks are swarming with
men.  If you don't go at them like bull-dogs you'll walk the plank
before sunset, every man of you.  Now, go forward, and double-shot your
muskets and pistols, and stick as many of the latter into your belts as
they will hold.  Mr Thompson, let the gunner double-shot the four big
guns, and load the little carronade with musket balls to the muzzle.  If
they do try to board us, they'll get a warm reception."

"There goes a shot, sir," said Buzzby, pointing towards the piratical
schooner, from the side of which a white cloud burst and a round shot
ricochetted over the sea, passing close ahead of the ship.

"Ay, that's a request for us to lay-to," said the captain bitterly, "but
we won't.  Keep her away a point."

"Ay, ay, sir," sung out the man at the wheel.  A second and third shot
were fired, but passed unheeded, and the captain, fully expecting that
the next would be fired into them, ordered the men below.

"We can't afford to lose a man, Mr Thompson; send them all down."

"Please, sir, may I remain?" said Buzzby, touching his hat.

"Obey orders," answered the captain sternly.  The sailor went below with
a sulky fling.

For nearly an hour the two vessels cut through the water before a steady
breeze, during which time the fast-sailing schooner gradually overhauled
the heavy West-Indiaman, until she approached within speaking distance.
Still Captain Ellice paid no attention to her, but stood with compressed
lips beside the man at the wheel, gazing alternately at the sails of his
vessel, and at the windward horizon, where he fancied he saw indications
that led him to hope the breeze would fail ere long.

As the schooner drew nearer, a man leaped on the hammock-nettings, and,
putting a trumpet to his mouth, sang out lustily: "Ship ahoy, where are
you from and what's your cargo?"

Captain Ellice made no reply, but ordered four of his men on deck to
point one of the stern-chasers.

Again the voice came harshly across the waves, as if in passion: "Heave
to, or I'll sink you."  At the same moment the black flag was run up to
the peak, and a shot passed between the main and fore-mast.

"Stand by to point this gun," said the captain in a subdued voice.

"Ay, ay, sir!"

"Fetch a red-hot iron; luff, luff a little--a little more--steady, so."
At the last word there was a puff and a roar, and an iron messenger flew
towards the schooner.  The gun had been fired more as a reply of
defiance to the pirate, than with the hope of doing him any damage, but
the shot had been well aimed--it cut the schooner's main-sail-yard in
two, and brought it rattling down on deck.  Instantly the pirate yawed
and delivered a broadside, but in the confusion on deck the guns were
badly aimed, and none took effect.  The time lost in this manoeuvre,
added to the crippled condition of the schooner, enabled the
West-Indiaman to gain considerably on her antagonist, but the pirate
kept up a well-directed fire with his bow-chasers, and many of the shots
struck the hull, and cut the rigging seriously.  As the sun descended
towards the horizon the wind fell gradually, and ceased at length
altogether, so that both vessels lay rolling on the swell with their
sails flapping idly against the masts.

"They're a gittin' out the boats, sir," remarked John Buzzby, who,
unable to restrain himself any longer, had crept upon deck at the risk
of another reprimand; "and, if my eyes be'nt deceiving me, there's a
sail on the horizon to wind'ard--leastways, the direction which _wos_
wind'ard afore it fell calm."

"She's bringing a breeze along with her," remarked the captain, "but I
fear the boats will come up before it reaches us.  There are three in
the water, and manned already.  There they come.  Now, then, call up all
hands."

In a few seconds the crew of the West-Indiaman were at their stations,
ready for action, and Captain Ellice, with Fred at his elbow, stood
beside one of the stern-chasers.  Meanwhile, the boats of the pirate--
five in number--pulled away in different directions, evidently with the
intention of attacking the ship at different points.  They were full of
men armed to the teeth.  While they rowed towards the ship the schooner
resumed its fire, and one ball cut away the spanker boom, and slightly
wounded two of the men with splinters.  The guns of the ship were now
brought to bear on the boats, but without effect, although the shot
plunged into the water all round them.  As they drew nearer, a brisk
fire of musketry was opened on them, and the occasional falling of an
oar and confusion on board showed that the shots told.  The pirates
replied vigorously, but without effect, as the men of the ship were
sheltered by the bulwarks.

"Pass the word to load and reserve fire," said the captain, "and hand me
a musket, Fred.  Load again as fast as I fire."  So saying, the captain
took aim, and fired at the steersman of the largest boat, which pulled
towards the stern.  "Another, Fred--"

At this moment a withering volley was poured upon the boat, and a savage
yell of agony followed, while the rowers--who remained unhurt--paused
for an instant as if paralysed.  Next instant they recovered, and
another stroke would have brought them almost alongside, when Captain
Ellice pointed the little carronade and fired.  There was a terrific
crash, the gun recoiled violently to the other side of the deck, and the
pirate boat sank, leaving the sea covered with dead and wounded men.  A
number, however, who seemed to bear charmed lives, seized their
cutlasses with their teeth, and swam boldly for the ship.  This
incident, unfortunately, attracted too much of the attention of the
crew, and, ere they could prevent it, another boat reached the bow of
the ship, the crew of which sprang up the side like cats, formed on the
forecastle, and poured a volley upon the men.

"Follow me, lads," shouted the captain, as he sprang forward like a
tiger.  The first man he reached fell by a ball from his pistol; in
another moment the opposing parties met in a hand-to-hand conflict.
Meanwhile Fred, having been deeply impressed with the effect of the shot
from the little carronade, succeeded in raising and reloading it.  He
had scarcely accomplished this when one of the boats reached the
larboard quarter, and two of the men sprang up the side.  Fred observed
them, and felled the first with a handspike before he reached the deck,
but the pirate who instantly followed, would have killed him, had he not
been observed by the second mate, who had prevented several of the men
from joining in the melee on the forecastle, in order to meet such an
emergency as this.  Rushing to the rescue with his party, he drove the
pirates back into the boat, which was immediately pulled towards the
bow, where the other two boats were now grappling and discharging their
crews on the forecastle.  Although the men of the West-Indiaman fought
with desperate courage, they could not stand before the increasing
numbers of pirates, who now crowded the forepart of the ship in a dense
mass.  Gradually they were beaten back, and at length were brought to
bay on the quarter-deck.

"Help, Father!" cried Fred, pushing through the struggling crowd,
"here's the carronade ready loaded."

"Ha! boy, well done!" cried the captain, seizing the gun, and, with the
help of Buzzby, who never left his side, dragging it forward.  "Clear
the way, lads!"

In a moment the little cannon was pointed to the centre of the mass of
men, and fired.  One awful shriek of agony rose above the din of the
fight, as a wide gap was cut through the crowd; but this only seemed to
render the survivors more furious.  With a savage yell they charged the
quarter-deck, but were hurled back again and again by the captain, and a
few chosen men who stood around him.  At length one of the pirates, who
had been all along conspicuous for his strength and daring, stepped
deliberately up, and, pointing a pistol at the captain's breast, fired.
Captain Ellice fell, and at the same moment a ball laid the pirate low;
another charge was made; Fred rushed forward to protect his father, but
was thrown down and trodden under foot in the rush, and in two minutes
more the ship was in possession of the pirates.

Being filled with rage at the opposition they had met with, these
villains proceeded, as they said, to make short work of the crew, while
several of them sprang into the cabin, where they discovered Mrs Ellice
almost dead with terror.  Dragging her violently on deck, they were
about to cast her into the sea, when Buzzby, who stood with his hands
bound, suddenly burst his bonds and sprang towards her.  A blow from the
butt of a pistol, however, stretched him insensible on the deck.

"Where is my husband?--my boy?" screamed Mrs Ellice wildly.

"They've gone before you, or they'll soon follow," said a savage
fiercely, as he raised her in his powerful arms, and hurled her
overboard.  A loud shriek was followed by a heavy plunge.  Jimmy wished
they would get it over, for he was quite willing to undergo any
form of punishment they might decide upon, if only they would let
him know quickly.

He hoped they wouldn't make the Biffer fight him, not that he was afraid
of the Biffer, but because it would be so hard to keep himself from
hitting back, and that he had decided not to do. You see the Biffer
was a new boy, and, for another thing, he wore a leather strap round his
wrist. On his very first day at school the Biffer had volunteered the
information that he once gave a boy such a biff on the nose that he
had sprained his wrist, and that ever since he had worn a wrist strap,
lest it should happen again. It was Jimmy who had nick-named him the
Biffer, and from that time the Biffer had sought Jimmy's blood.

But Jimmy was not easy to quarrel with.

He was the acknowledged champion of Form II., and you had to commit three
offences before Jimmy would seriously consider you. At the first offence
you got a note with the one word "Beware!" written upon it; at the
second, another note with the word "Blood" written underneath a skull
and crossbones; and at the third you received a note with the word "Deth,"
and underneath was the drawing of a coffin.

The Biffer had so far arrived at the second note.

Jimmy did hope they wouldn't choose the Biffer, for he could hear even now
the Biffer's yell when he had made that awful mistake which had brought
about the present deplorable situation.

Jimmy couldn't think how he had come to say what he did say; he could
have bitten off his tongue when he realised it; but it was too late--he
had said it.

He tried to think how it had all occurred, and the scene flashed again
before his mind.

There was the master with his pointer resting upon the Dogger Bank on the
map of Europe.

"Who can tell me the name of this sea?" he had said, and Jimmy had snapped
his fingers and waved his arm about in his anxiety to catch the
master's eye.

You see, it was so seldom, so very seldom, that Jimmy felt he knew
the right answer to any question, and the new experience was
intoxicating. The master too seemed to find it unusual, and he at once
turned to Jimmy and said, "Well, what is this sea called, then?" Jimmy,
full of the pride of knowledge, burst out with "The North Sea, Sir."
Oh!
if he had only stopped at that; but in his desire to show how much he
knew he added without thinking the fatal words, "or German Ocean!"
In the shout of derision which had followed, Jimmy realised what he
had said, and felt himself falling, falling, falling....

Jimmy became aware that the noise on the opposite side of the
playground was ceasing, and soon, from the corner of his eye, he saw
Jones minimus detach himself from the crowd. "Half a mo'," he heard Jones
minimus say; "I want to get a knotted handkerchief," and he saw him
hurry into the school. As he emerged he flourished the knotted
handkerchief, but when delivering the verdict to Jimmy that he would
have to run the gauntlet three times to the tune of the knotted handkerchiefs
of Form II., he tried to smuggle into Jimmy's hands an exercise-book
which he said Jimmy could stuff up his back; it would stick there if
Jimmy buttoned his jacket, he said, and it would take the sting off a
bit. Jimmy had to bite his lip as he refused the exercise-book, and then
with head erect and lips no longer trembling he went forth to face the
ordeal.

Form II. had arranged themselves in two ranks, facing one another,
and the knots in the handkerchiefs were firm and hard. "You have got to
bunk through and back again and then down again," said Jones minimus in
a hoarse whisper.

The Biffer was at the head of one rank, and had got his handkerchief
slung over his shoulder in happy readiness for the first blow.

"Are you ready? Go!" shouted Form II. in one voice.

At the word "Go!" Jimmy pulled his hands out of his pockets--he was glad
his mother wasn't there to see him--and with head still up and
eyes to the front he walked slowly up the double lines and as slowly
down them.

The Biffer got in a good one, he got in two before Jimmy was out of reach,
and he then changed the handkerchief to his left hand in readiness for
the return journey. Arrived at the end of the lines, Jimmy turned on his
heel and began to walk even more slowly than at first.

But there was no sting in the blows this time; all the zest seemed to
have gone out of the affair; and, but for the whack the Biffer
gave, Jimmy never felt anything.

The third time down was a farce, for, after Jimmy had deliberately stopped
opposite the Biffer in order to let him have as many as his injured
soul required, no one touched him.

In fact they were all shaking hands with Jimmy, who was now his smiling
self once more and ready to play with the best of them, when suddenly
the Biffer took it into his head to make a joke.

"Perhaps he _is_ a German," said the Biffer, and waited for the
general laugh to follow his sally.

But the laugh didn't come; instead there was a dead silence.

Who was the Biffer--a new boy at that--to call anyone a German?
Instinctively a ring was formed and the Biffer found himself in the
middle of it.

Jimmy took off his coat and gave it to Jones minimus, who danced for
sheer delight.

Jimmy had only one regret: the butcher-boy was not there to see him--the
butcher-boy who had expended so much time over him, had taught him the
upper cut, the under cut, every cut that the heart of a butcher-boy
delights in. The Biffer was very busy biffing the air with a rapid
circular motion of the arms, for Jimmy's fixed scowl and set of jaw
troubled him.

Oh, why wasn't the butcher-boy there to see that tremendous smack on the
nose the Biffer got? He would have felt amply rewarded.

No one had ever seen Jimmy fight like this, and Jones minimus shouted in
his joy, for the Biffer was outbiffed in every direction.

In vain did he cry "_Pax_," for Jimmy had not half relieved his feelings,
and there was no end to the dodges the butcher-boy had taught him,
each of which, he had said, meant sudden death.

"He's had enough, Jimmy," whispered Jones minimus.

"I'm satisfied," he added as the Biffer, who was lying on the ground,
refused to get up and have any more.

As the boys entered the class-room the next day there was the map of
Europe still hanging up in front of the class, and the very first question
that was asked by the master was, "Well, Jimmy, what is this sea?"

"The North Sea or British Ocean, Sir!"

said Jimmy, a reply that was greeted with a rousing cheer by the whole
of Form II.

* * * * *
A SECOND HELPING!

Our Bagdad force fell in a rut At Ctesiphon; Turks made things hum.

We found that we had got to Kut, Whilst Russians found a way to
Kum!

Our men know not the word "defeat," They'll make it clear on Tigris plain
That, Russian-like, when they retreat, 'Tis but to cut and come
again.

* * * * *
A TURKISH TROPHY.

(_A belated letter from Gallipoli._)
My dear ----, By this week's post I trust you will receive the long
promised trophy, to wit one Turkish headpiece procured by my own
personal exertions.

As the story of its capture, though somewhat out of the ordinary,
has been passed over in stony silence both by the official _communiqués_
and "Our Special Correspondent" I shall endeavour to give you a brief
impression of the difficulties overcome as truthfully as my sense
of imagination will allow me. First of all I must draw a map:--

[Illustration:

A B British trench, with traverses.

C D Turkish trench, without.

E F Ditch
G British barricade.

H Turkish barricade.]
This should give you an idea of the English and Turkish lines at a point
where they are about eighty yards apart. Without going into details you
will see the English trench is of the superior pattern, as it has
traverses. I had to work in that technical term to show I know all
about it; I know another, "the berm," but I am not too sure about what
that is, and also I don't suppose I could draw a "berm" if I saw
one.

Anyway, I know it's quite a good term connected with trenches, as I heard
a G.O.C. fairly strafe a subaltern, the other day, because he hadn't
got a "berm." Well, to refer to the map, you will observe that there
is an old ditch running between the two lines of trenches, and
both sides have advanced a certain distance along this ditch and have
built barricades about ten yards apart. Every day it is part of my job
to take a constitutional along our trenches, and after discussing the
European situation and the latest Budget with the various battalion
commanders to ask them whether there is any particularly obnoxious part
of the opposition line they would like me to salute with my battery.

Usually they say, "No, there's nothing in particular, but let's have a
shoot all the same; for example, there's a dog that barks abominably
every night opposite L 57. Couldn't you abolish him?" Incidentally we
no longer give our trenches names, such as Piccadilly, Rotten Row, but
mere letters and numbers; the reason being that one of the staff was
picked up in a fainting condition, having strolled down Park Lane and
then found himself, to his horror, in Peckham High Street. The shock--his
own home being in Baling Broadway--had proved too much for his
constitution.

However, to refer back to the map once more, our barricade across
the ditch is a most convenient spot for observing artillery fire and as
such is frequently used by me. Unfortunately my view was always hasty and
badly interrupted by the attentions of a Turkish sniper behind their
barricade. This man's name was Ibrahim, and he was a Constantinople
cab-driver, married, with two children, both boys. You may be surprised
that we know so much about the enemy, but we live in such close
proximity that opposite the Lancashire Fusiliers a Turk named
Mahomet, who lives at No. 3, Golden Horn Terrace, told the reporter
of _The Worpington Headlight_ that for three years he had been
suffering from pains in the back--but that's another story.

Incidentally Mahomet at present inhabits a sniper's post surrounded by
a perfect thicket of barbed-wire, and I had a bright scheme for its
removal. I got hold of a trench catapult, an ingenious contrivance
of elastic that hurls a bomb some hundreds of yards, and placed in it
a harpoon attached to a long coil of rope. The idea was that on release
of the catapult the harpoon would be hurled in the air, the rope would
neatly pay out, and then, as soon as the harpoon had grappled
Mahomet, all we would have to do would be to haul on the rope and over
would come the whole bag of tricks.
Unfortunately something went wrong, and the rope, instead of neatly
uncoiling, flailed round the trench like a young anaconda, and,
catching a harmless spectator by the leg, hurled him twenty feet in the
air.
Immediately the opposition lines resounded like a rifle-booth at a country
fair. However our spectator descended unpunctured, and the only damage
done was to our vanity, when Mahomet threw over a message attached
to a stone to ask whether we would repeat the performance as he and
a pal had a bet on as to who was the best shot and wanted a human aeroplane
to judge.

But we have got a long way from Ibrahim. Ibrahim possessed the headpiece
I am sending you. I could not think of a method for obtaining it,
as his vigilance was deadly.

However a bright thought struck me, and I assiduously saved up my rum
ration for a month. Then one bitter cold night I tossed over the
accumulation in a bottle wrapped up in an old sock. Presently there
resounded in the still air a pleasant bubbling sound indicative
of liquid being poured out of a glass receptacle, then a deep sigh,
followed by a profound silence.

Inch by inch I crawled over our barricade and slowly wormed my way
along the ditch. At last I reached the Turkish barricade and cautiously
slid my hand over the top until my fingers encountered Ibrahim's
toque.

Then I gave a gentle tug.
Horror! he had the flap down under his chin. Unmanned for a moment
I recovered, and I slowly slid my fingers down his hirsute neck and
with a gentle titillation slid the flap clear. Ibrahim merely stirred
in his sleep and resumed his slumbers.

Triumphantly hugging the trophy to my bosom I crawled back to our
barricade.

The saddest part of the tale is yet to come. I had promised
to procure you a trophy unstained by association with human
slaughter, but when the day dawned there lay poor Ibrahim stiff and
stark behind his barricade, killed by a cold in his head

.

* * * * *
[Illustration: PANTOMIME ANNOUNCEMENTS.]
* * * * *
"Message Boy Wanted for Butchery."
_Brechin Advertiser._

A lot of people are after that boy

.

* * * * *
"Taxi driver who laid down Fare at Royal Hotel at 2.45 p.m. on
Christmas Day, would oblige by returning Gent's Umbrella to Hotel."

  _Aberdeen Journal._
  We gather that it had been a wet morning

.

* * * * *
[Illustration: _Cyril_ (_eating his bread-and-jam--with not too much jam_).
"This is prepostrous--this war economy."]
* * * * *
HUNTIN' WEATHER.

There's a dog-fox down in Lannigan's spinney (And Lannigan's wife has
hens to mourn); The hunters stamp in their stalls an' whinny, Soft
with leisure an' fat with corn.

The colts are pasturin', bold an' lusty, Sleek they are with their coats
aglow, Ripe to break, but the bits grow rusty And the saddles sit in
a dusty row.

Old O'Dwyer was here a-Monday With a few grey gran'fathers out for a field
(Like the ghostly hunt of a dead an'-done day), They--an' some
lassies that giggled an' squealed.

The houn's they rioted like the devil (They ran a hare an' they
killed a goose); I cursed Caubeen, but he looked me level:
"The boys are away--so what's the use?"
The mists lie clingin' on bog an' heather, Haws hang red on the
silver thorn; It's huntin' weather, ay, huntin' weather, But trumpets
an' bugles have beat the horn!

* * * * *
A Debt of Honour.

Mr. Punch ventures to plead on behalf of the nine hundred men of
the Royal Naval Division who were taken prisoners by the enemy in
the retirement from Antwerp.

Less fortunate than those of the same Division who were interned in
Holland (for want of official information most people imagine that
all the missing were so interned), they lack the necessities of life.
Parcels of food are sent to them, fortnightly to each man, as well
as clothing and tobacco; and it is known that they receive all that
is sent.

Mr. Punch begs his readers to help the fund from which these simple
comforts are provided, and to address their gifts to Lady GWENDOLEN
GUINNESS, at 11, St.

James's Square, S.W.

* * * * *

From a report of Mr. LLOYD GEORGE'S speech:--
"The works of Ireland have been extremely helpful, and I am glad
to acknowledge that I have been extremely helpful."

_Manchester Guardian._
On this occasion the MINISTER OF MUNITIONS appears to have allowed
himself the privilege of "thinking aloud."

* * * * *

"_The Daily Mail_ will not be published to-morrow, and for that reason
we seize the occasion to-day of bidding our readers a merry Christmas,"--_Daily
Mail of December 24th._
And a very good reason too.

* * * * *
Seasonable.

"The Canadian Government has granted to Canadian troops oversea and in
training at home a Christmas allowance of one chilling."
_Provincial Paper._
* * * * *
"He much regretted that it was not possible to-day to communicate the
results of the Derby Report in any detail, or, indeed, at all. The task
had been one of stupendous bagnitude."
_Evening Standard._
Yes, but how big was the bag?

* * * * *
Two descriptions of the new Chief of the Imperial General Staff:--
"Of Scottish descent, and familiarly known to the Army as 'Jock,' he
is one of the most remarkable soldiers of the time."
_Glasgow Evening Times._
"That he is known throughout the whole Army simply as 'Wullie' is a
sure token that the private soldier has taken him to his heart."
_Glasgow Evening Citizen._
Won't the Germans be puzzled?

* * * * *
"Eddie Harvey (Fleetwood) and Ike Whitehouse (Barrow) went through 15
rounds contest for £5 a side and a nurse, and Harvey won on points."--_The
People._
The stakes, we presume, were divided.

* * * * *
"A kid was born with monkey face and human skull at Saidapet on the
13th instant."
_New India._
This is headed "A Curious Phenomenon." But is it? Some of our neighbours'
kids are just like that.

* * * * *
[Illustration: THE NEW EDGE.]
* * * * *
LONDON AS USUAL.

("_Kelly's London Directory_" for 1916, a contemporary remarks, is
very much the same as the volume for 1915.)

Where, where are the signs of the raider Who swam to our ken like a kite,
Who swore he had played the invader And knocked us to bits in the night;
Who pounded these parts into jelly From Mile End, he said, to the Mall?

For the man who should know (J. J. KELLY) Can't spot 'em at all.

You may turn up the street that is Vigo Or alight on the Lane that is
Mark; You may let your incredulous eye go O'er each Crescent and
Corner and Park; You may hunt through the humblest of alleys Or the
giddiest haunts of the town, And Kelly's, who're "safe" as the Palace,
Have got 'em all down.

So I sing to those equals in wonder, Of BRADSHAW (the expert on trains),
Who have torn the Hun's fiction asunder-- That our City's a mass of
remains; Here's our proof that we're plainly not undone, That, although
every night she lies hid, Our stolid undaunted old London Still
stands where she did

.

* * * * *

[Illustration: _Porter_ (_dug-out_). "Shall I put yer 'ockey-knockers in
the van, Sir?"]
* * * * *
STUDIES IN FRUSTRATION.

I.

The scene was the comfortable spacious breakfast-room in the Bishop's
Palace.

His lordship sat nearest to the fire; the bishop's wife presided
over the fragrant coffee-pot, and the curate, their dine-and-sleep
guest, sat opposite the bishop and farthest from the warmth.

As a curate this position was his due. Some day he also would be a
bishop, and then he too would know what it was to intercept the
glow.

The curate was looking dubiously into the recesses of an egg.

His fine Anglican features underwent a series of contortions.

"I am afraid," said the bishop, "that that egg is not a good one."

"You are right, my lord," said the curate. "It is not only bad, it's
alive. I think it's the worst egg that was ever offered me."

II.

The wounded soldier lay in his deck-chair placidly smoking his
hundredth cigarette that day. He was not naturally a smoker, but
cigarettes arrived in enormous numbers and something had to be done
with them.

His visitor sat beside him, note-book in hand.

"Yes?" he remarked.

"And then," said the soldier, "came the order to charge. We fixed
bayonets and rushed at the Bosches like mad. It was glorious--like
the best kind of football match."
The visitor took it all down, and more.
"I remember bayonetting two men," said the soldier, "and then I
remember nothing else. And that's six months ago. Still, I'm getting
well, and then there's only one thing on earth that I really want
with a passionate desire ..."
"I know! I know!" said the visitor, moistening his pencil.
"Never to see any more war as long as I live," the soldier
continued.

III.
The aged artist sat in his luxurious studio surrounded by his
masterpieces--that is, by the pictures he had never been able to
sell.
The gem of the collection stood on an easel in the middle of the
room; while a connoisseur, hat in hand, inspected it closely,
enthusiastically, breathlessly. Then, coming over to where the
artist was resting, he sat down opposite to him and in a voice
trembling with emotion asked, "Tell me, how _do_ you mix your
colours?"
There was a deep silence, almost painful in its intensity. A
drawing-pin fell with a deafening crash.
The venerable painter stood up with a calm and leonine expression.
"I use an ivory palette knife," he said.

IV.
The shadows were lengthening in the beautiful garden. It was a warm
spring evening. The old sun-dial had just struck seven.
The poet threw aside his book and called his Airedale terrier; the
dog, responding in time, eventually reached his master's knee.
Seizing his opportunity, the representative of the Press observed,
"You are, I see, fond of dogs."
"Fond of dogs?" replied the poet. "I? I detest them;" and so saying
he kicked the Airedale a distance of several feet into the air, so
that, falling immediately on the sun-dial, it was transfixed by the
gnomon.
As he watched its struggles, thus impaled, the poet laughed the
hearty resonant laugh for which he was famous.

V.
The Civil Service clerk so famous for his drollery was entering the
office doors at half-past ten in the morning, or exactly sixty
minutes past the appointed time. By an unfortunate chance his
principal met him, as, alas! he had too often done, at the same
tardy hour. "Late again," said the great man, consulting his watch.
"I believe that you get here later every day." "Yes," said the
clerk, "I do. But then I always stay on and work overtime." 

VI.
The eminent publicist replaced his glass on the table and turned
to the lady who sat beside him. "My business," he said, "is the
manufacture of mustard. I have made a vast fortune out of it."
"How very interesting," the lady replied absently; but the next
moment, inspired by a hidden thought, she added with quickened
interest, "Please don't think me inquisitive, but how can a fortune
be made out of a thing like mustard? People take so little of it."

"Madam," answered the mustard magnate deliberately, "we do not make
our fortunes from the mustard that people eat"--
"Yes, yes?" cried the lady eagerly.--"but," he continued, "from
what they spill in mixing poultices." 

VII.
The famous money-lender one evening arrived as usual at the Casino,
but this time only to bid his friends good-bye.
"Not leaving Monte?" they asked.
"Yes, I am," he replied; "I'm going to Rome." 
"Rome?"
"Yes, why not? I'm told it's wonderful. I shall be there a month;"
and so saying he hurried to his hotel.
Three days later he walked into the Casino again.
"What," cried his friends--"you here? We thought you were going to
be in Rome a month."
"So I am," said the money-lender, "and more. I came back for my
things, most of which I left here, as it had occurred to me I might
not like it.
But I adore it. Rome is beautiful, august, sublime. The simple
severe beauty of the Vatican, the vast solemnity of the Campagna!
It is indeed the eternal city. Let me keep Rome!"
And again he hurried away.

* * * * *
[Illustration: _Excited individual_ (_who has picked up umbrella
left in bar, to despatch rider just leaving_). "Hi! Mister. Is this
your umbrella?"] 
* * * * * 
A Long Turn.
"To-morrow evening Miss Phyllis Bedells makes her final appearance
at the London Empire, where she has danced without interruption for
nine and a half years." 
_Bristol Times and Mirror._ 
* * * * *
De Mortuis....
"Tired of this much worn physical life Chief George Moshesh bursted
the bands of morality as under Tuesday, November 2nd."There were only a few masses of low ice
floating about in various directions.  The wind was steady, but light,
and seemed as if it would speedily fall altogether.  Gradually the
_blink_ on the horizon (as the light haze always distinguishable above
ice, or snow-covered land, is called) resolved itself into a long white
line of ice, which seemed to grow larger as the ship neared it, and in
about two hours more they were fairly in the midst of the pack, which
was fortunately loose enough to admit of the vessel being navigated
through the channels of open water.  Soon after, the sun broke out in
cloudless splendour, and the wind fell entirely, leaving the ocean in a
dead calm.

"Let's go to the fore-top, Tom," said Fred, seizing his friend by the
arm, and hastening to the shrouds.

In a few seconds they were seated alone on the little platform at the
top of the fore-mast, just where it is connected with the fore-top-mast,
and from this elevated position they gazed in silent delight upon the
fairy-like scene.

Those who have never stood at the mast-head of a ship at sea, in a dead
calm, cannot comprehend the feeling of intense solitude, that fills the
mind in such a position.  There is nothing analogous to it on land.  To
stand on the summit of a tower and look down on the busy multitude below
is not the same, for there the sounds are quite different in _tone_, and
signs of life are visible all over the distant country, while cries from
afar reach the ear, as well as those from below.  But from the mast-head
you hear only the few subdued sounds under your feet--all beyond is
silence; you behold only the small oval-shaped platform that is your
world--beyond lies the calm, desolate ocean.  On deck you cannot realise
this feeling, for there sails and yards tower above you, and masts, and
boats, and cordage, intercept your view; but from above you _take in_
the intense minuteness of your home at a single glance--you stand aside,
as it were, and, in some measure, comprehend the insignificance of the
_thing_ to which you have committed your life.

The scene witnessed by our friends at the mast-head of the _Dolphin_ on
this occasion was surpassingly beautiful.  Far as the eye could stretch,
the sea was covered with islands and fields of ice of every conceivable
shape.  Some rose in little peaks and pinnacles, some floated in the
form of arches and domes, some were broken and rugged, like the ruins of
old border strongholds, while others were flat and level, like fields of
white marble; and so calm was it that the ocean in which they floated
seemed like a groundwork of polished steel, in which the sun shone with
dazzling brilliancy.  The tops of the icy islets were pure white, and
the sides of the higher ones of a delicate blue colour, which gave to
the scene a transparent lightness that rendered it pre-eminently
fairy-like.

"It far surpasses anything I ever conceived," ejaculated Singleton after
a long silence.  "No wonder that authors speak of scenes being
indescribable.  Does it not seem like a dream, Fred?"

"Tom," said Fred earnestly, "I've been trying to fancy myself in another
world, and I have almost succeeded.  When I look long and intensely at
the ice, I get almost to believe that these are streets, and palaces,
and cathedrals.  I never felt so strong a desire to have wings, that I
might fly from one island to another, and go floating in and out, and
round about, those blue caves and sparkling pinnacles."

"It's a curious fancy, Fred, but not unnatural."

"Tom," said Fred, after another long silence, "has not the thought
occurred to you that God made it all?"

"Some such thought did cross my mind, Fred, for a moment, but it soon
passed away.  Is it not _very_ strange that the idea of the Creator is
so seldom, and so slightly, connected with his works in our minds?"

Again there was a long silence.  This, however, could only take place
with those reefs, which had increased to a breadth sufficient to prevent
their central spaces from being almost immediately filled up with the
sand and detritus driven inwards from all sides: hence it is that few
reefs, which are less than half a mile in diameter, even in the
atolls where the basin-like structure is most strikingly exhibited,
include lagoons.

This remark, I may add, applies to all coral-reefs wherever found. The
basin-formed reefs of the Maldiva Archipelago may, in fact, be briefly
described, as small atolls formed during subsidence over the separate
portions of large and broken atolls, in the same manner as these latter
were formed over the barrier-reefs, which encircled the islands of
a large archipelago now wholly submerged.

SUBMERGED AND DEAD REEFS.

In the second section of the first chapter, I have shown that there are
in the neighbourhood of atolls, some deeply submerged banks, with
level surfaces; that there are others, less deeply but yet wholly
submerged, having all the characters of perfect atolls, but consisting
merely of dead coral-rock; that there are barrier-reefs and atolls
with merely a portion of their reef, generally on the leeward side,
submerged; and that such portions either retain their perfect
outline, or they appear to be quite effaced, their former place
being marked only by a bank, conforming in outline with that part
of the reef which remains perfect.

These several cases are, I believe, intimately related together,
and can be explained by the same means.

There, perhaps, exist some submerged reefs, covered with living
coral and growing upwards, but to these I do not here refer.

As we see that in those parts of the ocean, where coral-reefs are most
abundant, one island is fringed and another neighbouring one is not
fringed; as we see in the same archipelago, that all the reefs are
more perfect in one part of it than in another, for instance, in
the southern half compared with the northern half of the Maldiva
Archipelago, and likewise on the outer coasts compared with the
inner coasts of the atolls in this same group, which are placed in
a double row; as we know that the existence of the innumerable
polypifers forming a reef, depends on their sustenance, and that
they are preyed on by other organic beings; and, lastly, as we know
that some inorganic causes are highly injurious to the growth of
coral, it cannot be expected that during the round of change to
which earth, air, and water are exposed, the reef-building polypifers
should keep alive for perpetuity in any one place; and still less
can this be expected, during the progressive subsidences, perhaps
at some periods more rapid than at others, to which by our theory
these reefs and islands have been subjected and are liable.

It is, then, not improbable that the corals should sometimes perish
either on the whole or on part of a reef; if on part, the dead
portion, after a small amount of subsidence, would still retain its
proper outline and position beneath the water.

After a more prolonged subsidence, it would probably form, owing
to the accumulation of sediment, only the margin of a flat bank,
marking the limits of the former lagoon.

Such dead portions of reef would generally lie on the leeward side
(Mr.

Lyell, in the first edition of his "Principles of Geology," offered
a somewhat different explanation of this structure.

He supposes that there has been subsidence; but he was not aware
that the submerged portions of reef were in most cases, if not in
all, dead; and he attributes the difference in height in the two
sides of most atolls, chiefly to the greater accumulation of detritus
to windward than to leeward.

But as matter is accumulated only on the backward part of the reef, the
front part would remain of the same height on both sides. I may here
observe that in most cases (for instance, at Peros Banhos, the
Gambier group and the Great Chagos Bank), and I suspect in all
cases, the dead and submerged portions do not blend or slope into
the living and perfect parts, but are separated from them by an
abrupt line.

In some instances small patches of living reef rise to the surface
from the middle of the submerged and dead parts.), for the impure
water and fine sediment would more easily flow out from the lagoon
over this side of the reef, where the force of the breakers is less
than to windward; and therefore the corals would be less vigorous
on this side, and be less able to resist any destroying agent.

A hitch
in the line at that time, as it flew out of the tub, or any accidental
entanglement, would have dragged the boat and crew right down.  Many
such fatal accidents occur to whalers, and many a poor fellow has had a
foot or an arm torn off, or been dragged overboard and drowned, in
consequence of getting entangled.  One of the men stood ready with a
small hatchet to cut the line in a moment, if necessary, for whales
sometimes run out all that is in a boat at the first plunge, and should
none of the other boats be at hand, to lend a second line to attach to
the one nearly expended, there is nothing for it but to cut.  On the
present occasion, however, none of these accidents befel the men of the
captain's boat.  The line ran all clear, and long before it was
exhausted the whale ceased to descend, and the _slack_ was hauled
rapidly in.

Meanwhile the other boats pulled up to the scene of action, and prepared
to strike, the instant the fish should rise to the surface.  It appeared
suddenly, not twenty yards from the mate's boat, where Buzzby, who was
harpooner, stood in the bow ready to give it the iron.

"Spring, lads, spring!" shouted the mate, as the whale spouted into the
air a thick stream of water.  The boat dashed up, and Buzzby planted his
harpoon vigorously.  Instantly the broad flukes of the tail were tossed
into the air, and, for a single second, spread like a canopy over
Buzzby's head.  There was no escape.  The quick eye of the whaleman saw
at a glance that the effort to back out was hopeless.  He bent his head,
and the next moment was deep down in the waves.  Just as he disappeared,
the flukes descended on the spot which he had left, and cut the bow of
the boat completely away, sending the stern high into the air with a
violence that tossed men, and oars, and shattered planks, and cordage,
flying over the monster's back into the seething caldron of foam around
him.  It was apparently a scene of the most complete and instantaneous
destruction, yet, strange to say, not a man was lost.  A few seconds
after, the white foam of the sea was dotted with black heads, as the men
rose one by one to the surface, and struck out for floating oars and
pieces of the wrecked boat.

"They're lost!" cried Fred Ellice in a voice of horror.

"Not a bit of it, youngster; they're safe enough, I'll warrant," replied
the captain, as his own boat flew past the spot, towed by the whale.
"Pay out, Amos Parr; give him line, or he'll tear the bows out of us."

"Ay, ay, sir!" sang out Amos, as he sat coolly pouring water on the
loggerhead, round which a coil of the rope was whizzing like lightning;
"all right!  The mate's men are all safe, sir; I counted them as we shot
past, and I seed Buzzby come up last of all, blowin' like a grampus; and
small wonder, considerin' the dive he took."

"Take another turn of the coil, Amos, and hold on," said the captain.

The harpooneer obeyed, and away they went after the whale like a rocket,
with a tremendous strain on the line, and a bank of white foam gurgling
up to the edge of the gunwale, that every moment threatened to fill the
boat and sink her.  Such a catastrophe is not of unfrequent occurrence,
when whalemen, thus towed by a whale, are tempted to hold on too long;
and many instances have happened of boats and their crews being in this
way dragged under water and lost.  Fortunately the whale dashed
horizontally through the water, so that the boat was able to hold on and
follow, and in a short time the creature paused and rose for air.  Again
the men bent to their oars, and the rope was hauled in until they came
quite close to the fish.  This time a harpoon was thrown, and a deep
lance-thrust given which penetrated to the vital parts of its huge
carcass, as was evidenced by the blood which it spouted, and the
convulsive lashing of its tremendous tail.

While the captain's crew were thus engaged, Saunders, the second mate,
observing from the ship the accident to the first mate's boat, sent off
a party of men to the rescue, thus setting free the third boat, which
was steered by a strapping fellow named Peter Grim, to follow up the
chase.  Peter Grim was the ship's carpenter, and he took after his name.
He was, as the sailors expressed it, a "grim customer", being burnt by
the sun to a deep rich brown colour, besides being covered nearly up to
the eyes with a thick coal-black beard and moustache, which completely
concealed every part of his visage, except his prominent nose and dark,
fiery-looking eyes.  He was an immense man, the largest in the ship,
probably, if we except the Scotch second mate Saunders, to whom he was
about equal in all respects--except argument.  Like most big men, he was
peaceable and good-humoured.

"Look alive now, lads," said Grim, as the men pulled towards the whale;
"we'll get a chance yet, we shall, if you give way like tigers.  Split
your sides, boys--do--that's it.  Ah! there she goes, right down.  Pull
away now, and be ready when she rises."

As he spoke the whale suddenly _sounded_, that is, went perpendicularly
down, as it had done when first struck, and continued to descend until
most of the line in the captain's boat was run out.

"Hoist an oar," cried Amos Parr, as he saw the coil diminishing.  Grim
observed the signal of distress, and encouraged his men to use their
utmost exertions.  "Another oar!--another!" shouted Parr, as the whale
continued its headlong descent.  "Stand by to cut the line," said
Captain Guy with compressed lips.  "No! hold on, hold on!"

At this moment, having drawn down more than a thousand fathoms of rope,
the whale slackened its speed, and Parr, taking another coil round the
loggerhead, held on until the boat was almost dragged under water.  Then
the line became loose, and the slack was hauled in rapidly.  Meanwhile
Grim's boat had reached the spot and the men now lay on their oars at
some distance ahead, ready to pull the instant the whale should show
itself.  Up it came, not twenty yards ahead.  One short, energetic pull,
and the second boat sent a harpoon deep into it, while Grim sprang to
the bow, and thrust a lance with deadly force deep into the carcass.
The monster sent up a stream of mingled blood, oil, and water, and
whirled its huge tail so violently that the sound could be heard a mile
off.  Before it dived again, the captain's boat came up, and succeeded
in making fast another harpoon, while several additional lance-thrusts
were given with effect, and it seemed as if the battle were about to
terminate, when suddenly the whale struck the sea with a clap like
thunder, and darted away once more like a rocket to windward, tearing
the two boats after it, as if they had been egg-shells.

Meanwhile a change had come over the scene.  The sun had set, red and
lowering, behind a bank of dark clouds, and there was every appearance
of stormy weather; but as yet it was nearly calm, and the ship was
unable to beat up against the light breeze in the wake of the two boats,
which were soon far away on the horizon.  Then a furious gust arose and
passed away; a dark cloud covered the sky as night fell, and soon boats
and whale were utterly lost to view.

"Waes me," cried the big Scotch mate, as he ran up and down the
quarter-deck wringing his hands, "what _is_ to be done noo?"

Saunders spoke a mongrel kind of language--a mixture of Scotch and
English,--in which, although the Scotch words were sparsely scattered,
the Scotch accent was very strong.

"How's her head?"

"Nor'-nor'-west, sir."

"Keep her there, then.  Maybe, if the wind holds stiddy, we may overhaul
them before it's quite dark."

Although Saunders was really in a state of the utmost consternation at
this unexpected termination to the whale-hunt, and expressed the
agitation of his feelings pretty freely, he was too thorough a seaman to
neglect anything that was necessary to be done under the circumstances.
He took the exact bearings of the point at which the boats had
disappeared, and during the night, which turned out gusty and
threatening, kept making short tacks, while lanterns were hung at the
mast-heads, and a huge torch, or rather a small bonfire, of tarred
materials was slung at the end of a spar, and thrust out over the stern
of the ship.  But for many hours there was no sign of the boats, and the
crew of the _Dolphin_ began to entertain the most gloomy forebodings
regarding them.

At length, towards morning, a small speck of light was noticed on the
weather-beam.  It flickered for a moment, and then disappeared.

"Did ye see yon?" said Saunders to Mivins in an agitated whisper, laying
his huge hand on the shoulder of that worthy.  "Down your helm," (to the
steersman).

"Ay, ay, sir!"

"Stiddy!"

"Steady it is, sir!"

Mivins' face, which for some hours had worn an expression of deep
anxiety, relaxed into a bland smile, and he smote his thigh powerfully
as he exclaimed: "That's them, sir, _and_ no mistake!  What's your
opinion, Mr Saunders!"

The second mate peered earnestly in the direction in which the light had
been seen, and Mivins, turning in the same direction, screwed up his
visage into a knot of earnest attention, so complicated and intense that
it seemed as if no human power could evermore unravel it.

"There it goes again!" cried Saunders, as the light flashed distinctly
over the sea.

"Down helm; back fore-top-sails!" he shouted, springing forward; "lower
away the boat there!"

In a few seconds the ship was hove to, and a boat, with a lantern fixed
to an oar, was plunging over the swell in the direction of the light.
Sooner than was expected they came up with it, and a hurrah in the
distance told that all was right.

"Here we are, thank God," cried Captain Guy, "safe and sound!  We don't
require assistance, Mr Saunders; pull for the ship."

A short pull sufficed to bring the three boats alongside, and in a few
seconds more the crew were congratulating their comrades, with that
mingled feeling of deep heartiness, and a disposition to jest, which is
characteristic of men who are used to danger, and think lightly of it
after it is over.

"We've lost our fish, however," remarked Captain Guy, as he passed the
crew on his way to the cabin; "but we must hope for better luck next
time."

"Well, well," said one of the men, wringing the water out of his wet
clothes as he walked forward, "we got a good laugh at Peter Grim, if we
got nothin' else by our trip."

"How was that, Jack?"

"Why, ye see, jist before the whale gave in, it sent up a spout o' blood
and oil as thick as the main-mast, and, as luck would have it, down it
came slap on the head of Grim, drenchin' him from head to foot, and
makin' him as red as a lobster."

"'Ow did you lose the fish, sir?" enquired Mivins, as our hero sprang up
the side, followed by Singleton.

"Lost him as men lose money in railway speculations nowadays.  We _sank_
him, and that was the last of it.  After he had towed us I don't know
how far-out of sight of the ship at any rate,--he suddenly stopped, and
we pulled up and gave him some tremendous digs with the lances, until he
spouted jets of blood, and we made sure of him, when, all at once, down
he went head foremost like a cannon-ball, and took all the line out of
both boats, so we had to cut, and he never came up again.  At least, if
he did, it became so dark that we never saw him.  Then we pulled to
where we thought the ship was, and, after rowing nearly all night,
caught sight of your lights; and here we are, dead-tired, wet to the
skin, and minus about two miles of whale-line and three harpoons."


CHAPTER FIVE.

MISCELLANEOUS REFLECTIONS--THE COAST OF GREENLAND--UPPERNAVIK--NEWS OF
THE POLE STAR--MIDNIGHT DAY--SCIENTIFIC FACTS AND FAIRY-LIKE SCENES--TOM
SINGLETON'S OPINION OF POOR OLD WOMEN--IN DANGER OF A SQUEEZE--ESCAPE.

In pursuance of his original intention, Captain Guy now proceeded
through Davis' Straits into Baffin's Bay, at the head of which he
intended to search for the vessel of his friend Captain Ellice, and
afterwards prosecute the whale-fishery.  Off the coast of Greenland,
many whalers were seen, actively engaged in warfare with the giants of
the Polar Seas, and to several of these Captain Guy spoke, in the faint
hope of gleaning some information as to the fate or the _Pole Star_, but
without success.  It was now apparent to the crew of the _Dolphin_ that
they were engaged as much on a searching, as a whaling expedition; and
the fact that the commander of the lost vessel was the father of "young
Mr Fred", as they styled our hero, induced them to take a deep interest
in the success of their undertaking.

This interest was further increased by the graphic account that honest
John Buzzby gave of the death of poor Mrs Ellice, and the enthusiastic
way in which he spoke of his old captain.  Fred, too, had, by his frank,
affable manner, and somewhat reckless disposition, rendered himself a
general favourite with the men, and had particularly recommended himself
to Mivins the steward (who was possessed of an intensely romantic
spirit), by stating once or twice, very emphatically, that he (Fred)
meant to land on the coast of Baffin's Bay, should the captain fail to
find his father, and continue the search on foot and alone.  There was
no doubt whatever that poor Fred was in earnest, and had made up his
mind to die in the search, rather than not find him.  He little knew the
terrible nature of the country in which for a time his lot was to be
cast, and the hopelessness of such an undertaking as he meditated.  With
boyish inconsiderateness he thought not of how his object was to be
accomplished; he cared not what impossibilities lay in the way, but with
manly determination he made up his mind to quit the ship and search for
his father through the length and breadth of the land.  Let not the
reader smile at what he may perhaps style a childish piece of
enthusiasm.  Many a youth, at his age, has dreamed of attempting as
great if not greater impossibilities.  All honour, we say, to the boy
who _dreams_ impossibilities, and greater honour to him who, like Fred,
_resolves to attempt them_!  James Watt stared at an iron tea kettle
till his eyes were dim, and meditated the monstrous impossibility of
making that kettle work like a horse; and men might (perhaps did) smile
at James Watt _then_; but do men smile at James Watt _now_--now that
thousands of iron kettles are dashing, like dreadful comets, over the
length and breadth of the land, not to mention the sea, with long tails
of men, and women, and children behind them?

"That's 'ow it is, sir," Mivins used to say, when spoken to by Fred on
the subject, "I've never bin in cold countries myself, sir, but I've bin
in 'ot, and I knows that with a stout pair o' legs, and a will to work,
a man can work 'is way hanywhere.  Of course there's not much of a
pop'lation in them parts, I've heer'd; but there's Heskimos, and where
one man can live, so can another, and what one man can do, so can
another--that's bin my hexperience, and I'm not ashamed to hown it, I'm
not, though I _do_ say it as shouldn't, and I honour you, sir, for your
filleral detarmination to find your father, sir, and--"

"Steward!" shouted the captain down the cabin skylight.

"Yes, sir!"

"Bring me the chart."

"Yes, sir!" and Mivins disappeared like a Jack-in-the-box from the cabin
just as Tom Singleton entered it.

"Here we are, Fred," he said, seizing a telescope that hung over the
cabin door, "within sight of the Danish settlement of Uppernavik; come
on deck and see it."

Fred needed no second bidding.  It was here that the captain had hinted
there would, probably, be some information obtained regarding the _Pole
Star_, and it was with feelings of no common interest the two friends
examined the low-roofed houses of this out-of-the-way settlement.

In an hour afterwards the captain and first mate, with our young
friends, landed amid the clamorous greetings of the entire population,
and proceeded to the residence of the governor, who received them with
great kindness and hospitality; but the only information they could
obtain was that, a year ago, Captain Ellice had been driven there in his
brig by stress of weather, and, after refitting and taking in a supply
of provisions, had set sail for England.

Here the _Dolphin_ laid in a supply of dried fish, and procured several
dogs, besides an Esquimaux interpreter and hunter, named Meetuck.

Leaving this little settlement, they stood out once more to sea, and
threaded their way among the ice, with which they were now well
acquainted in all its forms, from the mighty berg, or mountain of ice,
to the wide field.  They passed in succession one or two Esquimaux
settlements, the last of which, Votlik, is the most northerly point of
colonisation.  Beyond this all was terra incognita.  Here enquiry was
again made, through the medium of the Esquimaux interpreter, who had
been taken on board at Uppernavik, and they learned that the brig in
question had been last seen, beset in the pack, and driving to the
northward.  Whether or not she had ever returned, they could not tell.

A consultation was now held, and it was resolved to proceed north as far
as the ice would permit, towards Smith's Sound, and examine the coast
carefully in that direction.

For several weeks past there had been gradually coming over the aspect
of nature, a change to which we have not yet referred, and which filled
Fred Ellice and his friend, the young surgeon, with surprise and
admiration; this was the long-continued daylight, which now lasted the
whole night round, and increased in intensity every day, as they
advanced north.  They had, indeed, often heard and read of it before,
but their minds had utterly failed to form a correct conception of the
exquisite calmness and beauty of the _midnight-day_ of the north.

Everyone knows that, in consequence of the axis of the earth not being
perpendicular to the plane of its orbit round the sun, the poles are
alternately directed more or less _towards_ that great luminary during
one part of the year, and _away_ from it during another part.  So that,
far north, the days during the one season grow longer and longer until,
at last, there is _one long day_ of many weeks' duration, in which the
sun does not set at all; and during the other season there is _one long
night_, in which the sun is never seen.  It was approaching the height
of the summer season when the _Dolphin_ entered the Arctic regions, and,
although the sun descended below the horizon for a short time each
night, there was scarcely any diminution of the light at all, and, as
far as one's sensations were concerned, there was but one long
continuous day, which grew brighter and brighter at midnight, as they
advanced.

"How thoroughly splendid this is," remarked Tom Singleton to Fred one
night, as they sat in their favourite out-look, the main-top, gazing
down on the glassy sea, which was covered with snowy icebergs and floes,
and bathed in the rays of the sun, "and how wonderful to think that the
sun will only set for an hour or so, and then get up as splendid as
ever!"

The evening was still as death.  Not a sound broke upon the ear save the
gentle cries of a few sea-birds, that dipped ever and anon into the sea,
as if to kiss it gently while asleep, and then circled slowly into the
bright sky again.  .

* * * * *

VI.

(1616). PROJECT FOR THE FURTHER DISCOVERY OF THE SOUTH-LAND NOVA
GUINEA.

A.

_Resolution of the Governor-General and Councillors, October 8,
1616._
...Inasmuch as heretofore the Company has taken in hand to dispatch
a ship for the discovery of the South-land-Nova-Guinea and the
dependencies thereof, which project has not been executed owing to
other intervening business, it has been resolved to take the said
project once more in hand at the present time; and that to this end
the Lord Admiral...[*] shall dispatch from Amboyna or Banda the
ship de Jager with any other small yacht that should lie at anchor
there, or happen to put into port, in order to the discovery of the
lands aforesaid; seeing that it is much more convenient to visit
those parts starting from here than from the Netherlands, and that
the same can now be done without any inconvenience or detriment to
the Company.

And if in Amboyna or Banda no other yacht besides the ship de Jager
should be found available, then the Lord Admiral shall be free to
assign the ship Morgenster for the said purpose...
[* Steven Van der Haghen.]

B.

_Resolution of the Governor-General and Councillors, October 21, 1616._

...Considering the confident inclination to the said voyage evinced by the
Lord Advocate Dedel [*], and the importance of this enterprise being
conducted with great skill and judgment, it has been determined and
resolved to employ the Advocate aforesaid in the said voyage, to
the end that all things may be conducted in good order, with the
requisite courage and resolution, for which purpose the Hon.

Advocate will now depart for Amboyna with the Lord Admiral...

[* Cornelis Dedel, LL. D.]
C.

_Letter from the Governor-General LAURENS REAEL to the Managers of
the E.I.C., May 10, 1617._ 
...Mr.

Cornelis Dedel, LL.

D., had by us been dispatched to this place [*] from the Moluccas, that
with two or three yachts and pinnaces he might proceed to the discovery
of the Southern lands, which undertaking had heretofore once more
by order of...Admiraal Verhagen been engaged in by Jan Rossangin
[**].

But when lying at anchor in Amboyna...Dedel's ships were employed
on other services. [***] 
[* Reael was then staying in Banda.]
[* This almost certainly refers to the voyage of 1605-6 under Willem
Jansz. and Rosengein.]
[* Although, as we see, the project was not carried into execution,
I have thought it good to print the above documents, because they
bear testimony to the earnest intention of the Dutch authorities
in India once more to undertake the discovery of the "South-land"
(at the same time the matter was by no means lost sight of in the
Netherlands, as is proved by a resolution of the Managers of the
E.I.C., of October 1616); [and] because document C in the text is
_presumably_ fresh evidence for the voyage of 1605-6

.]
* * * * *
{Page 8}

VII.

(1616). VOYAGE OF DE EENDRACHT UNDER COMMAND OF DIRK HARTOGS(ZOON).
DISCOVERY OF THE WEST-COAST OF AUSTRALIA IN 1616: DIRK HARTOGS ISLAND
AND -ROAD, LAND OF THE EENDRACHT OR EENDRACHTSLAND.

A.

_Letter of Supercargo Cornelis Buysero at Bantam to the Managers of the
East India Company at Amsterdam._
Worshipful, Wise, Provident, very Discreet Gentlemen,...
...The ship Eendracht [*], with which they had sailed from the
Netherlands, after communicating at the Cabo sailed away from them
so far southward as to come upon 6 various islands which were,
however, found uninhabited [**]...
[* Commanded by Dirk Hartogs, or Hartogszoon.]
[* What "uninhabited islands" the ship Eendracht "came upon",
Buysero's letter does not say.

Various authentic archival documents of 1618 and subsequent years,
however, go to show that the land afterwards named Eendrachtsland
or Land van de Eendracht, and the Dirk Hartogsreede (island) must
have been discovered on this voyage.]

Bantam, this last day of August, A.D. 1617.
Your Worships' servant to command CORNELIS BUYSERO [*]
[* Buysero was supercargo at Bantam (DE JONGE, Opkcornst, IV, p.
68,) and was therefore likely to be well informed as to the adventures
of the ship, which had sailed from the Netherlands in January 1616,
departed from the Cape of Good Hope in the last days of August, and had
arrived in India in December of the same year, as appears from
what Steven Van der Haghen, Governor of Amboyna, writes May 26, 1617:
"That in the month of December 1616, the ship Eendracht entered
the narrows between Bima and the land of Endea near Guno Api
(Goenoeng Api) in the south of Java" (Sapi Straits).]

B.

_See infra Document No. IX, of 1618._
It proves that as early as 1618 the name of Eendrachtsland was known in
the Netherlands.

C.

The subjoined chart (reproduced on the original scale in _Remarkable
Maps_, II, 4) was drawn by HESSEL GFRRITSZ, Cartographer in ordinary
to the East India Company {Page 9} (Ress. of the "Heeren XVII", March 21,
1619 and October 21, 1629). He had accordingly at his disposal the
official documents referring to this discovery.

[Map No. 4. Caert van (Chart of) 't Land van d'Eendracht Ao 1627
door HESSEL GERRITSZ] 
D.

The interesting little folding chart, marked No. 5, is now in the
possession of Jhr.

J. E. Huydecoper van Maarsseveen en Nigtevegt, LL. D., at Utrecht. It is
bound up with the said gentleman's copy of Abel Janszoon Tasman's
journal of his voyage of 1642-3 [*]. The chart clearly shows that at
times in subsequent issues of certain charts the dates given in the
first issue were retained, while numerous corrections were made in the
chart itself.

[* See my Life and Labours of TASMAN, p. 69.]
{Page 10}
E.

Of the chart of which this is a small portion, a complete reproduction
will be found in _Remarkable Maps_, II, 8. In 1630, accordingly, the
discovery of Eendrachtsland was known at Nuremberg.

[Map No. 6. Kaart van het Zuidland van (Alap of the Southland by) JOANNES
KEPPLER en PHILIPPUS ECKEBRECHT, 1630]
* * * * *

VIII.

(1618).

VOYAGE OF THE SHIP ZEEWOLF, FROM THE NETHERLANDS TO INDIA, UNDER THE
COMMAND OF SUPERCARGO PIETER DIRKSZOON AND SKIPPER HAEVIK CLAESZOON
VAN HILLEGOM.--FURTHER DISCOVERY OF THE WEST-COAST OF AUSTRALIA.

_Letter of Supercargo Pieter Dirkszoon to the Managers of the E.I.C.
at Amsterdam, dated June 24, 1618._
A.

Worshipful Wise Provident Very Discreet Gentlemen.

By the ships T'Wapen van Zeelandt, den Eenhoorn and Enckhuyzen
(which with full cargoes arrived at the Cape de bone Esperance from
these parts of India) I have on the 22nd of March last [1618] briefly
advised Your Worships of our safe arrival there...[*]
[* The ship had sailed from the Netherlands in December 1617

.]
* * *

{Page 11}

Now with this ship den Witten Beer Your Worships may be pleased to receive
news of the subsequent successful progress of our voyage to this part
of India, viz. that on the 24th of the said month we sailed from
the Taeffelbaey [Table Bay]...in the ship Seewolf for Bantam (pursuant
to Your Worships' orders); in such fashion that by God's grace we
soon got south as far as 37, 38 and 39 degrees, after which we held
our course due east for a thousand miles before turning it northward;
so that on the 21st of May following we made the land in Cleyn Java
about 6 or 8 miles east of the island of Bali; after which, passing
between Bali and Cleyn Java, we came to anchor before our factory
of Japara on the second day of June...

Having on the 11th of May reached 21° 15' S. Latitude, we saw and
discovered...land about 5 or 6 miles to windward east of us, which
in consequence we were unable to touch at.

We observed it to be a level, low-lying shore of great length, and looking
out from the top-mast we saw on both ends of it, to north as well as to
southward, still other land which showed high and mountainous.

But as the land bore eastward from us, and we could not have got
higher without considerable inconvenience, we do not know whether
it forms an unbroken coast-line, or is made up of separate islands.

In the former case it might well be a mainland coast, for it extended
to a very great length.

But only the Lord knows the real state of affairs. At all events it would
seem never to have been made or discovered by any one before us, as
we have never heard of such discovery [*], and the chart shows
nothing but open ocean at this place.

According to our skipper's estimation in his chart the Strait of Sunda
was then N.N.E. of us at about 250 miles' distance; according to
the second mate's reckoning the direction was North East, and
according to the first mate's estimation North East by North.

These statements, however, proved erroneous, since we arrived east
of Bali on a north-north-east course. So that consequently this land
bears from Sunda Strait south-south-west, and ships must arrive
in Java eastward of Sunda Strait on a north-by-west or northern
course; on which those who come in sight of this land from eastward
and wish to go to Bantam, may safely base their course.

This much by way of advice...

[* Dirk Hartochs's discovery had not come to their knowledge then.]
On board the ship Seewolff lying at anchor before Jacatra, this 20 of June,
1618.
Your Worships' obedient Servant PIETER DIRCXSOON 1618.

B.

_Letter of Skipper Haevick Claeszoon van Hillegom to the Managers of the
E.I.C. at Amsterdam, dated June 24, 1618._
Laus Deo. On board the ship Seewolf lying at anchor before Jaeketerae,
this 24th of June 1618.

Right Worshipful Beloved Gentlemen My Lords Directors of the United
Company at Amsterdam, with friendly greeting, the present, after my
best wishes for the {Page 12} well-being and health of my Worshipful
Noble Masters, serves to express my hope that Your Worships may
have duly received, through Pieter Gertsz, skipper of the ship
Enckhuyzen [*], my letters of the 22nd of March, written in the
Taefel Bay, recounting what had happened on our voyage up to said
date.

The present further serves to inform Your Worships of our progress up to
this day, as follows.

We set sail from the Cape de bon Esperanse on the 24th of the same
month...

[* See _supra_ A.]
On the 5th of May we got into Latitude 28° 26' South, when we saw numbers
of birds many of which seemed to be land-birds, such as a white
tropic-bird and a few scissor-tailed ducks, so that I surmised that we
were near land. Two or three days afterwards we saw sea-weed floating
in large quantities and long strips. On the 10th do. we passed the
tropic in fine weather. On the 11th do. we saw land in 21° 20' S. Lat.:
it was a level, low-lying coast extending to a great length, and bearing
mainly south and north, falling off on both sides with high
mountains; we could not get near it.

Whether it was a mainland coast or islands only, is known to God
alone, but from the signs seen at various times I suspect it to be
a mainland.

The compass has one point north-westerly variation here; we saw a
good deal of sea-weed floating about, and observed land-birds up
to the 16th degree, both of these being signs of the proximity of the
mainland. This land is a fit point to be made by ships coming here with
the eastern monsoon, in order to get a fixed course for Java or
Sunda Strait; for if you see this land in 21, 22 or 23 degrees, and
shape your course north-north-west and north-by-west you will make
the western extremity of Jaeva.

I write this as a matter of certainty, seeing that we have made the same
on a fixed course, and ships following this course are sure to find
it true. On the 21st do. we saw land, to wit, Kleyn Jaevae; we kept off
and on during the night, and at daybreak made for the land, passing
through the strait between Kleyn Jaeva and Baely...

Your Worships' servant to command
H.

CLAESSEN VAN HILLEGOM.

* * * * *

IX.

(1618). VOYAGE OF THE SHIP MAURITIUS FROM THE NETHERLANDS TO INDIA UNDER
THE COMMAND OF SUPERCARGO WILLEM JANSZ OR JANSZOON AND SKIPPER
LENAERT JACOBSZ(OON).

FURTHER DISCOVERY OF THE WEST-COAST OF AUSTRALIA.--WILLEMS-RIVER.

_Letter Of supercargo WILLFM JANSZ(OON) to the Managers of the Amsterdam
Chamber, Oclober 6, 1618._
A.

Worshipful Wise Provident Discreet Gentlemen,
(Sailed 1000 miles to eastward in in 38 degrees with notable success.)

The present serves only to inform you that on the 8th of June last with
the ship Mauritius we passed Cape de bon esperence, with strong westerly
winds, so that we deemed it inadvisable to call at any land, after
which we ran a thousand miles to eastward in 38 degrees Southern
Latitude, though we should have wished to go still further east.

{Page 13}

On the 31st of July we discovered an island and landed on the same,
where we found the marks of human footsteps--on the west-side it extends
N.N.E.
and S.S.W.; it measures 15 miles in length, and its northern extremity
is in 22° S. Lat. It bears Eendracht S.S.E. and N.N.W. from the south-point
of Sunda at 240 miles' distance; from there (Eendrachtsland [*]) through
God's grace we safely arrived before Bantam on the 22nd of
August...
[* This marginal note was made by an official of the East India
Company, when the letter had reached its destination.]

Done on board the ship 't Wapen van Amsterdam, October 6,
1618.

Your Worships' Obedt. Servant
WILLEM JANSZ.

B.

Worshipful Wise Provident Discreet Gentlemen,
See _the Maps numbered VII, C and D (1616)._
* * * * * 

X

.

(1619)? FURTHER DISCOVERY OF THE SOUTH-COAST OF NEW-GUINEA BY THE SHIP
HET WAPEN VAN AMSTERDAM? [*]
_Instructions for Tasman 1644._

...In the interim in the year 1619 the ship 't Wapen van Amsterdam,
passing Banda on her way thither, was east on the south-coast of Nova
Guinea where also some of her crew were slain by the barbarian
inhabitants, so that no certain information respecting the situation
of the country was obtained...

[* I place a note of interrogation here. The matter is not quite
clear.
For the sake of completeness I mention it here, but without drawing
any conclusion.

On p. 95, note 5 of my "Life of Tasman" in Fred. Muller's Tasman publication
I say: "Leupe, Zuidland, p. 35, cites a letter sent by the Directors
to the Gov.

-Gen. and Councillors, of Sept. 9, 1620. In this letter there is question
of the discoveries made by d'Eendracht, Zeewolff, _'t Wapen van Amsterdam_,
and quite recently by Commanders Houtman and D'Edel."

When, we may ask, did the ship 't Wapen van Amsterdam survey the
South-land? There certainly was a ship of that name by the side of
another vessel, named Amsterdam _pur et simple_.

According to the Register of departures of vessels of the E.I.C.,
preserved in the State Archives at the Hague, this ship set sail
from the Netherlands on May 11, 1613.

I have found no reliable trace of later date of this vessel, and the
documents know nothing of any exploration of the South-land by her. I
am inclined to think that Leupe is mistaken here.
The letter itself, which is contained in the copying-book of letters,
preserved in the State Archives, has suffered much from theravages of
time. Between the words "Zeewolff" and "Amsterdam" the paper has suffered
so much that nothing is left of the intervening letters.

L. C. D. Van Dijk, in his Mededeelingen uit het Oost-Indisch archief.
Amsterdam, _Scheltema_, 1859 p. 2, note 2, has also printed the
letter in question.
He puts the words: "'t Wapen van" in parentheses, in order to denote
that they are merely conjectural. Leupe may have inadvertently omitted
these parentheses. Perhaps the original text read: "ende Amsterdam". In
this case there would have been two times question of Dedel's
voyages: once by a reference to the ship Amsterdam; and afterwards by
mentioning Dedel's name itself.

I must not however omit to make mention here of what the Instructions for
Tasman's second voyage, dated January 29, 1644, say about an
unsuccessful expedition undertaken by the ship 't Wapen van Amsterdam
to the south coast of New Guinea in 1619

.]
* * * * *
{Page 14}

XI.

(1619).

VOYAGE OF THE SHIPS DORDRECHT AND AMSTERDAM UNDER COMMANDER FREDERIK DE
HOUTMAN, SUPERCARGO JACOB DEDEL, AND SKIPPERS REYER JANSZOON VAN BUIKSLOOT
AND MAARTEN CORNELISZOON(?)

, FROM THE NETHERLANDS TO THE EAST-INDIES.--FURTHER DISCOVERY OF THE
WEST-COAST OF AUSTRALIA:
DEDELSLAND AND HOUTMAN'S ABROLHOS.

A.

_Letter of Commander_ FREDERIK DE HUTMAN _to Prince Alaurice, October 7,
1619._

Most Noble Highborn Prince,

Most Highborn Prince, my last letter to Your Princely Excellency was
dated May the 20th last from the Taefelbay near Cabo de bonne esperance
with the ship Anna from England...

Now as regards my subsequent progress I would inform Your Excellency that
on the 8th of June we set sail from the Tafelbay with a fair wind with
the ships Dordrecht and Amsterdam, add that on the 19th of July
following we suddenly came upon the Southland of Beach [*] in 32 degrees
20 minutes. We spent a few days there in order to get some knowledge
of the same, but the inconvenience of being unable to make a
landing, together with the heavy gales, prevented us from effecting
our purpose, upon which shaping our course for Java, we got sight
of the same on the 19th of August, and arrived safely before Jacatra
on the 3rd of September...
[* Though De Houtman knew of the discovery of Eendrachtsland (see
_infra_), he still uses the name Beach; which clearly proves that
in the early part of the seventeenth century the Netherlanders
identified the discovered South-land with the mysterious land of
Beach.]

From Jacatra, this seventh of October, A.D. 1619.

(Signed)

Your Excellency's most devoted Servant
FREDERICK HOUTMAN.

B.

_Letter of_ FREDERIK DE HOUTMAN _to the Managers of the E.I.C.,
October 7, 1619._
Most Noble Wise Provident Very Discreet Gentlemn,
My last letter to Your Worships was dated May 20th from the
Tafelbay...We next sailed from the Tafelbay with the ships Dordrecht
and Amsterdam on June the 8th...

We ran on with a fair north-west wind as far as 36° 30', in which
latitude we kept this steady breeze with us up to the 17th of July,
when we estimated ourselves to have sailed straight to eastward the
space of a thousand miles.

We observed 16° decreasing north-westerly variation of the compass,
and resolved to steer...on a north-east-by-north course, {Page 15}
we then being in 35° 25' Southern Latitude. After keeping the aforesaid
course for about 60 miles, in the evening of the 19th we suddenly saw
land, which we steered away from. On the 20th we found it to be a
mainland coast extending South and North. We resolved to use our utmost
endeavours to obtain some knowledge of this coast, which seemed to
be a very good land, but could find no spot for conveniently landing
owing to the surf and the heavy seas.

On the 23rd both the Amsterdam and our ship lost an anchor each,
since our cables were broken by the strong gale.

We kept near the coast till the 28th of July, but owing to the violent
storm could not effect a landing, so that we were forced to leave
the land aforesaid, not without imminent danger of being thrown on it
by the strong gale.

On the 28th we sighted a cape of the said coast, off which we sounded
in from 45 to 70 fathom, but shortly after we got no bottom, and in the
evening the land was out of sight.

On the 29th do. deeming ourselves to be in an open sea, we shaped
our course north-by-east.

At noon we were in 29° 32' S. Lat.; at night about three hours before
daybreak, we again unexpectedly came upon a low-lying coast, a
level, broken country with reefs all round it.

We saw no high land or mainland, so that this shoal is to be carefully
avoided as very dangerous to ships that wish to touch at this coast. It
is fully ten miles in length, lying in 28° 46.

On the 2nd of August, the wind becoming contrary, we turned our course
eastward at noon we again sighted a long stretch of land in Lat. 27°
40' South. We are all assured that this is the land which the ship
Eendracht discovered and made in the year [*], and noways doubt
that all the land they saw in 22, 23, 25 degrees, and which we
sighted down to 33 degrees, is one uninterrupted mainland coast.
[* Left blank.]

When in 26° 20' we were in sight of the land, we had 8 degrees decreasing
northwesterly variation of the compass. We then shaped our course north
and north by west, which leaves it due north, if the variation is
deducted. On the 29th of August we made the south-coast of Java, 60 miles
to eastward of the western extremity of the said island, so that
if you are near this South-land in 23, 24 or 25 degrees S.

Lat., and shape your course north by west, which deducting the
variation is due north-north-west, you will strike the coast of
Java [*] miles to eastward of its south-western extremity.

Therefore, in order to have a fixed course from the Cape to Java, it is
advisable to set sail from the Cape de bonne Esperance in June or July,
and to run on an eastern course in 36 and 37 degrees Southern Latitude,
until you estimate yourself to have covered a thousand miles to
eastward, after which you had better shape your course north and
north by east, until you get into 26 or 27 degrees, thus shunning
the shoal aforesaid which lies off the South-land in 28°
46'.
[* Left blank.]

When you have reached the 26th or 27th degree, run eastward until you come
in sight of the South-land, and then, as before mentioned, from there
hold your course north by west and north-north-west, and you are sure
to make the western extremity of Java, as shown in the annexed small
chart [*], which I have drawn up for the better assurance. This
South-land, as far as we could judge, seems to be a very fair coast,
but we found it impossible to land on it, nor have we seen any smoke
or signs of inhabitants there; but further investigation is wanted
on this point.

[* Not forthcoming.]
On the 25th of August we got into Sonda Strait...
In the fortress of Jacatra, October 7, 1619.
Your Worships' obedient servant FREDERICK HOUTMAN.
{Page 16} 
C.
_Letter of Supercargo_ JACOB DEDEL _to the Managers of the E.I.C.,
October 7, 1619._ 
Worshipful Wise Provident Gentlemen,
My last letter to you was dated May 20 last, in which I informed
you of my arrival at Cabo de bonne Esperance..., where I found
Commander Houtman...
On the first of June I was ready to set sail for Bantam from Cabo
de bonne Esperance but contrary winds prevented my putting to sea
before June 8th, when I sailed in company with the Hon.Numerous walrus rolled about in the bays here, and they approached much
nearer to the vessel than they had yet done, affording those on board a
good view of their huge, uncouth visages, as they shook their shaggy
fronts and ploughed up the waves with their tusks.  These enormous
creatures are the elephants of the Arctic Ocean.  Their aspect is
particularly grim and fierce, and, being nearly equal to elephants in
bulk, they are not less terrible than they appear.  In form they
somewhat resemble seals, having barrel-shaped bodies, with round, or
rather square, blunt heads and shaggy bristling moustache, and two long
ivory tusks which curve downwards instead of upwards, serving the
purpose frequently of hooks, by means of which and their fore-flippers
they can pull themselves up on the rocks and icebergs.  Indeed they are
sometimes found at a considerable height up the sides of steep cliffs,
basking in the sun.

Fred was anxious to procure the skull of one of these monstrous animals,
but the threatening appearance of the weather rendered any attempt to
secure one at that time impossible.  A dark sinister scowl overhung the
blink under the cloud-bank to the southward, and the dovkies which had
enlivened their progress hitherto forsook the channel, as if they
distrusted the weather.  Captain Guy made every possible preparation to
meet the coming storm, by warping down under the shelter of a ledge of
rock, to which he made fast with two good hawsers, while everything was
made snug on board.

"We are going to catch it, I fear," said Fred, glancing at the black
clouds that hurried across the sky to the northward, while he walked the
deck with his friend, Tom Singleton.

"I suspect so," replied Tom, "and it does not raise my spirits to see
Saunders shaking his huge visage so portentously.  Do you know, I have a
great belief in that fellow.  He seems to know everything and to have
gone through every sort of experience, and I notice that most of his
prognostications come to pass."

"So they do, Tom," said Fred, "but I wish he would put a better face on
things till they _do_ come to pass.  His looks are enough to frighten
one."

"I think we shall require another line out, Mr Saunders," remarked the
captain, as the gale freshened, and the two hawsers were drawn straight
and rigid like bars of iron: "send ashore and make a whale-line fast
immediately."

The second mate obeyed with a grunt that seemed to insinuate that _he_
would have had one out long ago.  In a few minutes it was fast, and not
a moment too soon, for immediately after it blew a perfect hurricane.
Heavier and heavier it came, and the ice began to drift more wildly than
ever.  The captain had just given orders to make fast another line, when
the sharp, twanging snap of a cord was heard.  The six-inch hawser had
parted, and they were swinging by the two others, with the gale roaring
like a lion through the spars and rigging.  Half a minute more and
"twang, twang!" came another report, and the whale-line was gone.  Only
one rope now held them to the land, and prevented them being swept into
the turmoil of ice, and wind, and water, from which the rocky ledge
protected them.  The hawser was a good one--a new ten-inch rope.  It
sung like the deep tones of an organ, loud above the rattle of the
rigging and the shrouds, but that was its death-song.  It gave way with
the noise of a cannon, and in the smoke that followed its recoil, they
were dragged out by the wild ice and driven hither and hither at its
mercy.

With some difficulty the ship was warped into a place of comparative
security in the rushing drift, but it was soon thrown loose again, and
severely squeezed by the rolling masses.  Then an attempt was made to
set the sails and beat up for the land, but the rudder was almost
unmanageable owing to the ice, and nothing could be made of it, so they
were compelled to go right before the wind under close-reefed top-sails,
in order to keep some command of the ship.  All hands were on deck
watching in silence the ice ahead of them, which presented a most
formidable aspect.

Away to the north the strait could be seen growing narrower, with heavy
ice-tables grinding up and clogging it from cliff to cliff on either
side.  About seven in the evening they were close upon the piling
masses, to enter into which seemed certain destruction.

"Stand by to let go the anchor," cried the captain, in the desperate
hope of being able to wind the ship.

"What's that ahead of us?" exclaimed the first mate suddenly.

"Ship on the starboard bow, right inshore!" roared the look-out.

The attention of the crew was for a moment called from their own
critical situation towards the strange vessel which now came into view,
having been previously concealed from them by a large grounded berg.

"Can you make her out, Mr Bolton?"

"Yes, sir, I think she's a large brig, but she seems much chafed, and
there's no name left on the stern, if ever there was one."

As he spoke, the driving snow and fog cleared up partially, and the brig
was seen not three hundred yards from them, drifting slowly into the
loose ice.  There was evidently no one on board, and although one or two
of the sails were loose, they hung in shreds from the yards.  Scarcely
had this been noted when the _Dolphin_ struck against a large mass of
ice, and quivered under the violence of the shock.

"Let go!" shouted the captain.

Down went the heaviest anchor they had, and for two minutes the chain
flew out at the hawse-hole.

"Hold on!"

The chain was checked, but the strain was awful.  A mass of ice,
hundreds of tons weight, was tearing down towards the bow.  There was no
hope of resisting it.  Time was not even afforded to attach a buoy or
log to the cable, so it was let slip, and thus the _Dolphin's_ best
bower was lost for ever.

But there was no time to think of or regret this, for the ship was now
driving down with the gale, scraping against a lee of ice which was
seldom less than thirty feet thick.  Almost at the same moment the
strange vessel was whirled close to them, not more than fifty yards
distant, between two driving masses of thick ice.

"What if it should be my father's brig?" whispered Fred Ellice, as he
grasped Singleton's arm, and turned to him a face of ashy paleness.

"No fear of that, lad," said Buzzby, who stood near the larboard gangway
and had overheard the remark.  "I'd know your father's brig among a
thousand--"

As he spoke, the two masses of ice closed, and the brig was nipped
between them.  For a few seconds she seemed to tremble like a living
creature, and every timber creaked.  Then she was turned slowly on one
side, until the crew of the _Dolphin_ could see down into her hold,
where the beams were giving way and cracking up as matches might be
crushed in the grasp of a strong hand.  Many of the reefs on this
part of the coast may thus have originated; but there are some sickle,
and almost atoll-formed reefs lying in deep water off the promontory in
latitude 24 deg, which lead me to suppose that all these reefs are more
probably allied to the barrier or atoll classes. I have not, however,
ventured to colour this portion of coast.

ON THE WEST COAST FROM LATITUDE 19 DEG TO 17 DEG (south of space
coloured blue on the map), there are many low islets of very small
dimensions, not much elongated, and rising out of great depths at a
distance from the coast; these cannot be classed either with atolls,
or barrier- or fringing-reefs. I may here remark that the outlying
reefs on the west coast, between latitude 19 deg and 24 deg, are the
only ones in the Red Sea, which approach in structure to the true atolls
of the Indian and Pacific Oceans, but they present only imperfect
miniature likenesses of them.

EASTERN COAST.

I have felt the greatest doubt about colouring any portion of this
coast, north of the fringing-reefs round the Farsan Islands in 16
deg 10'.

There are many small outlying coral-reefs along the whole line of coast;
but as the greater number rise from banks not very deeply submerged
(the formation of which has been shown to be only secondarily
connected with the growth of coral), their origin may be due simply
to the growth of knolls of corals, from an irregular foundation
situated within a limited depth.

But between latitude 18 deg and 20 deg, there are so many linear, elliptic,
and extremely small reefs, rising abruptly out of profound depths, that
the same reasons, which led me to colour blue a portion of the west
coast, have induced me to do the same in this part. There exist some
small outlying reefs rising from deep water, north of latitude 20 deg
(the northern limit coloured blue), on the east coast; but as they
are not very numerous and scarcely any of them linear, I have thought
it right to leave them uncoloured.

In the SOUTHERN PARTS of the Red Sea, considerable spaces of the
mainland, and of some of the Dhalac islands, are skirted by reefs,
which, as I am informed by Captain Moresby, are of living coral,
and have all the characters of the fringing class.

As in these latitudes, there are no outlying linear or sickle-formed
reefs, rising out of unfathomable depths, I have coloured these
parts of the coast red.

On similar grounds, I have coloured red the NORTHERN PARTS OF THE WESTERN
COAST (north of latitude 24 deg 30'), and likewise the shores of the
chief part of the GULF OF SUEZ.
In the GULF OF ACABA, as I am informed by Captain Moresby there are no
coral-reefs, and the water is profoundly deep.

WEST INDIES.

My information regarding the reefs of this area, is derived from various
sources, and from an examination of numerous charts; especially of
those lately executed during the survey under Captain Owen, R.N. I lay
under particular obligation to Captain Bird Allen, R.N., one of
the members of the late survey, for many personal communications
on this subject.

As in the case of the Red Sea, it is necessary to make some preliminary
remarks on the submerged banks of the West Indies, which are in
some degree connected with coral-reefs, and cause considerable
doubts in their classification.

That large accumulations of sediment are in progress on the West
Indian shores, will be evident to any one who examines the charts
of that sea, especially of the portion north of a line joining
Yucutan and Florida.

The area of deposition seems less intimately connected with the debouchement
of the great rivers, than with the course of the sea-currents; as is
evident from the vast extension of the banks from the promontories
of Yucutan and Mosquito.

Besides the coast-banks, there are many of various dimensions
which stand quite isolated; these closely resemble each other, they
lie from two or three to twenty or thirty fathoms under water, and
are composed of sand, sometimes firmly agglutinated, with little
or no coral; their surfaces are smooth and nearly level, shelving
only to the amount of a few fathoms, very gradually all round towards
their edges, where they plunge abruptly into the unfathomable sea.

This steep inclination of their sides, which is likewise characteristic
of the coast-banks, is very remarkable: I may give as an instance,
the Misteriosa Bank, on the edges of which the soundings change in 250
fathoms horizontal distance, from 11 to 210 fathoms; off the northern
point of the bank of Old Providence, in 200 fathoms horizontal distance,
the change is from 19 to 152 fathoms; off the Great Bahama Bank, in 160
fathoms horizontal distance, the inclination is in many places
from 10 fathoms to no bottom with 190 fathoms. On coasts in all parts
of the world, where sediment is accumulating, something of this kind
may be observed; the banks shelve very gently far out to sea, and then
terminate abruptly. The form and composition of the banks standing in
the middle parts of the W. Indian Sea, clearly show that their origin
must be chiefly attributed to the accumulation of sediment; and the only
obvious explanation of their isolated position is the presence
of a nucleus, round which the currents have collected fine drift matter.
Any one who will compare the character of the bank surrounding the
hilly island of Old Providence, with those banks in its neighbourhood
which stand isolated, will scarcely doubt that they surround
submerged mountains.

We are led to the same conclusion by examining the bank called Thunder
Knoll, which is separated from the Great Mosquito Bank by a
channel only seven miles wide, and 145 fathoms deep. There cannot be
any doubt that the Mosquito Bank has been formed by the accumulation
of sediment round the promontory of the same name; and Thunder Knoll
resembles the Mosquito Bank, in the state of its surface submerged
twenty fathoms, in the inclinations of its sides, in composition, and in
every other respect. I may observe, although the remark is here
irrelevant, that geologists should be cautious in concluding that all
the outlyers of any formation have once been connected together, for
we here see that deposits, doubtless of exactly the same nature, may
be deposited with large valley-like spaces between them.

Linear strips of coral-reefs and small knolls project from many of the
isolated, as well as coast-banks; sometimes they occur quite irregularly
placed, as on the Mosquito Bank, but more generally they form
crescents on the windward side, situated some little distance within
the outer edge of the banks:--thus on the Serranilla Bank they form
an interrupted chain which ranges between two and three miles within
the windward margin:
generally they occur, as on Roncador, Courtown, and Anegada Banks,
nearer the line of deep water.

Their occurrence on the windward side is conformable to the general rule,
of the efficient kinds of corals flourishing best where most exposed;
but their position some way within the line of deep water I cannot explain,
without it be, that a depth somewhat less than that close to the
outer margin of the banks, is most favourable to their growth. Where
the corals have formed a nearly continuous rim, close to the
windward edge of a bank some fathoms submerged, the reef closely
resembles an atoll; but if the bank surrounds an island (as in the
case of Old Providence), the reef resembles an encircling barrier-reef.

I should undoubtedly have classed some of these fringed banks as imperfect
atolls, or barrier-reefs, if the sedimentary nature of their foundations
had not been evident from the presence of other neighbouring banks,
of similar forms and of similar composition, but without the
crescent-like marginal reef: in the third chapter, I observed that
probably some atoll-like reefs did exist, which had originated in
the manner here supposed.

Proofs of elevation within recent tertiary periods abound, as referred
to in the sixth chapter, over nearly the whole area of the West Indies.
Hence it is easy to understand the origin of the low land on the
coasts, where sediment is now accumulating; for instance on the
northern part of Yucutan, and on the N.E. part of Mosquito, where
the land is low, and where extensive banks appear to be in progressive
formation.

Hence, also, the origin of the Great Bahama Banks, which are bordered
on their western and southern edges by very narrow, long, singularly
shaped islands, formed of sand, shells, and coral-rock, and some
of them about a hundred feet in height, is easily explained by the
elevation of banks fringed on their windward (western and southern)
sides by coral-reefs.

On this view, however, we must suppose either that the chief part of
the surfaces of the great Bahama sandbanks were all originally deeply
submerged, and were brought up to their present level by the same
elevatory action, which formed the linear islands; or that during
the elevation of the banks, the superficial currents and swell of
the waves continued wearing them down and keeping them at a nearly
uniform level: the level is not quite uniform; for, in proceeding
from the N.W. end of the Bahama group towards the S.E.
end, the depth of the banks increases, and the area of land decreases,
in a very gradual and remarkable manner.

The latter view, namely, that these banks have been worn down by the
currents and swell during their elevation, seems to me the most probable
one.

It is, also, I believe, applicable to many banks, situated in widely distant
parts of the West Indian Sea, which are wholly submerged; for, on
any other view, we must suppose, that the elevatory forces have
acted with astonishing uniformity.

The shores of the Gulf of Mexico, for the space of many hundred miles, is
formed by a chain of lagoons, from one to twenty miles in breadth
("Columbian Navigator," page 178, etc.), containing either fresh
or salt water, and separated from the sea by linear strips of sand.

Great spaces of the shores of Southern Brazil (In the "London and Edinburgh
Philosophical Journal," 1841, page 257, I have described a singular
bar of sandstone lying parallel to the coast off Pernambuco in
Brazil, which probably is an analogous formation.), and of the
United States from Long Island (as observed by Professor Rogers)
to Florida have the same character.

Professor Rogers, in his "Report to the British Association" (volume
iii., page 13), speculates on the origin of these low, sandy, linear
islets; he states that the layers of which they are composed are
too homogeneous, and contain too large a proportion of shells, to
permit the common supposition of their formation being simply due
to matter thrown up, where it now lies, by the surf: he considers
these islands as upheaved bars or shoals, which were deposited in
lines where opposed currents met.

It is evident that these islands and spits of sand parallel to the
coast, and separated from it by shallow lagoons, have no necessary
connection with coral-formations.

But in Southern Florida, from the accounts I have received from persons
who have resided there, the upraised islands seem to be formed of
strata, containing a good deal of coral, and they are extensively
fringed by living reefs; the channels within these islands are in
some places between two and three miles wide, and five or six fathoms
deep, though generally (In the ordinary sea-charts, no lagoons
appear on the coast of Florida, north of 26 deg; but Major Whiting
("Silliman's Journal," volume xxxv., page 54) says that many are
formed by sand thrown up along the whole line of coast from St.

Augustine's to Jupiter Inlet.) they are less in depth than width. After
having seen how frequently banks of sediment in the West Indian Sea
are fringed by reefs, we can readily conceive that bars of sediment
might be greatly aided in their formation along a line of coast,
by the growth of corals; and such bars would, in that case, have a
deceptive resemblance with true barrier-reefs.

Having now endeavoured to remove some sources of doubt in classifying
the reefs of the West Indies, I will give my authorities for colouring
such portions of the coast as I have thought myself warranted in doing.
Captain Bird Allen informs me, that most of the islands on the
BAHAMA BANKS are fringed, especially on their windward sides, with living
reefs; and hence I have coloured those, which are thus represented
in Captain Owen's late chart, red. The same officer informs me, that
the islands along the southern part of FLORIDA are similarly
fringed; coloured red.

CUBA:
Proceeding along the northern coast, at the distance of forty miles from
the extreme S.E. point, the shores are fringed by reefs, which
extend westward for a space of 160 miles, with only a few breaks.

Parts of these reefs are represented in the plans of the harbours on this
coast by Captain Owen; and an excellent description is given of
them by Mr.

Taylor (Loudon's "Mag. of Nat. Hist." volume ix., page 449); he
states that they enclosed a space called the "baxo," from half to
three-quarters of a mile in width, with a sandy bottom, and a
little coral.

In most parts people can wade, at low water, to the reef; but in some
parts the depth is between two and three fathoms.

Close outside the reef, the depth is between six and seven fathoms; these
well-characterised fringing-reefs are coloured red.

Westward of longitude 77 deg 30', on the northern side of Cuba, a great
bank commences, which extends along the coast for nearly four degrees
of longitude. In the place of its commencement, in its structure, and
in the "CAYS," or low islands on its edge, there is a marked correspondence
(as observed by Humboldt, "Pers. Narr." volume vii., page 88) between
it and the Great Bahama and Sal Banks, which lie directly in front.
Hence one is led to attribute the same origin to both these sets of
banks; namely, the accumulation of sediment, conjoined with an elevatory
movement, and the growth of coral on their outward edges; those parts
which appear fringed by living reefs are coloured red. Westward of these
banks, there is a portion of coast apparently without reefs, except
in the harbours, the shores of which seem in the published plans to
be fringed. The COLORADO SHOALS (see Captain Owen's charts), and the
low land at the western end of Cuba, correspond as closely in relative
position and structure to the banks at the extreme point of Florida,
as the banks above described on the north side of Cuba, do to the
Bahamas, the depth within the islets and reefs on the outer edge
of the COLORADOS, is generally between two and three fathoms,
increasing to twelve fathoms in the southern part, where the bank
becomes nearly open, without islets or coral-reefs; the portions
which are fringed are coloured red.

The southern shore of Cuba is deeply concave, and the included space
is filled up with mud and sandbanks, low islands and coral-reefs. Between
the mountainous ISLE OF PINES and the southern shore of Cuba, the general
depth is only between two and three fathoms; and in this part small
islands, formed of fragmentary rock and broken madrepores (Humboldt,
"Pers.

Narr." volume vii. pages 51, 86 to 90, 291, 309, 320), rise abruptly, and
just reach the surface of the sea. From some expressions used in the
"Columbian Navigator" (volume i., part ii., page 94), it appears that
considerable spaces along the outer coast of Southern Cuba are bounded
by cliffs of coral-rock, formed probably by the upheaval of coral-reefs
and sandbanks. The charts represent the southern part of the Isle of
Pines as fringed by reefs, which the "Columb. Navig." says extend some
way from the coast, but have only from nine to twelve feet water on
them; these are coloured red.--I have not been able to procure any
detailed description of the large groups of banks and "cays" further
eastward on the southern side of Cuba; within them there is a large
expanse, with a muddy bottom, from eight to twelve fathoms deep;
although some parts of this line of coast are represented in the general
charts of the West Indies, as fringed, I have not thought it prudent to
colour them.
The remaining portion of the south coast of Cuba appears to be without
coral-reefs.

YUCUTAN.

The N.E. part of the promontory appears in Captain Owen's charts
to be fringed; coloured red.

The eastern coast, from 20 deg to 18 deg is fringed. South of latitude
18 deg, there commences the most remarkable reef in the West Indies:
it is about one hundred and thirty miles in length, ranging in a N. and
S. line, at an average distance of fifteen miles from the coast. The
islets on it are all low, as I have been informed by Captain B.

Allen; the water deepens suddenly on the outside of the reef, but not
more abruptly than off many of the sedimentary banks:
within its southern extremity (off HONDURAS) the depth is twenty-five
fathoms; but in the more northern parts, the depth soon increases
to ten fathoms, and within the northernmost part, for a space of
twenty miles, the depth is only from one to two fathoms.

This was not always the
case, however, and few ventured to come into collision with Peter Grim,
whose activity was on a par with his immense size.  Buzzby contented
himself with galloping on the outskirts of the fight, and putting in a
kick when fortune sent the ball in his way.  In this species of warfare
he was supported by the fat cook, whose oily carcass could neither stand
the shocks nor keep up with the pace of his messmates.  Mizzle was a
particularly energetic man in his way, however, and frequently kicked
with such good-will that he missed the ball altogether, and the
tremendous swing of his leg lifted him from the ice, and laid him
sprawling on his back.

"Look out ahead!" shouted Green, the carpenter's mate; "there's a sail
bearing down on your larboard bow."

Mivins, who had the ball before him at the moment, saw his own
satellite, Davie, coming down towards him with vicious intentions.  He
quietly pushed the ball before him for a few yards, then kicked it far
over the boy's head, and followed it up like an antelope.  Mivins
depended for success on his almost superhuman activity.  His tall,
slight frame could not stand the shocks of his comrades, but no one
could equal or come near to him in speed, and he was quite an adept at
dodging a _charge_, and allowing his opponent to rush far past the ball
by the force of his own momentum.  Such a charge did Peter Grim make at
him at this moment.

"Starboard hard!" yelled Davie Summers, as he observed his master's
danger.

"Starboard it is!" replied Mivins, and, leaping aside to avoid the
shock, he allowed Grim to pass.  Grim knew his man, however, and had
held himself in hand, so that in a moment he pulled up and was following
close on his heels.

"It's an ill wind that blows no good," cried one of the crew, towards
whose foot the ball rolled, as he quietly kicked it into the centre of
the mass of men.  Grim and Mivins turned back, and for a time looked on
at the general make that ensued.  It seemed as though the ball must
inevitably be crushed among them as they struggled and kicked hither and
thither for five minutes, in their vain efforts to get a kick; and
during those few exciting moments many tremendous kicks, aimed at the
ball, took effect upon shins, and many shouts of glee terminated in
yells of anguish.

"It can't last much longer!" screamed the cook, his face streaming with
perspiration, and beaming with glee, as he danced round the outside of
the circle.  "There it goes!"

As he spoke, the ball flew out of the circle, like a shell from a
mortar.  Unfortunately it went directly over Mizzle's head.  Before he
could wink he went down before them, and the rushing mass of men passed
over him like a mountain torrent over a blade of grass.

Meanwhile Mivins ran ahead of the others, and gave the ball a kick that
nearly burst it and down it came exactly between O'Riley and Grim, who
chanced to be far ahead of the others.  Grim dashed at it.  "Och! ye big
villain," muttered the Irishman to himself, as he put down his head and
rushed against the carpenter like a battering-ram.

Big though he was, Grim staggered back from the impetuous shock, and
O'Riley, following up his advantage, kicked the ball in a side
direction, away from everyone except Buzzby, who happened to have been
steering rather wildly over the field of ice.  Buzzby, on being brought
thus unexpectedly within reach of the ball, braced up his energies for a
kick, but seeing O'Riley coming down towards him like a runaway
locomotive, he pulled up, saying quietly to himself: "Ye may take it all
yer own way, lad; I'm too old a bird to go for to make my carcass a
buffer for a mad-cap like you to run agin."

Jack Mivins, however, was troubled by no such qualms.  He happened to be
about the same distance from the ball as O'Riley, and ran like a deer to
reach it first.  A pool of water lay in his path, however, and the
necessity of going round it enabled the Irishman to gain on him a
little, so that it became evident that both would come up at the same
moment and a collision be inevitable.

"Hold yer wind, Paddy," shouted the men, who paused for a moment to
watch the result of the race.  "Mind your timbers, Mivins!  Back your
top-sails, O'Riley; mind how he yaws!"

Then there was a momentary silence of breathless expectation.  The two
men seemed about to meet with a shock that would annihilate both, when
Mivins bounded to one side like an india-rubber ball.  O'Riley shot past
him like a rocket, and the next instant went head-foremost into the pool
of water.

This unexpected termination to the affair converted the intended huzzah
of the men into a yell of mingled laughter and consternation as they
hastened in a body to the spot; but before they reached it O'Riley's
head and shoulders reappeared, and when they came up, he was standing on
the margin of the pool blowing like a walrus.

"Oh, then, but it is cowld!" he exclaimed, wringing the water from his
garments.  "Och, where's the ball? give me a kick or I'll freeze, so I
will."

As he spoke, the drenched Irishman seized the ball from Mivins' hands
and gave it a kick that sent it high into the air.  He was too wet and
heavy to follow it up, however, so he ambled off towards the ship as
vigorously as his clothes would allow him, followed by the whole crew.


CHAPTER EIGHT.

FRED AND THE DOCTOR GO ON AN EXCURSION, IN WHICH, AMONG OTHER STRANGE
THINGS, THEY MEET WITH RED SNOW AND A WHITE BEAR, AND FRED MAKES HIS
FIRST ESSAY AS A SPORTSMAN.

But where were Fred Ellice and Tom Singleton all this time? the reader
will probably ask.

Long before the game at football was suggested, they had obtained leave
of absence from the captain, and, loaded with game-bags, a botanical
box, and geological hammer, and a musket, were off along the coast on a
semi-scientific cruise.  Young Singleton carried the botanical box and
hammer, being an enthusiastic geologist and botanist, while Fred carried
the game-bag and musket.

"You see, Tom," he said, as they stumbled along over the loose ice
towards the ice-belt that lined the cliffs,--"you see, I'm a great dab
at ornithology, especially when I've got a gun on my shoulder.  When I
haven't a gun, strange to say, I don't feel half so enthusiastic about
birds!"

"That's a very peculiar style of regarding the science.  Don't you think
it would be worth while communicating your views on the subject to one
of the scientific bodies when we get home again?  They might elect you a
member, Fred."

"Well, perhaps I shall," replied Fred gravely; "but I say, to be
serious, I'm really going to screw up my energies as much as possible,
and make coloured drawings of all the birds I can get hold of in the
Arctic regions.  At least I would like to try."

Fred finished his remark with a sigh, for just then the object for which
he had gone out to those regions occurred to him, and although the
natural buoyancy and hopefulness of his feelings enabled him generally
to throw off anxiety in regard to his father's fate, and join in the
laugh, and jest, and game as heartily as anyone on board, there were
times when his heart failed him, and he almost despaired of ever seeing
his father again; and these feelings of despondency had been more
frequent, since the day on which he witnessed the sudden and utter
destruction of the strange brig.

"Don't let your spirits down, Fred," said Tom, whose hopeful and earnest
disposition often reanimated his friend's drooping spirits.  "It will
only unfit you for doing any good service; besides, I think we have no
cause yet to despair.  We know that your father came up this inlet, or
strait, or whatever it is, and that he had a good stock of provisions
with him, according to the account we got at Uppernavik, and it is not
more than a year since he was there.  Many and many a whaler and
discovery ship has wintered more than a year in these regions.  And
then, consider the immense amount of animal life all around us.  They
might have laid up provisions for many months long before winter set
in."

"I know all that," replied Fred, with a shake of his head; "but think of
yon brig that we saw go down in about ten minutes."

"Well, so I do think of it.  No doubt the brig was lost very suddenly,
but there was ample time, had there been anyone on board, to have leaped
upon the ice, and they might have got to land by jumping from one piece
to another.  Such things have happened before, frequently.  To say
truth, at every point of land we turn, I feel a sort of expectation,
amounting almost to certainty, that we shall find your father and his
party travelling southward on their way to the Danish settlements."

"Perhaps you are right.  God grant that it may be so!"

As he spoke they reached the fixed ice which ran along the foot of the
precipices for some distance, like a road of hard white marble.  Many
large rocks lay scattered over it, some of them several tons in weight,
and one or two balanced in a very remarkable way on the edge of the
cliffs.

"There's a curious-looking gull I should like to shoot," exclaimed Fred,
pointing to a bird that hovered over his head, and throwing forward the
muzzle of his gun.

"Fire away, then," said his friend, stepping back a pace.

Fred, being unaccustomed to the use of firearms, took a wavering aim and
fired.

"What a bother!  I've missed it!"

"Try again," remarked Tom with a quiet smile, as the whole cliff vomited
forth an innumerable host of birds, whose cries were perfectly
deafening.

"It's my opinion," said Fred with a comical grin, "that if I shut my
eyes and point upwards I can't help hitting something; but I
particularly want yon fellow, because he's beautifully marked.  Ah!  I
see him sitting on a rock yonder, so here goes once more."

Fred now proceeded towards the coveted bird in the fashion that is known
by the name of _stalking_--that is, creeping as close up to your game as
possible, so as to get a good shot; and it said much for his patience
and his future success, the careful manner in which, on this occasion,
he wound himself in and out among the rocks and blocks of ice on the
shore in the hope of obtaining that sea-gull.  At last he succeeded in
getting to within about fifteen yards of it, and then, resting his
musket on a lump of ice, and taking an aim so long and steadily that his
companion began to fancy he must have gone to sleep, he fired, and blew
the gull to atoms!  There was scarcely so much as a shred of it to be
found.

Fred bore his disappointment and discomfiture manfully.  He formed a
resolution then and there to become a good shot, and although he did not
succeed exactly in becoming so that day, he nevertheless managed to put
several fine specimens of gulls and an auk into his bag.  The last bird
amused him much, being a creature with a dumpy little body and a beak of
preposterously large size and comical aspect.  There were also a great
number of eider ducks flying about but they failed to procure a
specimen.

Singleton was equally successful in his scientific researches.  He found
several beautifully green mosses, one species of which was studded with
pale-yellow flowers, and, in one place, where a stream trickled down the
steep sides of the cliffs, he discovered a flower-growth which was rich
in variety of colouring.  Amid several kinds of tufted grasses were seen
growing a small purple flower and the white star of the chickweed.  The
sight of all this richness of vegetation growing in a little spot close
beside the snow, and amid such cold Arctic scenery, would have delighted
a much less enthusiastic spirit than that of our young surgeon.  He went
quite into raptures with it and stuffed his botanical box with mosses
and rocks until it could hold no more, and became a burden that cost him
a few sighs before he got back to the ship.

The rocks were found to consist chiefly of red sandstone.  There was
also a good deal of greenstone and gneiss, and some of the spires of
these that shot up to a considerable height were particularly striking
and picturesque objects.

But the great sight of the day's excursion was that which unexpectedly
greeted their eyes on rounding a cape towards which they had been
walking for several hours.  On passing this point they stopped with an
exclamation of amazement.  Before them lay a scene such as the Arctic
regions alone can produce.

In front lay a vast reach of the strait, which at this place opened up
abruptly and stretched away northward laden with floes, and fields, and
hummocks, and bergs of every shade and size, to the horizon, where the
appearance of the sky indicated open water.  Ponds of various sizes, and
sheets of water whose dimensions entitled them to be styled lakes,
spangled the white surface of the floes, and around these were sporting
innumerable flocks of wild fowl, many of which, being pure white,
glanced like snow-flakes in the sunshine.  Far off to the west the ice
came down with heavy uniformity to the water's edge.  On the right there
was an array of cliffs whose frowning grandeur filled them with awe.
They varied from twelve to fifteen hundred feet in height, and some of
the precipices descended sheer down seven or eight hundred feet into the
sea, over which they cast a dark shadow.

Just at the feet of our young discoverers, for such we may truly call
them, a deep bay or valley trended away to the right, a large portion of
which was filled with the spur of a glacier, whose surface was covered
with _pink snow_!  One can imagine with what feelings the two youths
gazed on this beautiful sight.  It seemed as if that valley, instead of
forming a portion of the sterile region beyond the Arctic Circle, were
one of the sunniest regions of the south, for a warm glow rested on the
bosom of the snow, as if the sun were shedding upon it his rosiest hues.
A little farther to the north the red snow ceased, or only occurred
here and there in patches, and beyond it there appeared another gorge in
the cliffs within which rose a tall column of rock, so straight and
cylindrical that it seemed to be a production of art.  The whole of the
back country was one great rolling distance of glacier, and, wherever a
crevice or gorge in the riven cliffs afforded an opportunity, this ocean
of land-ice sent down spurs into the sea, the extremities of which were
constantly shedding off huge bergs into the water.

"What a scene!" exclaimed Tom Singleton, when he found words to express
his admiration.  "I did not think that our world contained so grand a
sight.  It surpasses my wildest dreams of fairy-land."

"Fairy-land!" ejaculated Fred, with a slight look of contempt; "do you
know, since I came to this part of the world I've come to the conclusion
that fairy tales are all stuff, and very inferior stuff too!  Why, this
reality is a thousand million times grander than anything that was ever
invented.  But what surprises me most is the red snow.  What can be the
cause of it?"

"I don't know," replied Singleton; "it has long been a matter of dispute
among learned men; but we must examine it for ourselves, so come along."

The remarkable colour of the snow referred to, although a matter of
dispute at the period of the _Dolphin's_ visit to the Arctic Seas, is
generally admitted now to be the result of a curious and extremely
minute vegetable growth, which spreads not only over its surface, but
penetrates into it sometimes to a depth of several feet.  The earlier
navigators who discovered it, and first told the astonished world that
the substance which they had been accustomed to associate with the idea
of the purest and most radiant whiteness had been seen by them lying
_red_ upon the ground, attributed the phenomenon to innumerable
multitudes of minute creatures belonging to the order _Radiata_, but the
discovery of red snow among the central Alps of Europe, and in the
Pyrenees, and on the mountains of Norway, where _marine_ animalcules
could not exist, effectually overturned this idea.  The colouring matter
has now been ascertained to result from plants belonging to the order
called _Algae_, which have a remarkable degree of vitality, and possess
the power, to an amazing extent, of growing and spreading with rapidity
even over such an ungenial soil as the Arctic snow.

While Singleton was examining the red snow, and vainly endeavouring to
ascertain the nature of the minute specks of matter, by which it was
coloured, Fred continued to gaze with a look of increasing earnestness
towards the tall column, around which a bank of fog was spreading, and
partially concealing it from view.  At length he attracted the attention
of his companion towards it.

"I say, I'm half inclined to believe that yon is no work of nature, but
a monument set up to attract the attention of ships.  Don't you think
so?"

Singleton regarded the object in question for some time.  "I don't think
so, Fred; it is larger than you suppose, for the fog-bank deceives us;
but let us go and see--it cannot be far off."

As they drew near to the tall rock, Fred's hopes began to fade, and soon
were utterly quenched by the fog clearing away and showing that the
column was indeed of nature's own constructing.  It was a single,
solitary shaft of green limestone, which stood on the brink of a deep
ravine, and was marked by the slaty limestone that once encased it.  The
length of the column was apparently about five hundred feet, and the
pedestal of sandstone on which it stood was itself upwards of two
hundred feet high.

This magnificent column seemed the flag-staff of a gigantic crystal
fortress, which was suddenly revealing by the clearing away of the
fog-bank to the north.  It was the face of the great glacier of the
interior, which here presented an unbroken perpendicular front--a sweep
of solid glassy wall, which rose three hundred feet above the
water-level, with an unknown depth below it.  The sun glittered on the
crags, and peaks, and battlements of this ice fortress as if the
mysterious inhabitants of the far north had lit up their fires, and
planted their artillery to resist further invasion.

The effect upon the minds of the two youths, who were probably the first
to gaze upon those wondrous visions of the icy regions, was tremendous.
For a long time neither of them could utter a word, and it would be idle
to attempt to transcribe the language, in which, at length, their
excited feelings sought to escape.  It was not until their backs had
been for some time turned on the scene, and the cape near the valley of
red snow had completely shut it out from view, that they could
condescend to converse again in their ordinary tones on ordinary
subjects.

As they hastened back over the ice-belt at the foot of the cliffs, a
loud boom rang out in the distance, and rolled in solemn echoes along
the shore.

"There goes a gun," exclaimed Tom Singleton, hastily pulling out his
watch.  "Hallo! do you know what time it is?"

"Pretty late, I suppose; it was afternoon, I know, when we started, and
we must have been out a good while now.  What time is it?"

"Just two o'clock in the morning!"

"What! do you mean to say it was _yesterday_ when we started, and that
we've been walking all night, and got into _to-morrow morning_ without
knowing it?"

"Even so, Fred.  We have overshot our time, and the captain is
signalling us to make haste.  He said that he would not fire unless
there seemed some prospect of the ice moving, so we had better run,
unless we wish to be left behind; come along."

They had not proceeded more than half a mile when a Polar bear walked
leisurely out from behind a lump of ice, where it had been regaling
itself on a dead seal, and sauntered slowly out towards the icebergs
seaward, not a hundred yards in advance of them.

"Hallo! look there! what a monster!" shouted Fred, as he cocked his
musket and sprang forward.  "What'll you do, Tom, you've no gun?"

"Never mind, I'll do what I can with the hammer.  Only make sure you
don't miss.  Don't fire till you are quite close to him."

They were running after the bear at top speed while they thus conversed
in hasty and broken sentences, when suddenly they came to a yawning
crack in the ice, about thirty feet wide, and a mile long on either
hand, with the rising tide boiling at the bottom of it.  Bruin's
pursuers came to an abrupt halt.

"Now, isn't that disgusting!"

Probably it was, and the expression of chagrin on Fred's countenance as
he said so evidently showed that he meant it, but there is no doubt that
this interruption to their hunt was extremely fortunate; for to attack a
polar bear with a musket charged only with small shot, and a geological
hammer, would have been about as safe and successful an operation as
trying to stop a locomotive with one's hand.  Neither of them had yet
had experience of the enormous strength of this white monarch of the
frozen regions and his tenacity of life, although both were reckless
enough to rush at him with any arms they chanced to have.

"Give him a long shot quick!" cried Singleton.

Fred fired instantly, and the bear stopped, and looked round, as much as
to say: "Did you speak, gentlemen?"  Then, not receiving a reply, he
walked away with dignified indifference, and disappeared among the
ice-hummocks.

An hour afterwards the two wanderers were seated at a comfortable
breakfast in the cabin of the _Dolphin_, relating their adventures to
the captain and mates, and, although unwittingly, to Mivins, who
generally managed so to place himself, while engaged in the mysterious
operations of his little pantry, that most of the cabin-talk reached his
ear, and travelled thence through his mouth to the forecastle.  The
captain was fully aware of this fact, but he winked at it, for there was
nothing but friendly feeling on board the ship, and no secrets.  When,
however, matters of serious import had to be discussed, the cabin door
was closed, and Mivins turned to expend himself on Davie Summers, who,
in the capacity of a listener, was absolutely necessary to the
comfortable existence of the worthy steward.

Having exhausted their appetites and their information, Fred and Tom
were told that, during their absence, a bear and two seals had been shot
by Meetuck, the Esquimaux interpreter, whom they had taken on board at
Uppernavik; and they were further informed that the ice was in motion to
the westward, and that there was every probability of their being
released by the falling tide.  Having duly and silently weighed these
facts for a few minutes, they simultaneously, and as if by a common
impulse, yawned and retired to bed.


CHAPTER NINE.

THE DOLPHIN GETS BESET IN THE ICE--PREPARATIONS FOR WINTERING IN THE
ICE--CAPTAIN GUY'S CODE OF LAWS.

An accident now befell the _Dolphin_ which effectually decided the fate
of the ship and her crew, at least for that winter.  This was her
getting aground near the ravine of the giant flagstaff before mentioned,
and being finally beset by ice from which all efforts on the part of the
men to extricate her proved abortive, and in which she was ultimately
frozen in--hard and fast.

In the western part of the Caroline Archipelago, there is a space
of 480 miles in length, and about 100 broad, thinly interspersed with
low islands. Lastly, in the Indian Ocean, the archipelago of the
Maldivas is 470 miles in length, and 60 in breadth; that of the
Laccadives is 150 by 100 miles; as there is a low island between
these two groups, they may be considered as one group of 1,000 miles
in length.

To this may be added the Chagos group of low islands, situated 280 miles
distant, in a line prolonged from the southern extremity of the
Maldivas.

This group, including the submerged banks, is 170 miles in length
and 80 in breadth.
So striking is the uniformity in direction of these three archipelagoes,
all the islands of which are low, that Captain Moresby, in one of his
papers, speaks of them as parts of one great chain, nearly 1,500
miles long.

I am, then, fully justified in repeating, that enormous spaces, both in
the Pacific and Indian Oceans, are interspersed with islands, of which
not one rises above that height, to which the waves and winds in an open
sea can heap up matter.

On what foundations, then, have these reefs and islets of coral been
constructed? A foundation must originally have been present beneath each
atoll at that limited depth, which is indispensable for the first growth
of the reef-building polypifers. A conjecture will perhaps be hazarded,
that the requisite bases might have been afforded by the accumulation
of great banks of sediment, which owing to the action of superficial
currents (aided possibly by the undulatory movement of the sea) did
not quite reach the surface,--as actually appears to have been the
case in some parts of the West Indian Sea.

But in the form and disposition of the groups of atolls, there is nothing
to countenance this notion; and the assumption without any proof, that
a number of immense piles of sediment have been heaped on the floor
of the great Pacific and Indian Oceans, in their central parts far
remote from land, and where the dark blue colour of the limpid water
bespeaks its purity, cannot for one moment be admitted.

The many widely-scattered atolls must, therefore, rest on rocky
bases. But we cannot believe that the broad summit of a mountain lies
buried at the depth of a few fathoms beneath every atoll, and
nevertheless throughout the immense areas above-named, with not
one point of rock projecting above the level of the sea; for we may
judge with some accuracy of mountains beneath the sea, by those on
the land; and where can we find a single chain several hundred miles
in length and of considerable breadth, much less several such chains,
with their many broad summits attaining the same height, within
from 120 to 180 feet?

If the data be thought insufficient, on which I have grounded my
belief, respecting the depth at which the reef-building polypifers
can exist, and it be assumed that they can flourish at a depth of
even one hundred fathoms, yet the weight of the above argument is
but little diminished, for it is almost equally improbable, that
as many submarine mountains, as there are low islands in the several
great and widely separated areas above specified, should all rise
within six hundred feet of the surface of the sea and not one above
it, as that they should be of the same height within the smaller
limit of one or two hundred feet.

So highly improbable is this supposition, that we are compelled to
believe, that the bases of the many atolls did never at any one period
all lie submerged within the depth of a few fathoms beneath the surface,
but that they were brought into the requisite position or level,
some at one period and some at another, through movements in the
earth's crust.

But this could not have been effected by elevation, for the belief that
points so numerous and so widely separated were successively uplifted
to a certain level, but that not one point was raised above that
level, is quite as improbable as the former supposition, and indeed
differs little from it.

It will probably occur to those who have read Ehrenberg's account of the
Reefs of the Red Sea, that many points in these great areas may have been
elevated, but that as soon as raised, the protuberant parts were cut
off by the destroying action of the waves: a moment's reflection,
however, on the basin-like form of the atolls, will show that this is
impossible; for the upheaval and subsequent abrasion of an island would
leave a flat disc, which might become coated with coral, but not
a deeply concave surface; moreover, we should expect to see, in some parts
at least, the rock of the foundation brought to the surface. If,
then, the foundations of the many atolls were not uplifted into the
requisite position, they must of necessity have subsided into it; and
this at once solves every difficulty (The additional difficulty on the
crater hypothesis before alluded to, will now be evident; for on this
view the volcanic action must be supposed to have formed within the areas
specified a vast number of craters, all rising within a few fathoms
of the surface, and not one above it.

The supposition that the craters were at different times upraised above
the surface, and were there abraded by the surf and subsequently coated
by corals, is subject to nearly the same objections with those
given above in this paragraph; but I consider it superfluous to
detail all the arguments opposed to such a notion.

Chamisso's theory, from assuming the existence of so many banks, all lying
at the proper depth beneath the water, is also vitally defective.
The same observation applies to an hypothesis of Lieutenant Nelson's
("Geolog. Trans." volume v., page 122), who supposes that the ring-formed
structure is caused by a greater number of germs of corals becoming
attached to the declivity, than to the central plateau of a submarine
bank: it likewise applies to the notion formerly entertained (Forster's
"Observ." page 151), that lagoon-islands owe their peculiar form
to the instinctive tendencies of the polypifers. According to this
latter view, the corals on the outer margin of the reef instinctively
expose themselves to the surf in order to afford protection to corals
living in the lagoon, which belong to other genera, and to other
families!), for we may safely infer, from the facts given in the last
chapter, that during a gradual subsidence the corals would be favourably
circumstanced for building up their solid frame works and reaching the
surface, as island after island slowly disappeared. Thus areas
of immense extent in the central and most profound parts of the great
oceans, might become interspersed with coral-islets, none of which
would rise to a greater height than that attained by detritus heaped
up by the sea, and nevertheless they might all have been formed by
corals, which absolutely required for their growth a solid foundation
within a few fathoms of the surface.

It would be out of place here to do more than allude to the many facts,
showing that the supposition of a gradual subsidence over large
areas is by no means improbable.

We have the clearest proof that a movement of this kind is possible,
in the upright trees buried under the strata many thousand feet
in thickness; we have also every reason for believing that there
are now large areas gradually sinking, in the same manner as others
are rising.

And when we consider how many parts of the surface of the globe have
been elevated within recent geological periods, we must admit that
there have been subsidences on a corresponding scale, for otherwise
the whole globe would have swollen.

It is very remarkable that Mr.

Lyell ("Principles of Geology," sixth edition, volume iii., page 386.),
even in the first edition of his "Principles of Geology," inferred that
the amount of subsidence in the Pacific must have exceeded
that of elevation, from the area of land being very small relatively
to the agents there tending to form it, namely, the growth of coral
and volcanic action.

But it will be asked, are there any direct proofs of a subsiding movement
in those areas, in which subsidence will explain a phenomenon otherwise
inexplicable?

This, however, can hardly be expected, for it must ever be most difficult,
excepting in countries long civilised, to detect a movement, the tendency
of which is to conceal the part affected. In barbarous and semi-civilised
nations how long might not a slow movement, even of elevation such
as that now affecting Scandinavia, have escaped attention!

Mr.

Williams (Williams's "Narrative of Missionary Enterprise," page 31.)
insists strongly that the traditions of the natives, which he has taken
much pains in collecting, do not indicate the appearance of any
new islands: but on the theory of a gradual subsidence, all that
would be apparent would be, the water sometimes encroaching slowly
on the land, and the land again recovering by the accumulation of
detritus its former extent, and perhaps sometimes the conversion
of an atoll with coral islets on it, into a bare or into a sunken
annular reef.

Such changes would naturally take place at the periods when the sea
rose above its usual limits, during a gale of more than ordinary
strength; and the effects of the two causes would be hardly
distinguishable.

In Kotzebue's "Voyage" there are accounts of islands, both in the Caroline
and Marshall Archipelagoes, which have been partly washed away during
hurricanes; and Kadu, the native who was on board one of the Russian
vessels, said "he saw the sea at Radack rise to the feet of the cocoa-nut
trees; but it was conjured in time." (Kotzebue's "First Voyage,"
volume iii., page 168.)

A storm lately entirely swept away two of the Caroline islands, and
converted them into shoals; it partly, also, destroyed two other
islands.

(M.
Desmoulins in "Comptes Rendus," 1840, page 837.) According to a tradition
which was communicated to Captain Fitzroy, it is believed in the Low
Archipelago, that the arrival of the first ship caused a great
inundation, which destroyed many lives.

Mr. Stutchbury relates, that in 1825, the western side of Chain Atoll,
in the same group, was completely devastated by a hurricane, and not
less than 300 lives lost: "in this instance it was evident, even to the
natives, that the hurricane alone was not sufficient to account for the
violent agitation of the ocean." ("West of England Journal", No. I.,
page 35.) That considerable changes have taken place recently in some
of the atolls in the Low Archipelago, appears certain from the
case already given of Matilda Island: with respect to Whitsunday
and Gloucester Islands in this same group, we must either attribute
great inaccuracy to their discoverer, the famous circumnavigator
Wallis, or believe that they have undergone a considerable change
in the period of fifty-nine years, between his voyage and that of
Captain Beechey's.

Whitsunday Island is described by Wallis as "about four miles long, and
three wide," now it is only one mile and a half long. The appearance of
Gloucester Island, in Captain Beechey's words (Beechey's "Voyage to
the Pacific," chapter vii., and Wallis's "Voyage in the 'Dolphin',"
chapter iv.), has been accurately described by its discoverer,
but its present form and extent differ materially." Blenheim reef,
in the Chagos group, consists of a water-washed annular reef, thirteen
miles in circumference, surrounding a lagoon ten fathoms deep: on its
surface there were a few worn patches of conglomerate coral-rock,
of about the size of hovels; and these Captain Moresby considered as
being, without doubt, the last remnants of islets; so that here an atoll
has been converted into an atoll-formed reef. The inhabitants of the
Maldiva Archipelago, as long ago as 1605, declared, "that the high tides
and violent currents were diminishing the number of the islands"
(See an extract from Pyrard's Voyage in Captain Owen's paper on the
Maldiva Archipelago, in the "Geographical Journal", volume ii.,
page 84.): and I have already shown, on the authority of Captain
Moresby, that the work of destruction is still in progress; but
that on the other hand the first formation of some islets is known
to the present inhabitants.

In such cases, it would be exceedingly difficult to detect a gradual
subsidence of the foundation, on which these mutable structures rest.

Some of the archipelagoes of low coral-islands are subject to
earthquakes:
Captain Moresby informs me that they are frequent, though not very
strong, in the Chagos group, which occupies a very central position
in the Indian Ocean, and is far from any land not of coral formation.

One of the islands in this group was formerly covered by a bed of mould,
which, after an earthquake, disappeared, and was believed by the
residents to have been washed by the rain through the broken masses
of underlying rock; the island was thus rendered unproductive. Chamisso
(See Chamisso, in Kotzebue's "First Voyage," volume iii., pages 182
and 136.) states, that earthquakes are felt in the Marshall atolls, which
are far from any high land, and likewise in the islands of the Caroline
Archipelago. On one of the latter, namely Oulleay atoll, Admiral Lutke,
as he had the kindness to inform me, observed several straight
fissures about a foot in width, running for some hundred yards
obliquely across the whole width of the reef.

Fissures indicate a stretching of the earth's crust, and, therefore,
probably changes in its level; but these coral-islands, which have
been shaken and fissured, certainly have not been elevated, and,
therefore, probably they have subsided. In the chapter on Keeling
atoll, I attempted to show by direct evidence, that the island
underwent a movement of subsidence, during the earthquakes lately
felt there.

The facts stand thus;--there are many large tracts of ocean, without any
high land, interspersed with reefs and islets, formed by the growth
of those kinds of corals, which cannot live at great depths; and the
existence of these reefs and low islets, in such numbers and at such
distant points, is quite inexplicable, excepting on the theory, that
the bases on which the reefs first became attached, slowly and
successively sank beneath the level of the sea, whilst the corals
continued to grow upwards.

No positive facts are opposed to this view, and some general considerations
render it probable. There is evidence of change in form, whether or not
from subsidence, on some of these coral-islands; and there is evidence
of subterranean disturbances beneath them. Will then the theory, to which
we have thus been led, solve the curious problem,--what has given to
each class of reef its peculiar form?

(PLATE: WOODCUT NO. 4.

AA--Outer edge of the reef at the level of the sea.

BB--Shores of the island.

A'A'--Outer edge of the reef, after its upward growth during a period
of subsidence.

CC--The lagoon-channel between the reef and the shores of the now encircled
land.

B'B'--The shores of the encircled island.

N.B.--In this, and the following woodcut, the subsidence of the land could
only be represented by an apparent rise in the level of the sea.

PLATE: WOODCUT NO. 5.

A'A'--Outer edges of the barrier-reef at the level of the sea. The
cocoa-nut trees represent coral-islets formed on the reef.

CC--The lagoon-channel.

B'B'--The shores of the island, generally formed of low alluvial land
and of coral detritus from the lagoon-channel.

A"A"--The outer edges of the reef now forming an atoll.

C'--The lagoon of the newly formed atoll. According to the scale, the depth
of the lagoon and of the lagoon-channel is exaggerated.)
Let us in imagination place within one of the subsiding areas, an island
surrounded by a "fringing-reef,"--that kind, which alone offers no
difficulty in the explanation of its origin. Let the unbroken lines and
the oblique shading in the woodcut (No. 4) represent a vertical section
through such an island; and the horizontal shading will represent the
section of the reef. Now, as the island sinks down, either a
few feet at a time or quite insensibly, we may safely infer from
what we know of the conditions favourable to the growth of coral,
that the living masses bathed by the surf on the margin of the reef,
will soon regain the surface. The water, however, will encroach, little
by little, on the shore, the island becoming lower and smaller, and the
space between the edge of the reef and the beach proportionately
broader. A section of the reef and island in this state, after a
subsidence of several hundred feet, is given by the dotted lines:
coral-islets are supposed to have been formed on the new reef, and
a ship is anchored in the lagoon-channel.

This section is in every respect that of an encircling barrier-reef;
it is, in fact, a section taken (The section has been made from the
chart given in the "Atlas of the Voyage of the 'Coquille'." The scale is
.57 of an inch to a mile.

The height of the island, according to M. Lesson, is 4,026 feet.
The deepest part of the lagoon-channel is 162 feet; its depth is
exaggerated in the woodcut for the sake of clearness.) east and
west through the highest point of the encircled island of Bolabola;
of which a plan is given in Plate I., Figure 5.

The same section is more clearly shown in the following woodcut (No.
5) by the unbroken lines.

The width of the reef, and its slope, both on the outer and inner
side, will have been determined by the growing powers of the coral,
under the conditions (for instance the force of the breakers and
of the currents) to which it has been exposed; and the lagoon-channel
will be deeper or shallower, in proportion to the growth of the
delicately branched corals within the reef, and to the accumulation
of sediment, relatively, also, to the rate of subsidence and the
length of the intervening stationary periods.

It is evident in this section, that a line drawn perpendicularly down from
the outer edge of the new reef to the foundation of solid rock, exceeds
by as many feet as there have been feet of subsidence, that small
limit of depth at which the effective polypifers can live--the
corals having grown up, as the whole sank down, from a basis formed
of other corals and their consolidated fragments.

Thus the difficulty on this head, which before seemed so great,
disappears.

As the space between the reef and the subsiding shore continued to
increase in breadth and depth, and as the injurious effects of the
sediment and fresh water borne down from the land were consequently
lessened, the greater number of the channels, with which the reef
in its fringing state must have been breached, especially those
which fronted the smaller streams, will have become choked up with
the growth of coral: on the windward side of the reef, where the
coral grows most vigorously, the breaches will probably have first
been closed.

In barrier-reefs, therefore, the breaches kept open by draining the tidal
waters of the lagoon-channel, will generally be placed on the
leeward side, and they will still face the mouths of the larger
streams, although removed beyond the influence of their sediment and
fresh water;--and this, it has been shown, is commonly the case.

Referring to the diagram shown above, in which the newly formed barrier-reef
is represented by unbroken lines, instead of by dots as in the
former woodcut, let the work of subsidence go on, and the doubly
pointed hill will form two small islands (or more, according to the
number of the hills) included within one annular reef.

Let the island continue subsiding, and the coral-reef will continue
growing up on its own foundation, whilst the water gains inch by
inch on the land, until the last and highest pinnacle is covered, and
there remains a perfect atoll.

A vertical section of this atoll is shown in the woodcut by the dotted
lines;--a ship is anchored in its lagoon, but islets are not supposed
yet to have been formed on the reef. The depth of the lagoon and
the width and slope of the reef, will depend on the circumstances just
referred to under barrier-reefs. Any further subsidence will produce
no change in the atoll, except perhaps a diminution in its size,
from the reef not growing vertically upwards; but should the currents
of the sea act violently upon it, and should the corals perish on
part or on the whole of its margin, changes would result during
subsidence which will be presently noticed.

I may here observe, that a bank either of rock or of hardened
sediment, level with the surface of the sea, and fringed with living
coral, would (if not so small as to allow the central space to be
quickly filled up with detritus) by subsidence be converted immediately
into an atoll, without passing, as in the case of a reef fringing
the shore of an island, through the intermediate form of a barrier-reef.

If such a bank lay a few fathoms submerged, the simple growth of the
coral (as remarked in the third chapter) without the aid of
subsidence, would produce a structure scarcely to be distinguished
from a true atoll; for in all cases the corals on the outer margin
of a reef, from having space and being freely exposed to the open
sea, will grow vigorously and tend to form a continuous ring whilst
the growth of the less massive kinds on the central expanse, will
be checked by the sediment formed there, and by that washed inwards
by the breakers; and as the space becomes shallower, their growth
will, also, be checked by the impurities of the water, and probably
by the small amount of food brought by the enfeebled currents, in
proportion to the surface of living reefs studded with innumerable
craving mouths: the subsidence of a reef based on a bank of this
kind, would give depth to its central expanse or lagoon, steepness
to its flanks, and through the free growth of the coral, symmetry
to its outline:--I may here repeat that the larger groups of atolls
in the Pacific and Indian Oceans cannot be supposed to be founded
on banks of this nature.

If, instead of the island in the diagram, the shore of a continent
fringed by a reef had subsided, a great barrier-reef, like that on the
north-east coast of Australia, would have necessarily resulted; and it
would have been separated from the main land by a deep-water channel,
broad in proportion to the amount of subsidence, and to the less
or greater inclination of the neighbouring coast-line. The effect of the
continued subsidence of a great barrier-reef of this kind, and its
probable conversion into a chain of separate atolls, will be noticed,
when we discuss the apparent progressive disseverment of the larger
Maldiva atolls.

We now are able to perceive that the close similarity in form, dimensions,
structure, and relative position (which latter point will hereafter be
more fully noticed) between fringing and encircling barrier-reefs, and
between these latter and atolls, is the necessary result of the
transformation, during subsidence of the one class into the other.
The boots were
made of white bear-skin which, at the end of the foot, were made to
terminate with the claws of the animal, and they were so long that they
came up the thigh under the coat, or "jumper" as the men called it, and
thus served instead of trousers.  He also wore fur mittens, with a bag
for the fingers, and a separate little bag for the thumb.  The hair on
these garments was long and soft, and worn outside, so that when a man
enveloped himself in them, and put up the hood, which well-nigh
concealed the face, he became very much like a bear, or some such
creature, standing on its hind-legs.

Meetuck was a short, fat, burly little fellow by nature, but when he put
on his winter dress he became such a round, soft, squat, hairy, and
comical-looking creature that no one could look at him without laughing;
and the shout with which he was received on deck the first time he made
his appearance in his new costume was loud and prolonged.  But Meetuck
was as good-humoured an Esquimaux as ever speared a walrus or lanced a
polar bear.  He joined in the laugh, and cut a caper or two to show that
he entered into the spirit of the joke.

When the ship was set fast, and the thermometer fell pretty low, the men
found that their ordinary dreadnoughts and pea-jackets, etcetera, were
not a sufficient protection against the cold, and it occurred to the
captain that his furs might now be turned to good account.  Sailors are
proverbially good needle-men of a rough kind.  Meetuck showed them how
to set about their work; each man made his own garments, and in less
than a week they were completed.  It is true the boots perplexed them a
little, and the less ingenious among the men made very rare and
curious-looking foot-gear for themselves, but they succeeded after a
fashion, and at last the whole crew appeared on deck in their new
habiliments, as we have already mentioned, capering among the snow like
bears, to their own entire satisfaction and to the intense delight of
Meetuck, who now came to regard the white men as brothers--so true is it
that "the tailor makes the man!"

"'Ow 'orribly 'eavy it is, hain't it?" gasped Mivins, after dancing
round the main-hatch till he was nearly exhausted.

"Heavy?" cried Buzzby, whose appearance was such that you would have
hesitated to say whether his breadth or length was greater,--"heavy,
d'ye say?  It must be your sperrits wot's heavy, then, for I feel as
light as a feather myself."

"O morther! then may I niver sleep on a bed made o' sich feathers!"
cried O'Riley, capering up to Green, the carpenter's mate, and throwing
a mass of snow in his face.  The frost rendered it impossible to form
the snow into balls, but the men made up for this by throwing it about
each other's eyes and ears in handfuls.

"What d'ye mean by insultin' my mate?--take that!" said Peter Grim,
giving the Irishman a twirl that tumbled him on the deck.

"Oh, bad manners to ye," spluttered O'Riley, as he rose and ran away,
"why don't ye hit a man o' yer own size."

"'Deed, then, it must be because there's not one o' my own size to hit,"
remarked the carpenter with a broad grin.

This was true.  Grim's colossal proportions were increased so much by
his hairy dress that he seemed to spread out into the dimensions of two
large men rolled into one.  But O'Riley was not to be overturned with
impunity.  Skulking round behind the crew, who were laughing at Grim's
joke, he came upon the giant in the rear, and seizing the short tail of
his jumper, pulled him violently down on the deck.

"Ah! then give it him, boys," cried O'Riley, pushing the carpenter flat
down, and obliterating his black beard and his whole visage in a mass of
snow.  Several of the wilder spirits among the men leaped on the
prostrate Grim, and nearly smothered him before he could gather himself
up for a struggle; then they fled in all directions, while their victim
regained his feet and rushed wildly after them.  At last he caught
O'Riley, and grasping him by the two shoulders gave him a heave that was
intended and "calc'lated," as Amos Parr afterwards remarked, "to pitch
him over the foretop-sail-yard!"  But an Irishman is not easily
overcome.  O'Riley suddenly straightened himself and held his arms up
over his head, and the violent heave, which, according to Parr, was to
have sent him to such an uncomfortable elevation, only pulled the jumper
completely off his body, and left him free to laugh in the face of his
big friend, and run away.

At this point the captain deemed it prudent to interfere.

"Come, come, my lads," he cried, "enough o' this!  That's not the
morning work, is it?  I'm glad to find that your new dresses," he added
with a significant smile, "make you fond of rough work in the snow;
there's plenty of it before us.  Come down below with me, Meetuck; I
wish to talk with you."

As the captain descended to the cabin the men gave a final cheer, and in
ten minutes they were working laboriously at their various duties.

Buzzby and his party were the first ready and off to cut moss.  They
drew a sledge after them towards the Red-snow Valley, which was not more
than two miles distant from the ship.  This "mossing", as it was termed,
was by no means a pleasant duty.  Before the winter became severe the
moss could be cut out from the beds of the snow streams with comparative
ease, but now the mixed turf of willows, heaths, grasses, and moss was
frozen solid, and had to be quarried with crowbars and carried to the
ship like so much stone.  However, it was prosecuted vigorously, and a
sufficient quantity was soon procured to pack on the decks of the ship,
and around its sides, so as to keep out the cold.  At the same time the
operation of discharging the stores was carried on briskly, and Fred, in
company with Meetuck, O'Riley, and Joseph West, started with the
dog-sledge on a hunting expedition.

In order to enable the reader better to understand the condition of the
_Dolphin_ and her crew, we will detail the several arrangements that
were made at this time and during the succeeding fortnight.  As a
measure of precaution, the ship, by means of blasting, sawing, and
warping, was with great labour got into deeper water, where one night's
frost set her fast with a sheet of ice three inches thick round her; in
a few weeks this ice became several feet thick, and the snow drifted up
her hull so much that it seemed as if she were resting on the land, and
had taken final leave of her native element.  Strong hawsers were then
secured to Store Island in order to guard against the possibility of her
being carried away by any sudden disruption of the ice.  The disposition
of the masts, yards, and sails were next determined on; the top-gallant
masts were struck, the lower yards got down to the housings.  The
top-sail yards, gaff, and jib-boom, however, were left in their places.
The top-sails and courses were kept bent to the yards, the sheets being
unrove, and the clews tucked in.  The rest of the binding sails were
stowed on deck to prevent their thawing during winter; and the spare
spars were lashed over the ship's sides, to leave a clear space for
taking exercise in bad weather.

The stores, in order to relieve the strain on the ship, were removed to
Store Island, and snugly housed under the tent erected there, and then a
thick bank of snow was heaped up round it.  After this was accomplished,
all the boats were hauled up beside the tent and covered with snow,
except the two quarter boats, which were left hanging at the davits all
winter.  When the thermometer fell below zero it was found that the
vapours below, and the breath of the men, condensed on the beams of the
lower deck and in the cabin near the hatchway.  It was therefore
resolved to convert some sheet-iron, which they fortunately possessed,
into pipes, which, being conducted from the cooking-stove through the
length of the ship, served in some degree to raise the temperature and
ventilate the cabins.  A regular daily allowance of coal was served out,
and four steady men appointed to attend to the fire in regular watches,
for the double purpose of seeing that none of the fuel should be wasted,
and of guarding against fire.  They had likewise charge of the
fire-pumps and buckets, and two tanks of water, all of which were kept
in the hatchway in constant readiness in case of accidents.  In addition
to this, a fire-brigade was formed, with Joseph West, a steady, quiet,
active young seaman, as its captain, and their stations in the event of
fire were fixed beforehand; also a hole was kept constantly open in the
ice alongside to ensure at all times a sufficient supply of water.

Strict regulations as to cleanliness, and the daily airing of the
hammocks, were laid down, and adhered to throughout the winter.  A
regular allowance of provisions was appointed to each man, so that they
should not run the risk of starving before the return of the wild fowl
in spring.  But those provisions were all salt, and the captain trusted
much to their hunting expeditions for a supply of fresh food, without
which there would be little hope of their continuing in a condition of
good health.  Coffee was served out at breakfast, and cocoa at supper,
besides being occasionally supplied at other times to men who had been
engaged in exhausting work in extremely cold weather.  Afterwards, when
the dark season set in, and the crew were confined by the intense cold
more than formerly within the ship, various schemes were set afoot for
passing the time profitably and agreeably.  Among others a school was
started by the captain for instructing such of the crew as chose to
attend in reading, writing, and arithmetic, and in this hyperborean
academy Fred Ellice acted as the writing-master, and Tom Singleton as
the accountant.  The men were much amused at first at the idea of "goin'
to school", and some of them looked rather shy at it, but O'Riley, after
some consideration, came boldly forward and said: "Well, boys, bad luck
to me if I don't think I'll be a scholard afther all.  My old
gran'mother used to tell me, whin I refused to go to the school that was
kip be an owld man as tuck his fees out in murphies and photteen,--says
she: `Ah ye spalpeen, ye'll niver be cliverer nor the pig, ye wont.'
`Ah, then, I hope not,' says I, `for sure she's far the cliverest in the
house, an' ye wouldn't have me to be cliverer than me own gran'mother,
would ye?' says I.  So I niver wint to school, and more be token, I
can't sign me name, and if it was only to learn how to do that, I'll go
and jine; indeed I will."  So O'Riley joined, and before long every man
in the ship was glad to join, in order to have something to do.

The doctor also, twice a week, gave readings from Shakespeare, a copy of
which he had fortunately brought with him.  He also read extracts from
the few other books they happened to have on board, and after a time,
finding unexpectedly that he had a talent that way, he began to draw
upon his memory and his imagination, and told long stories (which were
facetiously called _lectures_) to the men, who listened to them with
great delight.  Then Fred started an illustrated newspaper once a week,
which was named the _Arctic Sun_, and which was in great favour during
the whole course of its brief existence.  It is true, only one copy was
issued each morning of publication, because, besides supplying the
greater proportion of the material himself, and executing the
illustrations in a style that would have made Mr Leech of the present
day envious, he had to transcribe the various contributions he received
from the men and others in a neat, legible hand.  But this _one_ copy
was perused and reperused as no single copy of any paper extant--not
excepting _The Times_ or _Punch_--has ever yet been perused; and when it
was returned to the editor to be carefully placed in the archives of the
_Dolphin_, it was emphatically the worse for wear.  Besides all this, a
theatre was set agoing--of which we shall have more to say hereafter.

In thus minutely recounting the various expedients which these banished
men fell upon to pass the long dark hours of an Arctic winter, we may,
perhaps, give the reader the impression that a great deal of thought and
time were bestowed upon _amusement_, as if that were the chief end and
object of their life in those regions.  But we must remind him that
though many more pages might be filled in recounting all the
particulars, but a small portion of their time was, after all, taken up
in this way; and it would have been well for them had they been able to
find more to amuse them than they did, for the depressing influence of
the long-continued darkness, and the want of a sufficiency of regular
employment for so many months, added to the rigorous nature of the
climate in which they dwelt, well-nigh broke their spirits at last.

In order to secure warmth during winter, the deck of the ship was padded
with moss about a foot deep, and, down below, the walls were lined with
the same material.  The floors were carefully plastered with common
paste, and covered with oakum a couple of inches deep, over which a
carpet of canvas was spread.  Every opening in the deck was fastened
down and covered deeply over with moss, with the exception of one hatch,
which was their only entrance, and this was kept constantly closed,
except when it was desirable to ventilate.  Curtains were hung up in
front of it to prevent draughts.  A canvas awning was also spread over
the decks from stem to stern, so that it was confidently hoped the
_Dolphin_ would prove a snug tenement even in the severest cold.

As has been said before, the snow-drift almost buried the hull of the
ship; and, as snow is a good _non-conductor_ of heat, this further
helped to keep up the temperature within.  A staircase of snow was built
up to the bulwarks on the larboard quarter, and on the starboard side an
inclined plane of snow was sloped down to the ice to facilitate the
launching of the sledges when they had to be pulled on deck.

Such were the chief arrangements and preparations that were made by our
adventurers for spending the winter; but although we have described them
at this point in our story, many of them were not completed until a much
later period.


CHAPTER ELEVEN.

A HUNTING EXPEDITION, IN THE COURSE OF WHICH THE HUNTERS MEET WITH MANY
INTERESTING, DANGEROUS, PECULIAR, AND REMARKABLE EXPERIENCES, AND MAKE
ACQUAINTANCE WITH SEALS, WALRUS, DEER, AND RABBITS.

We must now return to Fred Ellice and his companions, Meetuck the
Esquimaux, O'Riley, and Joseph West, whom we left while they were on the
point of starting on a hunting expedition.

They took the direction of the ice hummocks out to the sea, and, seated
comfortably on a large sledge, were dragged by the team of dogs over the
ice at the rate of ten miles an hour.

"Well! did I iver expect to ride in a carriage and six?" exclaimed
O'Riley in a state of great glee as the dogs dashed forward at full
speed, while Meetuck flourished his awful whip, making it crack like a
pistol-shot ever and anon.

The sledge on which they travelled was of the very curious and simple
construction peculiar to the Esquimaux, and was built by Peter Grim
under the direction of Meetuck.  It consisted of two runners of about
ten feet in length, six inches high, two inches broad, and three feet
apart.  They were made of tough hickory, slightly curved in front, and
were attached to each other by cross bars.  At the stem of the vehicle
there was a low back composed of two uprights and a single bar across.
The whole machine was fastened together by means of tough lashings of
raw seal-hide, so that, to all appearance, it was a rickety affair,
ready to fall to pieces.  In reality, however, it was very strong.  No
metal nails of any kind could have held in the keen frost; they would
have snapped like glass at the first jolt; but the seal-skin fastenings
yielded to the rude shocks and twistings, to which the sledge was
subjected, and seldom gave way, or, if they did, were easily and
speedily renewed without the aid of any other implement than a knife.

But the whip was the most remarkable part of the equipage.  The handle
was only sixteen inches in length, but the lash was twenty _feet_ long,
made of the toughest seal-skin, and as thick as a man's wrist near the
handle, whence it tapered off to a fine point.  The labour of using such
a formidable weapon is so great that Esquimaux usually, when
practicable, travel in couples, one sledge behind the other.  The dogs
of the last sledge follow mechanically and require no whip, and the
riders change about so as to relieve each other.  When travelling, the
whip trails behind, and can be brought with a tremendous crack that
makes the hair fly from the wretch that is struck--and Esquimaux are
splendid _shots_, so to speak.  They can hit any part of a dog with
certainty, but usually rest satisfied with simply cracking the whip, a
sound that produces an answering yell of terror whether the lash takes
effect or not.

Our hunters were clothed in their Esquimaux garments, and cut the oddest
imaginable figures.  They had a soft, rotund, cuddled-up appearance that
was powerfully suggestive of comfort.  The sled carried one day's
provisions, a couple of walrus harpoons, with a sufficient quantity of
rope, four muskets, with the requisite ammunition, an Esquimaux
cooking-lamp, two stout spears, two tarpaulins to spread on the snow,
and four blanket sleeping-bags.  These last were six feet long, and just
wide enough for a man to crawl into at night, feet first.

"What a jolly style of travelling, isn't it?" cried Fred, as the dogs
sprang wildly forward, tearing the sledge behind them, Dumps and Poker
leading, and looking as lively as crickets.

Later they got more bitter and we heard, "Why don't the English come and
help us as they promised? If only the English would come, it would be
all right." And so on, till I almost felt as if I could not bear it
any longer. One morning some one came in and said English soldiers had
been seen ten kilometres away. We heard the sound of distant cannon
in a new direction, and watched and waited, hoping to see the English
ride in.

But some one must have mistaken the German khaki for ours, for no English
were ever near that place. There was no news of what was really
happening in the country, no newspapers ever got through, and we had
nothing to go upon but the German _affiches_ proclaiming victories
everywhere, the German trains garlanded with laurels and faded
roses, marked "Destination--Paris," and the large batches of French
prisoners that were constantly marched through the town.

An inscription written over a doorway in Charleroi amused us rather: "Vive
Guillaume II, roi de l'univers."

Not yet, not yet, William.

Later on the Belgians issued a wonderful little newspaper at irregular
intervals of three or four days, typewritten and passed from hand
to hand.

The most amazing news was published in it, which we always firmly
believed, till it was contradicted in the next issue.

I collected two or three copies of this paper as a curiosity, but
unfortunately lost them later on, with all my papers and luggage.

One or two items I remember quite well. One gave a vivid account of
how the Queen of Holland had killed her husband because he had
allowed the Germans to pass through Maestricht; another even more
circumstantial story was that England had declared war on Holland,
Holland had submitted at once, and England imposed many stringent
conditions, of which I only remember two.

One was, that all her trade with Germany should cease at once;
secondly, that none of her lighthouses should show light at night.

One of the German surgeons who used to operate at our hospital was
particularly ingenious in inventing tortures for me; I used to have to
help him in his operations, and he would recount to me with gusto how the
English had retreated from Mons, how the Germans were getting nearer
and nearer to Paris, how many English killed, wounded and prisoners
there were, and so on.

"Och,
there ye go again," he cried, as the sled suddenly fell about six
inches, from a higher level to a lower, where the floe had cracked,
causing the teeth of the whole party to come together with a snap.  "A
man dursen't spake for fear o' bitin' his tongue off."

"No fee," said Meetuck, looking over his shoulder with a broader smirk.

"No fee, ye lump of pork! it's a double fee I'll have to pay the dacter
an ye go on like that."

_No fee_ was Meetuck's best attempt at the words _no fear_.  He had
picked up a little English during his brief sojourn with the sailors,
and already understood much of what was said to him, but words were as
yet few, and his manner of pronouncing them peculiar.

"Holo! look! look!" cried the Esquimaux, leaping suddenly off the sledge
and checking the dogs.

"Eh! what! where?" ejaculated Fred, seizing his musket.

"I think I see something, sir," cried West, shading his eyes with his
hand, and gazing earnestly in the direction indicated by Meetuck.

"So do I, be the mortial!" said O'Riley in a hoarse whisper.  "I see the
mountains and the sky, I do, as plain as the nose on me face!"

"Hush! stop your nonsense, man," said Fred.  "I see a deer, I'm certain
of it."

Meetuck nodded violently to indicate that Fred was right.

"Well, what's to be done? luckily we are well to leeward, and it has
neither sighted nor scented us."

Meetuck replied by gestures and words to the effect that West and
O'Riley should remain with the dogs, and keep them quiet, under the
shelter of a hummock, while he and Fred should go after the reindeer.
Accordingly, away they went making a pretty long detour in order to gain
the shore, and come upon it under the shelter of the grounded floes,
behind which they might approach without being seen.  In hurrying along
the coast they observed the footprints of a musk ox, and also of several
Arctic hares and foxes, which delighted them much, for hitherto they had
seen none of those animals, and were beginning to be fearful lest they
should not visit that part of the coast at all.  Of course Fred knew not
what sort of animals had made the tracks in question, but he was an
adept at guessing, and the satisfied looks of his companion gave him
reason to believe that he was correct in his surmises.

In half an hour they came within range, and Fred, after debating with
himself for some time as to the propriety of taking the first shot,
triumphed over himself, and, stepping back a pace, motioned to the
Esquimaux to fire.  But Meetuck was an innate gentleman, and modestly
declined, so Fred advanced, took a good aim, and fired.

The deer bounded away, but stumbled as it went, showing that it was
wounded.

"Ha! ha!  Meetuck," exclaimed Fred, as he recharged in tremendous
excitement (taking twice as long to load in consequence), "I've improved
a little you see in my shoot--, o' bother this--ramrod!--tut! tut!
there, that's it."

Bang went Meetuck's musket at that moment, and the deer tumbled over
upon the snow.

"Well done, old fellow!" cried Fred, springing forward.  At the same
instant a white hare darted across his path, at which he fired, without
even putting the gun to his shoulder, and knocked it over, to his own
intense amazement.

The three shots were the signal for the men to come up with the sledge,
which they did at full gallop, O'Riley driving, and flourishing the long
whip about in a way that soon entangled it hopelessly with the dogs'
traces.

"Ah, then, ye've done it this time, ye have, sure enough!  Musha! what a
purty crature it is.  Now, isn't it, West?  Stop, then, won't ye (to the
restive dogs), ye've broke my heart entirely, and the whip's tied up
into iver so many knots.  Arrah, Meetuck! ye may drive yer coach yerself
for me, you may; I've had more nor enough of it."

In a few minutes the deer and the hare were lashed to the sledge--which
the Irishman asserted was a great improvement, inasmuch as the carcass
of the former made an excellent seat--and they were off again at full
gallop over the floes.  They travelled without further interruption or
mishap until they drew near to the open water, when suddenly they came
upon a deep fissure or crack in the ice, about four feet wide, with
water in the bottom.  Here they came to a dead stop.

"Arrah! what's to be done now?" enquired O'Riley.

"Indeed I don't know," replied Fred, looking toward Meetuck for advice.

"Hup, cut-up ice, mush, hurroo!" said that fat individual.  Fortunately
he followed his advice with a practical illustration of its meaning.
Seizing an axe he ran to the nearest hummock, and, chopping it down,
rolled the heaviest pieces he could move into the chasm.  The others
followed his example, and, in the course of an hour, the place was
bridged across, and the sledge passed over.  But the dogs required a
good deal of coaxing to get them to trust to this rude bridge, which
their sagacity taught them was not to be depended on like the works of
nature.

A quarter of an hour's drive brought them to a place where there was
another crack of little more than two feet across.  Meetuck stretched
his neck and took a steady look at this as they approached it at full
gallop.  Being apparently satisfied with his scrutiny, he resumed his
look of self-satisfied placidity.

"Look out, Meetuck, pull up!" cried Fred in some alarm; but the
Esquimaux paid no attention.

"O morther, we're gone now, for iver," exclaimed O'Riley, shutting his
eyes and clenching his teeth as he laid fast hold of the sides of the
sledge.

The feet of the dogs went faster and faster until they pattered on the
hard surface of the snow like rain.  Round came the long whip, as
O'Riley said, "like the shot of a young cannon," and the next moment
they were across, skimming over the ice on the other side like the wind.

It happened that there had been a break in the ice at this point on the
previous night, and the floes had been cemented by a sheet of ice only
an inch thick.  Upon this, to the consternation even of Meetuck himself,
they now passed, and in a moment, ere they were aware, they were passing
over a smooth, black surface that undulated beneath them like the waves
of the sea and crackled fearfully.  There was nothing for it but to go
on.  A moment's halt would have allowed the sledge to break through and
leave them struggling in the water.  There was no time for remark.  Each
man held his breath.  Meetuck sent the heavy lash with a tremendous
crack over the backs of the whole team, but just as they neared the
solid floe, the left runner broke through.  In a moment the men flung
themselves horizontally upon their breasts, and scrambled over the
smooth surface until they gained the white ice, while the sledge and the
dogs nearest to it were sinking.  One vigorous pull, however, by dogs
and men together, dragged the sledge upon the solid floe, even before
the things in it had got wet.

"Safe!" cried Fred, as he hauled on the sledge rope to drag it farther
out of danger.

"So we are," replied O'Riley, breathing very hard, "and it's meself
thought to have had a wet skin at this minute.  Come, West, lind a hand
to fix the dogs, will ye?"

A few minutes sufficed to put all to rights and enable them to start
afresh.  Being now in the neighbourhood of dangerous ice, they advanced
with a little more caution; the possibility of seals being in the
neighbourhood also rendered them more circumspect.  It was well that
they were on the alert, for a band of seals were soon after descried in
a pool of open water not far ahead, and one of them was lying on the
ice.

There were no hummocks, however, in the neighbourhood to enable them to
approach unseen; but the Esquimaux was prepared for such a contingency.
He had brought a small sledge, of about two feet in length by a foot and
a half in breadth, which he now unfastened from the large sledge, and
proceeded quietly to arrange it, to the surprise of his companions, who
had not the least idea what he was about to do, and watched his
proceedings with much interest.

"Is it to sail on the ice ye're goin', boy?" enquired O'Riley, at last,
when he saw Meetuck fix a couple of poles, about four feet long, into a
hole in the little sledge, like two masts, and upon these spread a piece
of canvas upwards of a yard square, with a small hole in the centre of
it.  But Meetuck answered not.  He fastened the canvas "sail" to a
cross-yard above and below.  Then, placing a harpoon and coil of rope on
the sledge, and taking up his musket, he made signs to the party to keep
under the cover of a hummock, and, pushing the sledge before him,
advanced towards the seals in a stooping posture, so as to be completely
hid behind the bit of canvas.

"Oh the haythen, I see it now!" exclaimed O'Riley, his face puckering up
with fun.  "Ah, but it's a cliver trick, no doubt of it!"

"What a capital dodge!" said Fred, crouching behind the hummock, and
watching the movements of the Esquimaux with deep interest.

"West, hand me the little telescope; you'll find it in the pack."

"Here it is, sir," said the man, pulling out a glass of about six inches
long, and handing it to Fred.

"How many is there, an' ye plaze?"

"Six, I think; yes--one, two, three,--I can't make them out quite, but I
think there are six, besides the one on the ice.  Hist! there he sees
him.  Ah!  Meetuck, he's too quick for you."

As he spoke, the seal on the ice began to show symptoms of alarm.
Meetuck had approached to within shot, but he did not fire; the wary
Esquimaux had caught sight of another object which a lump of ice had
hitherto concealed from view.  This was no less a creature than a
walrus, who chanced at that time to come up to take a gulp of fresh air,
and lave his shaggy front in the brine, before going down again to the
depths of his ocean home.  Meetuck, therefore, allowed the seal to glide
quietly into the sea, and advanced towards this new object of attack.
At length he took a steady aim through the hole in the canvas screen,
and fired.  Or it may be boned, rolled, and corned.

FOREQUARTER OF LAMB OR VEAL.

This is a difficult joint for a beginner, but after a little
study and practice one may manipulate it with dexterity. Some time when
a lamb stew or fricassee is to be prepared, study the joint carefully and
practice cutting it up, and thus become familiar with the position
of the shoulder-blade joint,--the only one difficult to reach. The
backbone should always be disjointed.

The ribs should be divided across the breast and at the junction of the
breast-bone, and the butcher should also remove the shoulder-blade
and the bone in the leg.

Unless the joint be very young and tender, it is better to use the
breast portion for a stew or fricassee; but when nice and tender the
breast may be roasted with the other portions, as the choice gelatinous
morsels near the breast-bones are preferred by many. This joint
consists of three portions,--the shoulder or knuckle, the breast
or brisket, and the ribs.
Put it on the platter with the backbone up. Put the fork in near the
knuckle. Cut through the flesh clear round the leg and well up on the
shoulder, but not too far on the breast. With the fork lift the leg
away from the shoulder, cutting in till you come to the joint,
after separating which, remove the leg to a separate dish, to be
afterward cut into thin slices through the thickest part. Cut across
from left to right where the ribs have been broken, separating the
gristly breast from the upper portion.

Then remove the blade if it has not been done before cooking. Divide
each of these portions between the ribs, and serve a piece of the
rib, the breast, or a slice from the leg, as preferred.

NECK OF VEAL.

The vertebra should be disjointed, and the ribs cut on the inside through
the bone only, on the thin end. Place it on the platter with the
back up and cut across from left to right, where the ribs were divided,
separating the small ends of the ribs from the thicker upper portion;
then cut between each short rib. Carve from the back down in
slanting slices, then slip the knife under close to the ribs and
remove the slices. This gives a larger portion than the cutting
of the slices straight would give, and yet not so large as if each
were helped to a whole rib. Serve a short rib with each slice.

BREAST OF VEAL.

Place it on the dish with the breast-bone or brisket nearest you. Cut off
the gristly brisket, then separate it into sections. Cut the upper part
parallel with the ribs, or between each rib if very small. Slice the
sweetbread, and serve a portion of brisket, rib, and sweetbread to each
person.

CALF'S HEAD.

Calf's head served whole is a favorite dish in England, but seldom
seen on American tables. For those who have this preference a few hints
about carving may be desirable. Place it on the platter with the face
toward the right. Cut from left to right, through the middle of the
cheek down to the bone, in several parallel slices of medium thickness;
then separate them from the bone. Cut down at the back of the throat
and slice the throat sweetbread. With the point of the knife cut out
the gelatinous portion near the eye, and serve to those who desire it.
There is a small portion of delicate lean meat to be found after
removing the jawbone.

Some are fond of the palate, which lies under the head. The tongue
should be sliced, and a portion of this and of the brains offered to
each person.

ROAST PIG.

This is sometimes partly divided before serving. Cut off the head
and divide it through the middle; then divide through the backbone. Place
it on the platter back to back, with half the head on each end of the
dish.

If the pig be very young, it is in better style to serve it whole.
Before cooking, truss the forelegs forward and the hind legs
backward.
Place the pig on the platter with the head at the left. Cut off the head,
separating the neck-joint with the point of the knife, then cut through
the flesh on either side.

Take off the shoulders by cutting in a circle from under the foreleg
round nearly to the backbone and down again. Bend it forward and cut
through the joint. Cut off the hams in the same way. Then split the
backbone the entire length and divide between each rib. Cut slices
from the thickest part of the hams and the shoulders.

The ribs are the choice portion, but those who like it at all consider any
part of it a delicacy.

HAM.

If the ham is not to be served whole, the simplest and most economical way
is to begin near the smaller end and cut in very thin slices, on
each side of the bone.

Divide the slices and arrange them neatly on the dish, one lapping
over another, with the fat edge outside.

Where the whole ham is to appear on the table it should be trimmed
neatly, and the end of the bone covered with a paper ruffle.

The thickest part should be on the further side of the platter. Make an
incision through the thickest part, a little way from the smaller
end.

Shave off in very thin slices, cutting toward the larger end and down
to the bone at every slice. The knife should be very sharp to make a clean
cut, and each slice should have a portion of the fat with the crisp
crust. To serve it hot a second day, fill the cavity with a bread stuffing,
cover it with buttered crumbs, and brown it in the oven. If it is to be
served cold, brown the crumbs first and then sprinkle them over the
stuffing. If this be done the edges will not dry and the symmetry of
the ham is preserved. Carve as before, toward the larger end, and
if more be needed, cut also from the other side of the bone.

By filling the cavity again with stuffing, a ham may be served as
a whole one the third time and look as inviting as when first served.

Should there be two or three inches of the thickest end left for
another serving, saw off the bone, lay the meat flesh side up,
with the fat on the further side of the platter, and carve horizontally
in thin slices.

TONGUE.

The centre of the tongue is the choicest portion. Cut across in slices
as thin as a wafer.

The tip of the tongue is more delicate when cut lengthwise in thin
slices, though this is not the usual practice.

CORNED BEEF.

Corned beef should be put while hot into a pan or mould, in layers
of fat and lean, with the fibres running the long way of the pan. After
pressing it, place it on the platter and slice thinly from one end. This
gives uniform slices, cut across the grain, each one having a fair
proportion of fat and lean.

CHARTREUSE, OR PRESSED MEAT.

Any moulds of meat, either plain or in jelly or rice, should be cut
from one end, or in the middle and toward either end, in uniform
slices, the thickness varying with the kind of meat.

Be careful not to break them in serving. If only a part of a slice be
desired, divide it neatly. Help also to the rice or jelly.

TO CUT UP A CHICKEN FOR A STEW OR FRICASSEE.

Nothing is more unsightly and unappetizing than a portion of chicken with
the bones chopped at all sorts of angles, and with splinters of
bone in the meat.

All bones will separate easily at the joint when the cord or tendon and
gristly portion connecting them have been cut.

After the chicken has been singed and wiped, and the crop removed from
the end of the neck, place it in front of you with the breast
up and the neck at the left. With a small sharp knife make an incision
in the thin skin between the inside of the legs and the body. Cut through
the skin only, down toward the right side of the leg, and then on the
left. Bend the leg over toward you, and you will see where the flesh
joins the body and also where the joint is, for the bone will move in the
joint. Cut through the flesh close to the body, first on the right
of the joint and then on the left, and as you bend the leg over,
cut the cord and gristle in the joint, and this will free the leg from
the body. Find the joint in the leg and divide it neatly. Work the wing
until you see where the joint is, then cut through the flesh on the
shoulder, bend the wing up and cut down through the gristle and
cord.

Make a straight clean cut, leaving no jagged edges. Divide the
wing in the joint, and then remove the leg and wing from the opposite
side, and divide in the same way.
Make an incision in the skin near the vent, cut through the membrane lying
between the breast and the tail down to the backbone on each side,
remove the entrails, and break off the backbone just below the
ribs.
Separate the side-bones from the back by cutting close to the backbone
from one end to the other on each side. This is a little difficult to
do; and in your first experiment it would be better not to divide it
until after boiling it, as it separates more easily after the connecting
gristle has been softened by cooking.

Take off the neck close to the back by cutting through the flesh
and twisting or wringing it until the bone is disjointed.

Cut off the wish-bone in a slanting direction from the front of the
breast-bone down to the shoulder on each side. Cut through the
cartilage between the end of the collar-bone and the breast. Cut between
the end of the shoulder-blade and the back down toward the wing-joint,
turn the blade over toward the neck, and cut through the joint.

This joint in the wing, collar-bone, and shoulder-blade is the hardest
to separate. Remove the breast from the back by cutting through the
cartilage connecting the ribs; this can be seen from the inside. The
breast should be left whole and the bone removed after stewing; but if
the chicken is to be fried you may remove the bone first.

It is not necessary in boiling a chicken to divide it so minutely, for
the wings and legs can be disjointed, and the side-bones and breast
separated from the back more easily after cooking; but it is valuable
practice, and if one learns to do it neatly it will help in carving a
boiled fowl or roast turkey.

In arranging a fricasseed chicken on the platter, put the neck and ribs
at the left end of the dish and the backbone at the right end. Put the
breast over the ribs, arrange the wings on each side of the breast, the
second joints next to the side-bones, and cross the ends of the
drumsticks over the tail.

BOILED FOWL OR TURKEY.

Fowls or turkeys for boiling should be trussed with the ends of the legs
drawn into the body through a slit in the skin, and kept in place with
a small skewer. Turn the tip of the wing over on the back. Cut off
the neck, not the skin, close to the body, and after putting in the
stuffing, fasten the skin of the neck to the back. Put strips of cloth
round it, or pin it in a cloth, to keep it white and preserve the
shape.

In carving, place it on the platter with the head at the left. Put the
fork in firmly across the breast-bone. With the point of the knife
cut through the skin near the tail, and lift the legs out from the
inside.
Then cut through the skin between the legs and body, bend the leg over,
and cut across through the joint.

Cut from the top of the shoulder down toward the body until the wing-joint
is exposed, then cut through this, separating the wing from the body.
Remove the leg and wing from the other side.

Shave off a thin slice on the end of the breast toward each wing-joint,
slip the knife under at the top of the breast-bone, and turn back
the wish-bone.

Capons and large fowls may be sliced thinly across the breast in the same
manner as a roast turkey. But if the fowl be small, draw the knife along
the edge of the breast-bone on each side, and lay the meat away
from the bone; the fillets will separate easily.

Then divide the meat across the grain. Separate the collar-bone from the
breast. Slip the knife under the shoulder-blade, turn it over, and
separate at the joint.
Cut through the cartilage connecting the ribs; this will separate
the breast from the back.

Now remove the fork from the breast, turn the back over, place the knife
midway, and with the fork lift up the tail end, separating the
back from the body. Place the fork in the middle of the backbone, cut
close to the backbone from one end to the other on each side,
freeing the side-bones.

The wing and breast of a boiled fowl are the favorite portions. It is
important that the fowl be cooked just right. If underdone, the joints
will not separate readily; and if overdone they will fall apart so quickly
that carving is impossible. Unless the knife be very sharp, and the
work done carefully, the skin of the breast will come off with the leg
or wing.

BROILED CHICKEN.

Split the chicken down the back and remove the backbone. If the chicken
be very young and tender--and only such are suitable for
broiling--remove the breast-bone before cooking, or cut the bone
through the middle, lengthwise and crosswise from the inside, without
cutting into the meat.

In serving, divide through the breast from the neck down, and serve
half to each person; or if a smaller portion be desired, divide
each half crosswise through the breast, leaving the wing on one
part and the leg on the other.

If the chicken be large, break the joints of the legs, thighs, and
wings, without breaking through the skin; cut the tendons on the thighs
from the inside, cut the membrane on the inside of the collar-bone
and wing-joint, and remove the breast-bone.

This may all be done before cooking, and will not injure the appearance
of the outside.

In serving, separate the legs and wings at the joints, then separate
the breast from the lower part, and divide the breast lengthwise
and crosswise.

Carving-scissors are convenient for cutting any kind of broiled
game or poultry.

ROAST TURKEY.

Turkeys should be carefully trussed. The wings and thighs should be brought
close to the body and kept in position by skewers. The ends of the
drumsticks may be drawn into the body or crossed over the tail and tied
firmly.

After cooking, free the ends of the drumsticks from the body and
trim them with a paper ruffle.

This will enable the carver to touch them if necessary without soiling his
hands. Place the turkey on the platter with the head at the left. Unless
the platter be very large, provide an extra dish, also a fork for
serving.

Insert the carving-fork across the middle of the breast-bone. Cut
through the skin between the breast and the thigh.

Bend the leg over, and cut off close to the body and through the
joint. Cut through the top of the shoulder down through the wing-joint.
Shave off the breast in thin slices, slanting from the front of the
breast-bone down toward the wing-joint.

If the family be small and the turkey is to be served for a second
dinner, carve only from the side nearest you. Tip the bird over
slightly, and with the point of the knife remove the oyster and the
small dark portion found on the side-bone. Then remove the fork from
the breast and divide the leg and wing. Cut through the skin between
the body and breast, and with a spoon remove a portion of the stuffing.

Serve light or dark meat and stuffing, as preferred. If carved in this
way, the turkey will be left with one half entire, and if placed on a
clean platter with the cut side nearest the carver, and garnished
with parsley, will present nearly as fine an appearance, to all but the
carver, as when first served.

When there are many to be served, take off the leg and wing from each
side and slice the whole of the breast before removing the fork; then
divide as required.

It is not often necessary to cut up the whole body of the turkey; but
where every scrap of the meat will be needed, or you wish to exercise
your skill, proceed to carve in this manner.

Put the fork in firmly across the middle of the breast-bone. Cut
through the skin between the leg and body.

Bend the leg over and cut off at the joint. If the turkey be very tender
or overcooked, the side-bone will separate from the back and come away
with the second joint, making it more difficult to separate the thigh
from the side-bone. Cut through the top of the shoulder and separate
the wing at the joint.

Cut off the leg and wing from the other side.

Carve the breast on each side, in thin slices, slanting slightly toward
the wing. Be careful to take a portion of crisp outside with each
slice.

Shave off the crisp skin near the neck, in order to reach the
stuffing. Insert the point of the knife at the front of the
breast-bone, turn back the wish-bone and separate it.
Cut through the cartilage on each side, separating the collar-bones
from the breast. Tip the body slightly over and slip the knife under
the end of the shoulder-blade; turn it over toward the wing. Repeat
this process on the opposite side. Cut through the cartilage which
divides the ribs, separating the breast-bone from the back. Lay the
breast one side and remove the fork from it. Take the stuffing from
the back. Turn the back over, place the knife midway just below the
ribs, and with the fork lift up the tail end, separating the back
from the body. Place the fork in the middle of the backbone, and
cut close to the backbone from one end to the other, on each side,
freeing the side-bone. Then divide the legs and wings at the joints.
The joint in the leg is not quite in the middle of the bend, but a
trifle nearer the thigh. It requires some practice to strike these
joints in the right spot. Cut off the meat from each side of the
bone in the second joint and leg, as these when large are more than
one person requires, and it is inconvenient to have so large bones
on one's plate.
It is easier to finish the carving before beginning to serve. An
expert carver will have the whole bird disjointed and literally in
pieces with a very few strokes of the knife.

ROAST GOOSE.
A green goose neatly trussed and "done to a turn" looks very tempting
on the platter; but there is so little meat in proportion to the
size of the bird that unless it be skilfully carved only a small
number can be served. The breast of a goose is broader and flatter
than that of a turkey. It should be carved in a different manner,
although many writers give the same directions for carving both.
Place it on the platter with the head at the left. Insert the fork
firmly across the ridge of the breast-bone. Begin at the wing and
cut down through the meat to the bone, the whole length of the
breast. Cut down in the same way in parallel slices, as thin as can
be cut, until you come to the ridge of the breast-bone. Slip the
knife under the meat at the end of the breast, and remove the slices
from the bone. Cut in the same manner on the other side of the
breast. Cut through the skin below the breast, insert a spoon and
help to the stuffing. If more be required, cut the wing off at the
joint. Then tip the body over slightly and cut off the leg. This
thigh-joint is tougher, and requires more skill in separating, than
the second joint of a turkey. It lies nearer the backbone. But
practice and familiarity with its location will enable one to strike
it accurately. The wish-bone, shoulder-blade, and collar-bone may
be removed according to the directions given for carving roast
turkey. Some prefer to remove the wing and leg before slicing the
breast.

ROAST DUCK.
Place it in the same position and carve in the same way as a
goose.
Begin at the wing, and cut down to the bone in long thin slices,
parallel with the breast-bone; then remove them from the bone. The
breast is the favorite portion; but the "wing of a flyer and the
leg of a swimmer" are esteemed by epicures.
The stuffing is not often desired, but if so it may be found by
cutting across below the end of the breast.
Geese and ducks are seldom entirely cut up at the table, as there
is very little meat on the back. But often from a seemingly bare
carcass enough may be obtained to make a savory entrée.

PIGEONS.
These, if small, are served whole. If large, cut through the middle
from the neck to the end of the breast and down through the backbone.
The bones are thin, and may easily be divided with a sharp knife.
When smaller portions are required, cut from the shoulder down below
the leg, separating the wing and leg from the body.

PARTRIDGES.
Cut through above the joint of the wing, down below the leg, and
remove the wing and leg in one portion. Cut under the breast from
the lower end through the ribs to the neck and remove the breast
entire.Poker took it at once, and a single snap caused it to vanish.  He, too,
had finished supper, and evidently ate the morsel to please the
Irishman.

"Hand me the coffee, Meetuck," said Fred.  "The biscuit lies beside you,
don't give in so soon, man."

"Thank you, sir, I have about done."

"Meetuck, ye haythen, try a bit o' the roast; do now, av it was only to
plaaze me."

Meetuck shook his head quietly, and, cutting a _fifteenth_ lump off the
mass of raw walrus that lay beside him, proceeded leisurely to devour
it.

"The dogs is nothin' to him," muttered O'Riley.  "Isn't it a curious
thing, now, to think that we're all at _sea_ a eatin', and drinkin', and
slaapin'--or goin' to slaape--jist as if we wor on the land, and the
great ocean away down below us there, wid whales, and seals, and
walrusses, and mermaids, for what I know, a swimmin' about jist under
whare we sit, and maybe lookin' through the ice at us this very minute.
Isn't it quare?"

"It is odd," said Fred, laughing, "and not a very pleasant idea.
However, as there is at least twelve feet of solid ice between us and
the company you mention, we don't need to care much."

"Ov coorse not," replied O'Riley, nodding his head approvingly as he
lighted his pipe; "that's my mind intirely, in all cases o' danger, when
ye don't need to be afeared, ye needn't much care.  It's a good chart to
steer by, that same."

This last remark seemed to afford so much food for thought to the
company that nothing further was said by anyone until Fred rose and
proposed to turn in.  West had already crawled into his blanket-bag, and
was stretched out like a mummy on the floor, and the sound of Meetuck's
jaws still continued as he winked sleepily over the walrus meat, when a
scraping was heard outside the hut.

"Sure, it's the foxes; I'll go and look," whispered O'Riley, laying down
his pipe and creeping to the mouth of the tunnel.

He came back, however, faster than he went, with a look of
consternation, for the first object that confronted him on looking out
was the enormous head of a Polar bear.  To glance round for their
firearms was the first impulse, but these had unfortunately been left on
the sledge outside.  What was to be done?  They had nothing but their
clasp-knives in the igloe.  In this extremity Meetuck cut a large hole
in the back of the hut intending to creep out and procure one of the
muskets, but the instant the opening was made the bear's head filled it
up.  With a savage yell O'Riley seized the lamp and dashed the flaming
fat in the creature's face.  It was a reckless deed, for it left them
all in the dark, but the bear seemed to think himself insulted, for he
instantly retreated, and when Meetuck emerged and laid hold of a gun he
had disappeared.

They found, on issuing into the open air, that a stiff breeze was
blowing, which, from the threatening appearance of the sky, promised to
become a gale; but as there was no apprehension to be entertained in
regard to the stability of the floe, they returned to the hut, taking
care to carry in their arms along with them.  Having patched up the
hole, closed the doors, rekindled the lamp, and crept into their
respective bags, they went to sleep, for, however much they might dread
the return of Bruin, slumber was a necessity of nature that would not be
denied.

Meanwhile the gale freshened into a hurricane, and was accompanied with
heavy snow, and when they attempted to move next morning they found it
impossible to face it for a single moment.  There was no alternative,
therefore, but to await the termination of the gale, which lasted two
days, and kept them close prisoners all the time.  It was very
wearisome, doubtless, but they had to submit, and sought to console
themselves and pass the time as pleasantly as possible by sleeping, and
eating, and drinking coffee.


CHAPTER THIRTEEN.

JOURNEY RESUMED--THE HUNTERS MEET WITH BEARS AND HAVE A GREAT FIGHT, IN
WHICH THE DOGS ARE SUFFERERS--A BEAR'S DINNER--MODE IN WHICH ARCTIC
ROCKS TRAVEL--THE ICE-BELT.

In the abating of the great storm, referred to in the last chapter, the
hunters sought to free themselves from their snowy prison, and succeeded
in burrowing, so to speak, upwards, after severe labour, for the hut was
buried in drift which the violence of the gale had rendered extremely
compact.

O'Riley was the first to emerge into the upper world.  Having dusted the
snow from his garments, and shaken himself like a Newfoundland dog, he
made sundry wry faces, and gazed round him with the look of a man that
did not know very well what to do with himself.

"It's a quare place, it is, intirely," he remarked, with a shake of the
head that betokened intense sagacity, while he seated himself on a mound
of snow and watched his comrades as they busied themselves in dragging
their sleeping-bags and cooking utensils from the cavern they had just
quitted.  O'Riley seemed to be in a contemplative mood, for he did not
venture any further remark, although he looked unutterable things as he
proceeded quietly to fill his little black pipe.

"Ho, O'Riley! lend a hand, you lazy fellow," cried Fred; "work first and
play afterwards, you skulker."

"Sure that same is what I'm doin'," replied O'Riley with a bland smile
which he eclipsed in a cloud of smoke.  "Haven't I bin workin' like a
naagur for two hours to git out of that hole, and ain't I playin' a tune
on me pipe now?  But I won't be cross-grained.  I'll lind ye a hand av
ye behave yerself.  It's a bad thing to be cross-grained," he continued,
pocketing his pipe and assisting to arrange the sledge; "me owld
grandmother always towld me that, and she was wise, she wos, beyand
ordn'r.  More like Salomon nor anything else."

"She must have directed that remark specially to you, I think," said
Fred--"let Dumps lead, West, he's tougher than the others,--did she not,
O'Riley?"

"Be no manes.  It wos to the pig she said it.  Most of her conversation
(and she had a power of it) wos wid the pig, and many's the word o' good
advice she gave it, as it sat in its usual place beside the fire
forenint her; but it was all thrown away, it wos, for there wosn't
another pig in all the length o' Ireland as had sich a will o' its own;
and it had a screech, too, when it wasn't plaazed, as bate all the steam
whistles in the world, it did.  I've often moralated on that same, and
I've noticed that as it is wid pigs, so it is wid men and women--some of
them at laste--the more advice ye give them, the less they take."

"Down, Poker; quiet, good dog!" said West, as he endeavoured to restrain
the ardour of the team, which, being fresh and full fed, could scarcely
be held in by the united efforts of himself and Meetuck while their
companions lashed their provisions, etcetera, on the sledge.

"Hold on, lads!" cried Fred, as he fastened the last lashing.  "We'll be
ready in a second.  Now, then, jump on, two of you!  Catch hold of the
tail-line, Meetuck!  All right!"

"Hall right!" yelled the Esquimaux, as he let go the dogs and sprang
upon the sledge.

The team struggled and strained violently for a few seconds in their
efforts to overcome the _vis inertiae_ of the sledge, and it seemed as
if the traces would part, but they were made of tough walrus hide, and
held on bravely, while the heavy vehicle gradually fetched way, and at
length flew over the floes at the rate of seven or eight miles an hour.
Travelling, however, was not now quite as agreeable as it had been when
they set out from the ship, for the floes were swept bare in some places
by the gale, while in other places large drifts had collected, so that
the sledge was either swaying to and fro on the smooth ice, and swinging
the dogs almost off their feet, or it was plunging heavily through banks
of soft snow.

As the wind was still blowing fresh, and would have been dead against
them had they attempted to return by a direct route to the ship, they
made for the shore, intending to avail themselves of the shelter
afforded by the ice-belt.  Meanwhile the carcass of the walrus, at least
as much of it as could not be packed on the sledge, was buried in the
hut, and a spear planted above it to mark the spot.

"Hah! an' it's cowld," said O'Riley, wrapping himself more closely in
his fur jumper as they sped along.  "I wish we wos out o' the wind, I
do."

"You'll have your wish soon, then," answered West, "for that row of
icebergs we're coming to will shelter us nearly all the way to the
land."

"Surely you are taking us too much off to the right, Meetuck," said
Fred; "we are getting farther away from the ship."

"No fee.  Be win' too 'trong.  We turn hup 'long shore very quick,
soon--ha!"

Meetuck accompanied each word with a violent nod of his head, at the
same time opening and shutting his mouth and winking with both eyes,
being apparently impressed with the conviction that such contortions of
visage rendered his meaning more apparent.

"Look! look! ho!  Nannook, nannook!"  (a bear, a bear!) whispered the
Esquimaux with sudden animation, just as they gained the lee of the
first iceberg.

The words were unnecessary, however, for the whole party were looking
ahead with the most intense eagerness at a bear which their sudden
advent had aroused from a nap in the crevice of the iceberg.  A little
cub was discerned a moment after, standing by her side, and gazing at
the intruders with infantine astonishment.  While the muskets were being
loosened and drawn out, Meetuck let slip all the dogs, and in a few
seconds they were engaged in active warfare with the enemy.

"Oh! musha!  Dumps is gone intirely!"  The quadruped referred to was
tossed to a height of about thirty feet, and alighted senseless upon the
ice.  The bear seized him with her teeth and tossed him with an
incredibly slight effort.  The other dogs, nothing daunted by the fate
of their comrade, attacked the couple in the rear, biting their heels,
and so distracting their attention that they could not make an energetic
attack in any direction.  Another of the dogs, however, a young one,
waxing reckless, ventured too near the old bear, and was seized by the
back, and hurled high into the air, through which it wriggled violently,
and descended with a sounding whack upon the ice.  At the same moment a
volley from the hunters sent several balls into the carcass of both
mother and cub; but, although badly wounded, neither of them evinced any
sign of pain and exhaustion as they continued to battle with the
remaining dogs.

The dogs that had already fallen in the fray had not been used to
bear-hunting--hence their signal defeat; but this was not the case with
the others, all of which were old campaigners; and Poker especially,
although not old in years, was a practical fighter, having been trained
not to attack but to harass.  The systematic and steady way in which
they advanced before the bear, and retired, right and left, leading her
into a profitless pursuit, was very interesting to witness.  Another
volley from the hunters caused them to make off more rapidly, and
wounded the cub severely, so much so that in a few minutes it began to
flag.  Seeing this, the mother placed it in front of her, and urged it
forward with her snout so quickly that it was with the utmost difficulty
the men could keep up with them.  A well-directed shot, however, from
Fred Ellice brought the old bear to the ground; but she rose instantly,
and again advanced, pushing her cub before her, while the dogs continued
to embarrass her.  They now began to fear that, in spite of dogs and
men, the wounded bears would escape, when an opportune crack in the ice
presented itself, into which they both tumbled, followed by the yelping,
and, we may add, limping, dogs.  Before they could scramble up on the
other side, Meetuck and Fred, being light of foot, gained upon them
sufficiently to make sure shots.

Their paddles are long, and they use them standing or sitting; the men
are black, tall and well-built, with coarse and strong limbs,
and curly hair, like the Caffres, some of them wearing it tied to
the neck in a knot, and others letting it fall loose down to the
waist. They have hardly any beards; some of them have two, others three
holes through the nose, in which they wear fangs or teeth of hogs or
sword-fishes. They are stark-naked and have their privities enclosed
in a conch shell, fastened to the waist with a bit of string; they wear
no rings of gold, silver, copper, tin, or iron on their persons, but
adorn themselves with rings made of tortoise shell or terturago (_Spanish_
tortuga?)

, from which it may be inferred that their land yields no metals or
wood of any value, but is all low-lying and half-submerged, as we have
actually found it to be; there were also among them some not provided
with paddles, but wearing two strings of human teeth round their necks,
and excelling all the others in ugliness; these men carried on the
left arm a hammer with a wooden handle and at one end a black conch-shell,
the size of a man's fist, the other end by which they hold it, being
fitted with a three-sided bone, not unlike a piece of stag's horn; in
exchange for one of these hammers they were offered a rug, some
strings of {Page 33} beads and bits of iron, which they refused,
though they were willing to barter the same for one of the boys,
whom they seemed to have a great mind to.

Those who carry the hammers aforesaid would seem to be noblemen or
valiant soldiers among them. The people are cunning and suspicious,
and no stratagems on our part availed to draw them near enough to us
to enable us to catch one or two with nooses which we had prepared
for the purpose; their canoes also contained a number of human
thigh-bones, which they repeatedly held up to us, but we were unable
to make out what they meant by this.

Finally they asked for a rope to tow the yacht to shore, but soon
got tired of the work, and paddled back to the land in a great
hurry.

In the evening we cast anchor in three fathom about 3 miles from the land,
having sailed 13 miles this day.

In the morning of the 27th the wind was W.N.W. with a stiff breeze, course
held S.E. by S. and S.E., on which we sailed 7 miles, and afterwards
E.S.E. 5 miles, in 5½, 5 and 3 fathom; in the evening we came to
anchor in 6½ fathom, 3½ miles from the land; a quarter of a mile
farther to landward we saw a sandbank, on which the Aernem struck
but got off again, for which God be praised.

On the 28th we set sail again, with a N.W. wind, on an eastern course
towards the land, in various depths, such as 7, 9, 12, 4 and 5½
fathom; at noon we were in 9° 6' S. Lat., having sailed 5 miles;
from noon till the evening we ran on an E. by S. course a distance
Of 4 miles in 18, 12, 9, 7, 5 and 2 fathom, after which we cast anchor,
and sent out the pinnace to take soundings; the water being found to
become deeper nearer the coast, we again weighed anchor and sailed to the
land, casting anchor finally in 4 fathom three miles from the coast.

In the morning of the 29th the wind was N.N.E. with fine weather; in the
forenoon it was deemed advisable to send off the boat of the Pera
with thirteen men and the steersman of the Aernem and victualled
for four days, in order to take soundings and skirt the land, which
extended E.N.E., for a distance of 7 or 8 miles.

On the 30th the wind was N. with good weather, so that we also sent out
the pinnace of the Aernem in order to take soundings in various
directions 2 or 3 miles from the yachts; at low water we saw various
sandbanks and reefs lying dry, to wit E.S.E., S.S.W. and W.; in
the afternoon the pinnace of the Aernem returned on board, having
found shallows everywhere at 2 miles' distance.

Towards the evening the boat of the Pera also returned, when we heard
from the steersman that they had been E. by S. and E.S.E. of the yachts,
at about 8 miles' distance, where they had found very shallow water, no
more than 7, 8, 9 and 10 feet, which extended a mile or more, and
was succeeded by depths Of 2, 2½, 3, 5 and 7 fathom; they had found
the land to extend E. and E. by N., and to be very low-lying and
muddy, and overgrown with low brushwood and wild trees.

On the 31st the wind was N.N.E. with rain. In the afternoon I rowed with
the two pinnaces to one of the reefs in order to examine the state of
things between the yachts and the land, which space had fallen dry
at low tide; in the afternoon the skipper of the Pera also got
orders to row to the land with the boat duly manned and armed, in
order to ascertain whether anything could be done for the service
of our Masters, and to attempt to get a parley with the inhabitants
and to get hold of one or two of them, if practicable; very late
in the evening the boat returned on board, and we were informed by
the skipper that, although it was high water, they could not come
nearer than to a pistol-shot's distance from the land owing to the
shallow water and the soft mud; they also reported the land to be
low-lying and half-submerged, overgrown with brushwood and wild trees

.

* * *
{Page 34}
NOTE.

(The Drooge Bocht, where we were compelled to leave the western extremity
of Nova Guinea is in 9 degrees 20 minutes S. Lat.)
After hearing the aforesaid reports touching the little depths
sounded to eastward, we are sufficiently assured that it will prove
impossible any longer to follow the coastline which we have so long
skirted in an eastward direction, and that we shall, to our great
regret, be compelled to return the same way we have come, seeing
that we have been caught in the shallows as in a trap; for this
purpose we shall have to tack about and take advantage of the ebb,
and as soon as we get into deeper water, to run south to the sixteenth
degree or even farther, if it shall be found advisable; then turn
the ships' heads to the north along the coast of Nova Guinea,
according to our previous resolution taken on the 6th of March last;
as mentioned before, we were here in 9° 6' S.

Lat., about 125 miles east of Aru, and according to the chart we had
with us and the estimation of the skippers and steersmen, no more than
2 miles from Nova Guinea, so that the space between us and Nova Guinea
seems to be a bight to which on account of its shallows we have given
the name of drooge bocht [*] [shallow bight] in the new chart; to the
land which we had run along up to now, we have by resolution given
the name of 't Westeinde van Nova Guinea (Western extremity of N.

G.), seeing that we have in reality found the land to be an unbroken
coast, which in the chart is marked as islands, such as Ceram and the
Papues, owing to misunderstanding and untrustworthy information.

[* Entrance of Torres Strait.]
APRIL.

On the first the wind was W. by S. with good weather; we weighed
anchor and drifted with the ebb running from the N.E. when we had
run 1½ mile with the tide to the S.W., we came to anchor again in
6 fathom.

On the second, the wind being W. by N., we tried to tack about to the
W.

with the ebb-tide in 4, 5 and 6 fathom; we had variable winds the
whole day; towards the evening we cast anchor in 4 fathom three
miles from the land, having this day progressed 4 miles to the W.
and W. by N.

On the third we set sail again at daybreak, the wind being N.,
course kept W.N.W. in 7, 2, and 2½ fathom, the water in these parts
being of greatly varying depths, so that we had to keep sounding
continually; in the afternoon we dropped anchor in 4 fathom, having
drifted 2½, miles with the ebb-tide.

On the 4th, the wind being N.E. by N., we set sail again with good
weather: in the afternoon we ran on with the tide and cast anchor
in 7 fathom, having lost sight of the land, and sailed 8 miles W.
and W. by N

.

* * *
NOTE.

Here we managed with extreme difficulty and great peril to get again
out of the shallows aforesaid, into which we had sailed as into a trap,
between them and the land, for which happy deliverance God be praised;
the shallows extend South and North, from 4 to 9 miles from the
mainland, and are 10 miles in length from East to West.

{Page 35}

On the fifth we set sail again at daybreak, the wind being E.N.E., on
courses varying between S.W. and S., by which we got into deeper
water, between 14 and 26 fathom, and sailed 18 miles in the last
24 hours.

On the sixth the wind was S.W. with rain, course held S.E.; at night
we were in Lat. 9° 45', having sailed 11 miles to the E.S.E. in the last
24 hours.

On the 7th, the wind being S.S.E., we ran on an Eastern course in 15 or
16 fathom, and sailed 4 miles till the evening; at nightfall we went
over to S.E., and cast anchor in 4 fathom, but as the yacht was
veering round, we got into 2 fathom, having sailed three miles
E.S.E. during the night.

In the morning of the 8th we clearly saw several stones lying on the
sea-bottom, without perceiving any change in the water in which we
had sounded 26 fathom; so that the land here, which we did not see,
is highly dangerous to touch at, but through God's providence the yachts
did not get aground here; at noon we set sail, being in 10° 15' S.

Lat., the wind being W. by S. and afterwards variable; we sailed S.S.W.
till the next morning, in 10 and 10½ fathom, and covered 6 miles.

On the 9th the wind was N. with rain, course held S.E.; at night
the wind went round to S.E.; we therefore came to anchor in 11 fathom,
having sailed 5 miles this day.

In the morning of the 10th the wind was E.N.E., course held S.E. in
9, 10, and 11 fathom; at night the wind blew from the S.E., upon which
we cast anchor, having sailed 5 miles this day.

On the 11th the wind was E. by N. with a fair breeze, course kept
S.S.E.; at noon we were in 11° 30'; the whole of this day and night we
tried to get south with variable winds and on different courses,
and sailed 22 miles in the last 24 hours; course kept S.E.

In the morning of the 12th the wind was S.E. with good weather; at sunrise
we saw the land of Nova Guinea [*], showing itself as a low-lying coast
without hills or mountains; we were then in 13½ fathom, clayey bottom;
course held S.S.W.; at noon we were in Lat. 11° 45' South, having
sailed 10 miles on a S.E. course in the last 24 hours.

[* York Peninsula.]

In the morning of the 13th the wind was S.E. by E. and we were in 24
fathom; we still saw the land aforementioned and found it to be of the
same shape as before; course held S.W.; at noon we were in 12° 53';
for the rest of day and night we tried to get south with the winds
aforesaid and on varying courses, having sailed 22 miles in the last 24
hours; course kept S.W.

On the 14th the wind was E. by S., course held S. by E. along the land
in 11, 12, 13, and 14 fathom; at noon we were in Lat. 13° 47', the
land being no longer in sight. The rest of the day and the whole night
we tried to get the land alongside with divers winds and on varying
courses in 7, 6, 6, 4, 3, and 2½ fathom; towards daybreak we were so
near the land that one might have recognised persons on shore.

In the morning of the 15th the wind blew hard from the East; course
held S. by E. in 3 and 2½ fathom along a sandbank, situated about
one mile from the mainland; at noon we were in 14° 36. The land which
we have hitherto seen and followed, extends S. and N.; it is low-lying
and without variety, having a fine sandy beach in various places.

In the afternoon we dropped anchor owing to the calm, having sailed {Page
36} 11 miles South. Great volumes of smoke becoming visible on the land,
the subcargo [*] got orders to land with the two pinnaces, duly
manned and armed, and was specially enjoined to use his utmost endeavours
for the advantage of Our Masters; when the pinnaces returned at
nightfall, the subcargo reported that the pinnaces could get no
farther than a stone's throw from the land, owing to the muddy
bottom into which the men sunk to their waists, but that they had
in various places seen blacks emerging from the wood, while others
lay hid in the coppice; they therefore sent a man ashore with some
pieces of iron and strings of beads tied to a stick, in order to
attract the blacks; but as nothing could be effected and the night
was coming on, they had been forced to return to the yachts.
[* Pieter Lintiens.

(Summary).]
In the morning of the 16th, being Easter-day, the wind was East;
we set sail, holding our course S. by E.; at noon we were in 14°
56'; in the evening we came to anchor in 5 ½fathom, having sailed
10½ miles, course kept South.

In the morning of the 17th the wind was S. by W., with rain and the tide
setting to the south; at noon the wind went round to East, so that we
made sail, course held S. by W., along the land in 4½ fathom; towards
the evening, it fell a calm, so that we dropped anchor with the ebb,
after which I went ashore myself with the two pinnaces duly provided
with men and arms; we went a considerable distance into the interior,
which we found to be a flat, fine country with few trees, and a good soil
for planting and sowing, but so far as we could observe utterly
destitute of fresh water.

Nor did we see any human beings or even signs of them; near the strand
the coast was sandy with a fine beach and plenty of excellent fish.

In the morning of the 18th the wind was E.N.E., course held S. by W.
along the land; about noon, as we saw persons on the beach, we cast
anchor in 3½ fathom clayey bottom; the skipper of the Pera got
orders to row to land with the two pinnaces, duly provided for
defence; in the afternoon when the pinnaces returned, we were
informed by the skipper that as soon as he had landed with his men,
a large number of blacks, some of them armed and others unarmed,
had made up to them; these blacks showed no fear and were so bold,
as to touch the muskets of our men and to try to take the same off
their shoulders, while they wanted to have whatever they could make
use of; our men accordingly diverted their attention by showing
them iron and beads, and espying vantage, seized one of the blacks
by a string which he wore round his neck, and carried him off to
the pinnace; the blacks who remained on the beach, set up dreadful
howls and made violent gestures, but the others who kept concealed
in the wood remained there.

These natives are coal-black, with lean bodies and stark naked, having
twisted baskets or nets round their heads; in hair and figure they
are like the blacks of the Coromandel coast, but they seem to be
less cunning, bold and evil-natured than the blacks at the western
extremity of Nova Guinea; their weapons, of which we bring specimens
along with us, are less deadly than those we have seen used by other
blacks; the weapons in use with them are assagays, shields, clubs
and sticks about half a fathom in length; as regards their customs
and policy and the nature of the country, Your Worships will in
time be able to get information from the black man we have got hold
of, to whom I would beg leave to refer you...

On the 19th, the wind being S.E., we remained at anchor, and since the
yachts were very poorly provided with firewood, the skipper of the
Pera went ashore with the two pinnaces duly manned and armed; when
the men were engaged in cutting wood, {Page 37} a large number of
blacks upwards of 200 came upon them, and tried every means to
surprise and overcome them, so that our men were compelled to fire
two shots, upon which the blacks fled, one of their number having
been hit and having fallen; our men then proceeded somewhat farther
up the country, where they found several weapons, of which they
took some along with them by way of curiosities.

During their march they observed in various places great quantities of
divers human bones, from which it may be safely concluded that the
blacks along the coast of Nova Guinea are man-eaters who do not
spare each other when driven by hunger.

"Ye're wrong there intirely," retorted O'Riley.  "I niver seed nothing
like it in all me thravels except yerself, and that only in regard to
its muzzle, which was black and all kivered over with bristles, it wos.
I'll throuble for another steak, messmate; that walrus is great livin'.
We owe ye thanks for killin' it, Mister Ellice."

"You're fishing for compliments, but I'm afraid I have none to give you.
Your first harpoon, you know, was a little wide of the mark, if I
recollect right, wasn't it?"

"Yis, it wos--about as wide as the first bullet.  I misremember exactly
who fired it; wos it you, Meetuck?"

Meetuck, being deeply engaged with a junk of fat meat at that moment
expressed all he had to say in a convulsive gasp, without interrupting
his supper.

"Try a bit of the bear," said Fred to Tom Singleton; "it's better than
the walrus to my taste."

"I'd rather not," answered Tom, with a dubious shake of the head.

"It's a most unconscionable thing to eat a beast o' that sort," remarked
Saunders gravely.

"Especially one who has been in the habit of living on raisins and
sticking-plaster," said Bolton with a grin.

"I have been thinking about that," said Captain Guy, who had been for
some time listening in silence to the conversation, "and I cannot help
thinking that Esquimaux must have found a wreck somewhere in this
neighbourhood, and carried away her stores, which Bruin had managed to
steal from them."

"May they not have got some of the stores of the brig we saw nipped some
months ago?" suggested Singleton.

"Possibly they may."

"I dinna think that's likely," said Saunders, shaking his head.  "Yon
brig had been deserted long ago, and her stores must have been consumed,
if they were taken out of her at all, before we thought o' comin' here."

For some time the party in the cabin ate in silence.

"We must wait patiently," resumed the captain, as if he were tired of
following up a fruitless train of thought.  "What of your theatricals,
Fred? we must get them set a-going as soon as possible."

The captain spoke animatedly, for he felt that, with the prospect of a
long dark winter before them, it was of the greatest importance that the
spirits of the men should be kept up.

"I find it difficult to beat up recruits," answered Fred, laughing;
"Peter Grim has flatly refused to act, and O'Riley says he could no more
learn a part off by heart than--"

"His grandmother's pig could," interrupted David Mizzle, who, having
concluded supper, now felt himself free to indulge in conversation.

"Och! ye spalpeen," whispered the Irishman.

"I have written out the half of a play which I hope to produce in a few
days on the boards of our Arctic theatre with a talented company, but I
must have one or two more men--one to act the part of a lady.  Will you
take that part, Buzzby?"

"Wot! _me_?" cried the individual referred to with a stare of amazement.

"Oh yes! _do_, Buzzby," cried several of the men with great delight.
"You're just cut out for it."

"Blue eyes," said one.

"Fair hair," cried another.

"And plump," said a third.

"Wid cheeks like the hide of a walrus," cried O'Riley; "but, sure, it
won't show wid a veil on."

"Come, now, you won't refuse."

But Buzzby did refuse; not, however, so determinedly but that he was
induced at last to allow his name to be entered in Fred's note-book as a
supernumerary.

"Hark!" cried the captain; "surely the dogs must have smelt a bear."

There was instantly a dead silence in the cabin, and a long, loud wail
from the dogs was heard outside.

"It's not like their usual cry when game is near," said the second mate.

"Hand me my rifle, Mivins," said the captain, springing up and pulling
forward the hood of his jumper, as he hurried on deck followed by the
crew.

It was a bright, still, frosty night, and the air felt intensely sharp,
as if needles were pricking the skin, while the men's breath issued from
their lips in white clouds, and settled in hoar-frost on the edges of
their hoods.  The dogs were seen galloping about the ice hummocks as if
in agitation, darting off to a considerable distance at times, and
returning with low whines to the ship.

"It is very strange," remarked the captain.  "Jump down on the ice,
boys, and search for footprints.  Extend as far as Store Island and see
that all is right there."

In a few seconds the men scattered themselves right and left, and were
lost in the gloom, while the vessel was left in charge of Mivins and
four men.  A strict search was made in all directions, but no traces of
animals could be found; the stores on the island were found undisturbed,
and gradually the dogs ceased their agitated gyrations and seemed
inclined to resume their slumbers on the ice.

Seeing this, and supposing that they were merely restless, Captain Guy
recalled his men, and, not long after, every man in the cabin of the
_Dolphin_ was buried in profound slumber.


CHAPTER FIFTEEN.

STRANGERS APPEAR ON THE SCENE--THE ESQUIMAUX ARE HOSPITABLY ENTERTAINED
BY THE SAILORS--A SPIRITED TRAFFIC--THIEVING PROPENSITIES AND SUMMARY
JUSTICE.

Dumps sat on the top of a hummock, about quarter of a mile from the
ship, with an expression of subdued melancholy on his countenance, and
thinking, evidently, about nothing at all.  Poker sat in front of him,
gazing earnestly and solemnly right into his eyes with a look that said,
as plain as if he had spoken: "What a tremendously stupid old fellow you
are, to be sure!"  Having sat thus for full five minutes Dumps wagged
his tail.  Poker, observing the action, returned the compliment with his
stump.  Then Poker sprang up and barked savagely, as much as to say:
"Play, won't you!" but Dumps wouldn't; so Poker endeavoured to relieve
his mind by gambolling violently round him.

We would not have drawn your attention, reader, to the antics of our
canine friends, were it not for the fact that these antics attracted the
notice of a personage who merits particular description.  This was no
other than one of the Esquimaux inhabitants of the land--a woman, and
_such_ a woman!  Most people would have pronounced her a man, for she
wore precisely the same dress--fur jumper and long boots--that was worn
by the men of the _Dolphin_.  Her lips were thick and her nose was
blunt; she wore her hair turned up, and twisted into a knot on the top
of her head; her hood was thrown back, and inside of this hood there was
a baby--a small and a very fat baby!  It was, so to speak, a
conglomerate of dumplings.  Its cheeks were two dumplings, and its arms
were four dumplings--one above each elbow and one below.  Its hands,
also, were two smaller dumplings, with ten extremely little dumplings at
the end of them.  This baby had a nose, of course, but it was so small
that it might as well have had none; and it had a mouth, too, but that
was so capacious that the half of it would have been more than enough
for a baby double the size.  As for its eyes, they were large and
black--black as two coals--and devoid of all expression save that of
astonishment.

Such were the pair that stood on the edge of the ice-belt gazing down
upon Dumps and Poker.  And no sooner did Dumps and Poker catch sight of
them than they sprang hastily towards them, wagging their tails--or,
more correctly speaking, their tail and a quarter.  But on a nearer
approach those sagacious animals discovered that the woman and her child
were strangers, whereupon they set up a dismal howl, and fled towards
the ship as fast as they could run.

Now it so happened that, at this very time, the howl of the dogs fell
upon the ears of two separate parties of travellers--the one was a band
of Esquimaux who were moving about in search of seals and walrus, to
which band this woman and her baby belonged; the other was a party of
men under command of Buzzby, who were returning to the ship after an
unsuccessful hunt.  Neither party saw the other, for one approached from
the east, the other from the west, and the ice-belt, on the point of
which the woman stood, rose up between them.

"Hallo! what's yon," exclaimed Peter Grim, who was first to observe the
woman.

"Dunno," said Buzzby, halting; "it looks like a bear."

"Faix an it is, then, it's got a young wan on its back," cried O'Riley.

"We had better advance and find out," remarked West, as he led the way,
while several of the men threw up their arms in token of their friendly
intentions.  O'Riley capered somewhat extravagantly as he drew near,
partly with the intention of expressing his feelings of good-will
towards the unknown, and partly in order to relieve the excitement
caused by the unexpected apparition.

These demonstrations, however, had the effect of terrifying the woman,
who wheeled suddenly round and made off.

"Och! it _is_ a man.  Hooray, boys! give chase."

"Men don't usually carry babies on their backs and tie their hair up
into top-knots," remarked Grim, as he darted past in pursuit.

A few seconds sufficed to enable Grim to overtake the woman, who fell on
her knees the instant she felt the sailor's heavy hand on her shoulder.

"Don't be afeard; we won't hurt ye," said Buzzby in a soothing tone,
patting the woman on the head and raising her up.

"No, avic, we's yer frinds; we'll not harm a hair o' yer beautiful head,
we won't.  Ah, then, it's a swate child, it is, bless its fat face!"
said O'Riley, stroking the baby's head tenderly with his big hand.

It was with difficulty that the poor creature's fears were calmed at
first, but the genuine tenderness displayed by the men towards the baby,
and the perfect complacency with which that conglomerate of dumplings
received their caresses, soon relieved her mind, and she began to regard
her captors with much curiosity, while they endeavoured by signs and
words to converse with her.  Unfortunately Meetuck was not with the
party, he having been left on board ship to assist in a general cleaning
of the cabin that had been instituted that day.

"Sure, now, ye don't know how to talk with a girl at all, ye don't; let
_me_ try," cried O'Riley, after several of the party had made numerous
ineffectual attempts to convey their meaning.  "Listen to _me_, darlint,
and don't mind them stupid grampusses.  Where have ye comed from, now;
tell me, dear, _doo_ now?"

O'Riley accompanied the question with a smile of ineffable sweetness and
a great deal of energetic pantomime, which, doubtless, explained much of
his meaning to himself, but certainly to no one else.

"Ah, then, ye don't onderstand me?  Well, well, now, isn't that strange?
Look you, avic, have ye seen a brig or a brig's crew anywhere betune
this and the north pole--try, now, an' remimber."  He illustrated this
question by holding up both arms straight above his head to represent
the masts of a brig, and sticking his right leg straight out in front of
him, to represent the bowsprit; but the woman gazed at him with an air
of obtuse gravity that might have damped the hopes even of an Irishman.
O'Riley prided himself, however, on not being easily beat, and despite
his repeated failure, and the laughter of his messmates, was proceeding
to make a third effort, when a loud shout from the cliffs caused the
whole party to start and turn their eyes in that direction.  The cry had
been uttered by a figure whose costume bore so close a resemblance to
that which they themselves wore that they thought for a moment it was
one of their own shipmates, but a second glance proved that they were
mistaken, for the individual in question carried a spear which he
brandished with exceedingly fierce and warlike intentions.

"Faix, it must be her husband," said O'Riley.

"Hallo, lads, there's more on 'em!" cried Grim, as ten or twelve
Esquimaux emerged from the rents and caverns of the ice-belt, and,
scrambling to the top of surrounding hummocks and eminences, gazed
towards the party of white men, while they threw about their arms and
legs, and accompanied their uncouth and violent gesticulations with
loud, excited cries.  "I've a notion," he added, "that it was the scent
o' them chaps set the dogs off after yon strange fashion t'other
_night_."

It was evident that the Esquimaux were not only filled with unbounded
astonishment at this unexpected meeting with strangers, but were also
greatly alarmed to see one of their own women in their power.

"Let's send the woman over to them," suggested one of the men.

"No, no; keep her as a hostage," said another.

"Look out, lads," cried Buzzby, hastily examining the priming of his
musket, as additional numbers of the wild inhabitants of the north
appeared on the scene, and crowned the ice-belt and the hummocks around
them.

"Let's show a bold front.  Draw up in single line and hold on to the
woman.  West, put her in front."

The men instantly drew up in battle array, and threw forward their
muskets; but as there was only a dozen of them, they presented a very
insignificant group compared with the crowds of Esquimaux who appeared
on the ice in front of them.

"Now, then, stand fast, men, and I'll show ye wot's the way to manage
them chaps.  Keep yer weather-eyes open, and don't let them git in rear
o' ye."

So saying, Buzzby took the woman by the arm and led her out a few yards
in front of his party, while the Esquimaux drew closer together, to
prepare either to receive or make an attack, as the case might be.  He
then laid his musket down on the ice, and, still holding the woman by
the arm, advanced boldly towards the natives unarmed.  On approaching to
within about twenty yards of them he halted, and raised both arms above
his head as a sign of friendship.  The signal was instantly understood,
and one big fellow leaped boldly from his elevated position on a lump of
ice, threw down his spear, and ran to meet the stranger.

In a few minutes Buzzby and the Esquimaux leader came to a mutual
understanding as to the friendly disposition of their respective
parties, and the woman was delivered up to this big fellow, who turned
out to be her husband after all, as O'Riley had correctly guessed.  The
other Esquimaux, seeing the amicable terms on which the leaders met,
crowded in and surrounded them.

"Leave the half o' ye to guard the arms, and come on the rest of ye
without 'em," shouted Buzzby.

The men obeyed, and in a few minutes the two parties mingled together
with the utmost confidence.  The sailors, however, deemed it prudent to
get possession of their arms again as soon as possible, and, after
explaining as well as they could by signs that their home was only at a
short distance, the whole band started off for the ship.  The natives
were in a most uproarious state of hilarity, and danced and yelled as
they ambled along in their hairy dresses, evidently filled with delight
at the prospect of forming a friendship with the white strangers, as
they afterwards termed the crew of the _Dolphin_, although some of the
said crew were, from exposure, only a few shades lighter than
themselves.

Captain Guy was busily engaged with Fred Ellice and Tom Singleton in
measuring and registering the state of the tide when this riotous band
turned the point of the ice-belt to the northward, and came suddenly
into view.

"Jump down below, Fred, and fetch my rifle and sword; there are the
natives," cried the captain, seizing his telescope.  "Call all hands,
Mivins, and let them arm; look alive!"

"All 'ands, _ahoy_!" shouted the steward, looking down the hatchway;
"tumble up there, tumble up, 'ere come the Heskimows.  Bring your harms
with ye.  Look alive!"

"Ay, ay," shouted the men from below; and in a few minutes they crowded
up the hatchway, pulling up their hoods and hauling on their mittens,
for it was intensely cold.

"Why, Captain, there are some of our men with them," exclaimed Tom
Singleton, as he looked through his pocket-glass at them.

"So there are--I see Buzzby and Grim; come, that's fortunate, for they
must have made friends with them, which it is not always easy to do.
Hide your muskets, men, but keep on your cutlasses; it's as well to be
prepared, though I don't expect to find those people troublesome.  Is
the soup in the coppers, David Mizzle?"

"Yes, sir, it is."

"Then put in an extra junk of pork, and fill it up to the brim."

While the cook went below to obey this order, the captain and half of
the crew descended to the ice, and advanced unarmed to meet the natives.
The remainder of the men stayed behind to guard the ship, and be ready
to afford succour if need be; but the precaution was unnecessary, for
the Esquimaux met the sailors in the most frank and confiding manner,
and seemed quite to understand Captain Guy when he drew a line round the
ship, and stationed sentries along it to prevent them from crossing.
The natives had their dogs and sledges with them, and the former they
picketed to the ice, while a few of their number, and the woman, whose
name was Aninga, were taken on board and hospitably entertained.

It was exceedingly interesting and amusing to observe the feelings of
amazement and delight expressed by those barbarous but good-humoured and
intelligent people at everything they saw.  While food was preparing for
them, they were taken round the ship, on deck and below, and the sailors
explained, in pantomime, the uses of everything.  They laughed, and
exclaimed, and shouted, and even roared with delight, and touched
everything with their fingers, just as monkeys are wont to do when let
loose.  Captain Guy took Aninga and her tall husband, Awatok, to the
cabin, where, through the medium of Meetuck, he explained the object of
their expedition, and questioned the chief as to his knowledge of the
country.  Unfortunately Awatok and his band had travelled from the
interior to the coast, and, never having been more than twenty or thirty
miles to the north of the Bay of Mercy, could give no information either
in regard to the formation of the coast or the possibility of Europeans
having wintered there.  In fact, neither he nor his countrymen had ever
seen Europeans before; and they were so much excited that it was
difficult to obtain coherent answers to questions.  The captain,
therefore, postponed further enquiries until they had become somewhat
accustomed to the novelty of their position.

Meanwhile, David Mizzle furnished them with a large supply of pea-soup,
which they seemed to relish amazingly.  Not so, however, the salt pork
with which it had been made.  They did, indeed, condescend to eat it,
but they infinitely preferred a portion of raw walrus flesh, which had
been reserved as food for the dogs, and which they would speedily have
consumed had it not been removed out of their reach.  Having finished
this, they were ordered to return to their camp on the ice beside the
ship, and a vigorous barter was speedily begun.

First of all, however, a number of presents were made to them, and it
would really have done your heart good, reader, to have witnessed the
extravagant joy displayed by them on receiving such trifles as bits of
hoop--iron, beads, knives, scissors, needles, etcetera.  Iron is as
precious among them as gold is among civilised people.  The small
quantities they possessed of it had been obtained from the few portions
of wrecks that had drifted ashore in their ice-bound land.  They used it
for pointing their spear-heads and harpoons, which, in default of iron,
were ingeniously made of ivory from the tusks of the walrus and the horn
of the narwal.  A bit of iron, therefore, was received with immense
glee, and a penny looking-glass with shouts of delight.

But the present which drew forth the most uproarious applause was a
Union Jack, which the captain gave to their chief, Awatok.  He was in
the cabin when it was presented to him.  On seeing its gaudy colours
unrolled, and being told that it was a gift to himself and his wife, he
caught his breath, and stared, as if in doubt, alternately at the flag
and the captain, then he gave vent to a tremendous shout, seized the
flag, hugged it in his arms, and darted up on deck literally _roaring_
with delight.  The sympathetic hearts of the natives on the ice echoed
the cry before they knew the cause of it; but when they beheld the
prize, they yelled, and screamed, and danced, and tossed their arms in
the air in the most violent manner.

"They're all mad, ivery mother's son o' them," exclaimed O'Riley, who
for some time had been endeavouring to barter an old, rusty knife for a
pair of sealskin boots.

"They looks like it," said Grim, who stood looking on with his legs
apart and his arms crossed, and grinning from ear to ear.

To add to the confusion, the dogs became affected with the spirit of
excitement that filled their masters, and gave vent to their feelings in
loud and continuous howling, which nothing could check.  The imitative
propensity of these singular people was brought rather oddly into play
during the progress of traffic.  Busby had produced a large roll of
tobacco--which they knew the use of, having already been shown how to
use a pipe--and cut off portions of it, which he gave in exchange for
fox-skins, and deer-skins, and seal-skin boots.  Observing this, a very
sly old Esquimaux began to slice up a deer-skin into little pieces,
which he intended to offer for the small pieces of tobacco!  He was
checked, however, before doing much harm to the skin, and the principles
of exchange were more perfectly explained to him.

The skins and boots, besides walrus and seals' flesh, which the crew
were enabled to barter at this time, were of the utmost importance, for
their fresh provisions had begun to get low, and their boots were almost
worn out, so that the scene of barter was exceedingly animated.  Davie
Summers and his master, Mivins, shone conspicuous as bargain-makers, and
carried to their respective bunks a large assortment of native articles.
Fred and Tom Singleton, too, were extremely successful, and in a few
hours a sufficient amount of skins were bartered to provide them with
clothing for the winter.  The quantity of fresh meat obtained, however,
was not enough to last them a week, for the Esquimaux lived from hand to
mouth, and the crew felt that they must depend on their own exertions in
the hunt for this indispensable article of food, without which they
could not hope to escape the assaults of the sailors' dread enemy,
scurvy.

Meetuck's duties were not light upon this occasion, as you may suppose.

"Arrah, then, _don't_ ye onderstand me?" cried O'Riley in an excited
tone to a particularly obtuse and remarkably fat Esquimaux, who was
about as sharp at a bargain as himself.  "Hallo!  Meetuck, come here,
do, and tell this pork-faced spalpeen what I'm sayin'.  Sure I couldn't
spake it plainer av I was to try."

"I'll never get this fellow to understand," said Fred.  "Meetuck, my
boy, come here and explain to him."

"Ho, Meetuck!" shouted Peter Grim, "give this old blockhead a taste o'
your lingo.  I never met his match for stupidity."

"I do believe that this rascal wants the 'ole of this ball o' twine for
the tusk of a sea-'oss.  Meetuck! w'ere's Meetuck!  I say, give us a
'and 'ere like a good fellow," cried Mivins; but Mivins cried in vain,
for at that moment Saunders had violently collared the interpreter, and
dragged him towards an old Esquimaux woman, whose knowledge of Scotch
had not proved sufficient to enable her to understand the
energetically-expressed words of the second mate.

During all this time the stars had been twinkling brightly in the sky,
and the aurora shed a clear light upon the scene, while the air was
still calm and cold; but a cloud or two now began to darken the horizon
to the north-east, and a puff of wind blew occasionally over the icy
plain, and struck with such chilling influence on the frames of the
traffickers that with one consent they closed their business for that
day, and the Esquimaux prepared to return to their snow village, which
was about ten miles to the southward, and which village had been erected
by them only three days previous to their discovery of the ship.

"I'm sorry to find," remarked the captain to those who were standing
near him, "that these poor creatures have stolen a few trifling articles
from below.  I don't like to break the harmonious feeling which now
exists between us for the sake of a few worthless things, but I know
that it does more harm than good to pass over an offence with the
natives of these regions, for they attribute our forbearance to fear."

"Perhaps you had better tax them with the theft," suggested the surgeon;
"they may confess it, if we don't look very angry."

A few more remarks were made by several of those who stood on the
quarter-deck, suggesting a treatment of the Esquimaux which was not of
the gentlest nature, for they felt indignant that their hospitality had
been abused.

"No, no," replied the captain to such suggestions, "we must exercise
forbearance.  These poor fellows do not regard theft in the same light
that we do; besides, it would be foolish to risk losing their
friendship.  Go down, Meetuck, and invite Awatok and his wife, and half
a dozen of the chief men, into the cabin.  Say I wish to have a talk
with them."

The interpreter obeyed, and in a few minutes the officers of the ship
and the chiefs of the Esquimaux were assembled in solemn conclave round
the cabin table.

"Tell them, Meetuck," said the captain, "that I know they have stolen
two pieces of hoop iron and a tin kettle, and ask them why they were so
ungrateful as to do it."

The Esquimaux, who were becoming rather alarmed at the stern looks of
those around them, protested earnestly that they knew nothing about it,
and that they had not taken the things referred to.

"Say that I do not believe them," answered the captain sternly.  "It is
an exceedingly wicked thing to steal and to tell lies.  White men think
those who are guilty of such conduct to be very bad."

"Ah, ye villain!" cried Saunders, seizing one of the Esquimaux named
Oosuck by the shoulder, and drawing forth an iron spoon which he
observed projecting from the end of his boot.

An exclamation of surprise and displeasure burst from the officers, but
the Esquimaux gave vent to a loud laugh.  They evidently thought
stealing to be no sin, and were not the least ashamed of being detected.
Awatok, however, was an exception.  He looked grave and annoyed, but
whether this was at being found out, or at the ingratitude of his
people, they could not decide.

"Tell them," said the captain, "that I am much displeased.  If they
promise to return the stolen goods immediately, I will pass over their
offence this time, and we will trade together, and live like brothers,
and do each other good; but if not, and if any more articles are taken,
I will punish them."

Having had this translated to them, the chiefs were dismissed, but the
expression of indifference on some of their faces proved that no
impression had been made upon them.

In a quarter of an hour the articles that had been mentioned as missing
were returned; and, in order to restore harmony, several plugs of
tobacco and a few additional trinkets were returned by the messenger.
Soon after, the dogs were harnessed, the sledges packed, and, with many
protestations of good-will on both sides, the parties separated.  A few
cracks of their long whips--a few answering howls from the dogs--and the
Esquimaux were off and out of sight, leaving the _Dolphin_ in her former
solitude under the shadow of the frowning cliffs.

"Fetch me the telescope, Mivins," said the captain, calling down the
hatchway.

Latitude 27° 25'; sailed 24 miles East-south-east, East by South
and East-north-east, on the whole keeping an eastward course...

On the 19th do. Latitude 27' 20'. sailed due east 20 Miles in 24
hours...

On the 20th do.

Latitude 27° 20' sailed 20 miles these 24 hours North-east, East-north-east
and East, with a light breeze, fair weather, and a West-south-west
wind; course held east.

On the 21st do. in the morning we sighted Eendrachtsland in Latitude
27°
at about 6 miles' distance South-west by west; we sounded off it
in 61 fathom fine gravel bottom, the land showing outwardly like
Robben Island in the Taffel Bay; at noon in Latitude 26° 43' we
shaped our course to northward, and afterwards drifted in a calm.

On the 22nd do.

Latitude 26` 36, sailed and drifted about 4 miles, at about 8 miles'
distance North~north-west from the land. We sighted everywhere a hilly
coast with large bays, with low-lying land in between, the whole
covered with dunes; we drifted in a calm, our course being North-west
by West.

On the 23rd do. Latitude 26° 3'; during the last twenty-four hours
we mostly drifted in a calm at about 3 or 4 miles' distance from
the coast; here we sighted a large inlet, looking like a river or
bay.

We sounded in 80 fathom, good sandy bottom; in the afternoon there was a
light breeze from the South-south-west, our course being North-west by
West. In the evening we saw the farthest extremity of the land north
by east at six miles' distance from us.

On the 26th do. Latitude 25° 48', we did our best to keep off the land,
which extended North-north-west and East-south-east. The land looked like
the west-coast of England with many reddish rocks; out at sea there
were plenty of cliffs and sunken rocks; at noon the wind went round
to South-west afterwards to the south; we held our course North-west
by North.

In the evening the endmost land lay North by east of us at about 7 miles'
distance.

On the 27th do. WILLEMTGEN JANSZ., wedded wife Of WILLEM JANSZ. of
Amsterdam, midshipman, was delivered of a son, who got the name
of SEEBAER VAN NIEMELANT.

At noon Latitude 24° 15', sailed northward both in a calm and with
variable winds, generally on a North-by-west course...[*] miles,
our course being north, and the wind south with a fine breeze.
[* Left blank.]

On the 29th do. Latitude 20° 56'.

On the 30th do. Latitude 18° 56'; the wind being east, we could not
get higher than north. We saw a good deal of rock-weed floating
about, and plenty of fish near the ship...

* * * * *
{Page 50}

XVI.

(1624) DISCOVERY OF THE TORTELDUIF ISLAND (ROCK).

A.

_Daily Register [*] of what has happened here at Batavia from the
first of January, A.D. 1627._
[* This Daily Register has been edited by me ('s Gravenhage, Nijhoff,
1896).]
...On the 21st [of June] there arrived here from the Netherlands
the advice-yacht Tortelduiff...which had left the Texel...on the
16th of November, 1623...

B.

_Hessel Gerritsz Charts, 1627 [*] (Nos. 4 and 5.

--VII, C, D)._
[* The situation of Tortelduif island was accordingly known as early
as 1677. The voyage Of 1623-1624 is the only one made to India by the
ship of that name (see LEUPE, Zuidland, p. 48). If we take for granted
that this ship gave its name to the island (rock), which is highly
probable, then the name must have been conferred in 1624.

The note of interrogation in the text is only meant to ward off the
charge of over-hasty inference on my part.]
* * * * *

XVII.

(1626) VOYAGE OF THE SHIP LEIJDEN, COMMANDED BY SKIPPER DANIEL
JANSSEN COCK, FROM THE NETHERLANDS TO JAVA.

--FURTHER DISCOVERY OF THE WEST-COAST OF AUSTRALIA.

Copy of the Journal kept by me DANIEL JANSSEN COCK, Captain and Skipper
of the ship LEIJDEN, which set sail on the 17th of May 1625, of all
that has occurred during the voyage.

* * *
Praise God. April 1626.

26 do. Latitude 29½ degrees, sailed 36 miles...

27 do. Latitude 27 2/3 degrees, sailed 28 miles; course held north-east;
the wind being south and south-west, I had the top-gallants set. God
grant what is best for us. Amen. Course kept North-north-east.

28 do. In the morning we took the sun's azimuth: between 7 and 8 degrees
to northward, the rise being 16 degrees. We sighted land, being the
Southland, at 10 miles' distance. We found a strong current here, with a
depth Of 40 fathom. The current set to eastward or straight against
the land. In the evening we shaped our course to North-west.

29 do.

Latitude slightly under 26°. the weather was calm, so that we ran along
the coast, North and at times North-north-west. In the evening I
saw the endmost (?) land north-east of me; the wind blowing from the
south.

30 do. In the morning I took the sun's azimuth: between 9 and 10 degrees
to northward, the rise being 16½ degrees, remains 7½ degrees. At noon
Latitude 24° 47'.

Course held North by west, with a southerly wind; sailed 18 miles;
in the evening it fell calm

...

* * * * *
{Page 51}

XVIII.

(1627) DISCOVERY OF THE SOUTH-WEST COAST OF AUSTRALIA BY THE SHIP HET
GULDEN ZEEPAARD, COMMANDED BY PIETER NUIJTS, MEMBER OF THE
COUNCIL OF INDIA, AND BY SKIPPER FRANÇOIS THIJSSEN OR
THIJSZOON.

A.

_Dail Register of what has happened here at Batavia from the first of
January, 1627 [*]._
[* On p. 307 of my edition of the Daily Register of 1624-1629.]
...On the 10th [of April] there arrived here from the Netherlands the
ship t' Gulden Seepaart fitted out by the Zealand Chamber [*],
having on board the Hon.

Pieter Nuyts, extraordinary Councillor of India, having sailed from there
on the 22nd of May, 1626...

[* The Register of outgoing vessels of the E.I.C. shows that the
skipper's name was François Thijssen or Thijszoon.]
B.

_Hessel Gerritsz-Huydecoper Chart (No. 5.--VII D)._
This chart has 't land van Pieter Nuijts (discovered January 26 [*],
1627) and the islands of Sint François and Sint Pieter.

[* Some of the charts have February, but most of them January. This
month is also mentioned as the time of the discovery in the
instructions for Pool (1636, see _infra_) and for Tasman (1644).

Cf. my Life of Tasman, pp. 97f.]
* * * * *

XIX.

(1627) VOYAGE OF THE SHIPS GALIAS, UTRECHT AND TEXEL, COMMANDED BY
GOVERNOR-GENERAL JAN PIETERSZOON COEN.

FURTHER DISCOVERY OF THE WEST-COAST OF AUSTRALIA.

A.

_Letter of Jan Pieterszoon Coen to the Directors of the E.I.C._
Most Noble Wise Provident Very Discreet Gentlemen,
The present is a copy of our letter written from Illa de Mayo on
the 15th of April last...On July the 22nd we sailed from the Tafelbay
with the ships Galias, Utrecht and Texel.

When coming out to sea we got the wind from the south, so that we could
not sail higher than the Cape, and lost eight days during which we made
no progress.

Then getting a favourable wind we remained together in 37½ degrees
Southern Latitude up to the 10th of August; the following night,
however, the rudder of the Galias broke in a strong wind, so that
the ship became ungovernable, and the sails were dashed to pieces,
in consequence of which she got separated from the other two ships,
who had failed to observe the accident of the Galias owing to the
darkness; {Page 52} the next day, the rudder having been repaired,
we continued our voyage with the Galias, and in the afternoon of
the 5th of September in 28½ degrees S.

Lat. came upon the land of d'Eendracht. We were at less than half a
mile's distance from the breakers before perceiving the same, without
being able to see land. If we had come upon this place in the night-time,
we should have been in a thousand perils with our ship and crew.

In the plane charts the reckonings of our steersmen were still
between 300 and 350 miles from any land, so that there was not the
slightest suspicion of our being near any, although the reckoning
of the chart with increasing degrees showed only 120 miles, and the
reckoning by the terrestrial globe only 50 miles distance from the
land.

But to this little attention had been paid. It seems certain now that
the miscalculation involved in the plane chart from Cabo de bon'
Esperança to the Southland in 35 degrees latitude gives an overplus
of more than 270 miles of sea, a matter to which most steersmen
pay little attention, and which has brought, and is still daily
bringing, many vessels into great perils.

It would be highly expedient if in the plane charts most in use, between
Cabo de bon' Esperança and the South-land south of Java, so much space
were added and passed over in drawing up the reckonings, as is
deducible from the correct longitude according to the globosity of
earth and sea.

We would request Your Worships to direct attention to this point,
and have such indications made in the plane chart as experts
shall find to be advisable; a matter of the highest importance,
which if not properly attended to involves grievous peril to ships
and crews (which God in his mercy avert).

In this plane chart the South-land also lies fully 40 miles more to
eastward than it should be, which should also be rectified.

On the 20th of September we struck the South-coast of Java about 50 or
60 miles eastward of its western extremity...

Your Worships' obedt. servant J.P. COEN.

At Batavia, October 30, 1627.

* * * * *

XX.

(1627) VOYAGE OF THE SHIP HET WAPEN VAN HOORN, COMMANDED BY SUPER
CARGO J. VAN ROOSENBERGH.
FURTHER DISCOVERY OF THE WEST-COAST OF AUSTRALIA.

_Letter Of Supercargo J. Van Roosenbergh to the Directors of the E.I.C.,
November 8, 1627._

Worshipful Wise Provident Very Discreet Gentlemen,
You have no doubt received my letter from Illa de Mayo...

On the 7th of September we resolved to run for the South-land, that
we might be near Java before the middle of October. On the 17th do. we
sighted the land of d'Eendracht near Dirck Hartochs reede [road-stead],
at about 7 miles' distance from us; the land was of middle height,
something like D'overen [Dover] in England; it is less low than has
been asserted by some, and of a whitish hue, so that at night it cannot
be seen before one is quite close to it. When by estimation we were at
two miles' distance from the land, the coast seemed to have a foreshore
consisting of small hills here and there. According to our observations
the land lay quite differently from what the chart would have us
believe, to wit, North by West and North-north-west, from a point three
miles south of the aforesaid height to a point 8 or 9 miles north of
it; which were the farthest points seen by us; this constituting
a difference Of 3½
{Page 53} points with the chart, which makes it North-north-east
and South-south-west.

We cast the lead five miles off the shore in 75 fathom, muddy bottom
mixed with small red pebbles, and five glasses afterwards, two
miles off shore, in 55 fathom sandy bottom, for hardly anything was
found sticking to the lead when heaved.

We had seen no other signs of land beyond gulf-weed floating about in
small quantities just as in the Sargasso Sea, and some land-birds
flying high overhead.

The many-coloured birds which we met near the islands of Tristan de Aconcha,
left us two days before, just as they did when we got near Cabo de bone
Esperança, so that they would seem to dislike the land. Instead of
them, we saw a black bird with a white tail, having white streaks here
and there under its wings; a bird, it seems, of rare occurrence. Three
or four days before we also saw a number of sanderlings. Close
inshore we also saw a quantity of cuttlebone, but the pieces were very
small and scattered, so that they could hardly be seen in hollow water,
except by paying very close attention to them and only 6 or 8 miles off
shore, seeing that the steady west-wind prevents their getting out
to sea, which they would certainly do, if now and then the wind blew
from the east for a few days in succession. Careful estimations based
on the globosity of the earth will give the best signs after all. By
estimation we have got into...[*] Longitude, some of our steersmen
having got one or two degrees more, some less, which in the plane charts
makes a considerable difference, about 217 miles by calculation. I
repeat that since I have seen the land a good deal earlier, it will
be expedient in the plane chart to mark out a distance of about 200
miles, to westward of St.

Paulo island and to eastward of Madagascar, the said distance to be
passed over in drawing up reckonings, seeing that the plane chart
involves serious drawbacks; the same might well be done to eastward of
the Cape, in such fashion as Your Worships' cartographers and other
experts, such as Master C.

J. Lastman, shall find to be most expedient for the Company's
service.

Seeing that we had nothing to do near the coast, and there was a
fair wind blowing for us to make use of, we deemed it advisable
that night to run north-west, and the next morning, having got north
into 20 degrees S.

Lat., from there to hold a north by-west course for Java, whither
God Almighty may in safety conduct ourselves and those who shall
come after us.

[* Left blank.]

On the 27th do. in the evening, when it had got dark, the water suddenly
turned as white as butter-milk, a thing that none of those on board
of us had ever seen in their lives, and which greatly surprised us
all, so that, concluding it to be caused by a shallow of the sea,
we set the foresail and cast the lead, but since we got no bottom,
and with the rising moon the water again resumed its usual colour,
we made all sail and ran on full speed, satisfied that the strange
colour had been caused by the sky, which was very pale at the time.

On the 28th in the morning very early, the water became thick, and
shortly after we sighted land, being two islands, each of them
about 2 miles in length; at 4 miles' distance from the land we cast
the lead in 65 fathom sandy bottom. At noon in Latitude 8°, three
miles off shore, we found ourselves to have run too far to eastward,
wherefore we held our course to westward up to the 2nd of October,
when by God's grace we passed the Princen islands, and arrived off
Bantham on the 9th do.

By estimation the land of d'Eendracht is marked in the chart fifty
miles too far to eastward, which should also be rectified...

Done in the ship 't Wapen van Hoorn, November 8, A.D. 1627, lying at
anchor before Batavia.

Your Worships' obedt. Servant J. V. ROOSENBERGH.

* * * * *
{Page 54}

XXI.

(1628) DISCOVERY OF THE NORTH-WEST COAST OF AUSTRALIA BY THE
SHIP VIANEN (VIANE, VIANA), COMMANDED BY GERRIT FREDERIKSZOON DE
WITT.

--DE WITT'S LAND.

A.

_Letter of the Governor-General and Councillors to the Managers of the
E.I.C. November 3, 1628._
...[We] thought fit to give orders for the ship Vyanen [*] to sail to the
strait of Balamboan. [She] sailed [from Batavia] thither on the 14th
of January, and from there stood out to sea on the 25th do.

She was by head-winds driven so far to south-ward that she came upon the
South-land beyond Java where she ran aground, so that she was forced
to throw overboard 8 or 10 lasts of pepper and a quantity of copper,
upon which through God's mercy she got off again without further
damage...

[* That commander Gerrit Frederikszoon De Witt, was on board this ship,
is proved by an original letter of his, dated August 6, 1628 (Hague
State Archives).]
B.

_See the Hessel Gerritsz--Huydecoper Chart (No 5.--VII D), which has G.
F.
De Witts-land._
C.

_Instructions for Tasman, 1644 [*]._
[* The well-known chart of TASMAN, 1644 (see my Life of, Tasman,
pp.
71-73) also has the name G. F. De Witt's Land.]
...Meanwhile in the year 1627 the ship t' Gulde Zeepaert,...discovered...the
south coast of the great Southland, and in the following year 1628 the
ship Viana, homeward bound from Batavia, equally unexpectedly discovered
the coast of the same land on the north side in the Southern Latitude
of 21 degrees, and sailed along it a distance of about 50 miles; none
of these discoveries, however, resulting in the obtaining of any
considerable information respecting the situation and condition of this
vast land, it only having been found that it has barren and dangerous
coasts, green, fertile fields and exceedingly savage, black, barbarian
inhabitants

...

* * * * *

XXII.

(before 1629) DISCOVERY OF JACOB REMESSENS-, REMENS-, OR ROMMER-RIVER,
SOUTH OF WILLEMS RIVER [*].
[* I do not know the date of this discovery.

Since Pelsaert was acquainted with it, it must have taken place before
1629 or 1628. It cannot have been much earlier, as the name is not found
in Hessel Gerritsz's charts.

I must mention, however, that Leupe has found a steersman of the name of
Jacob Remmetsz referred to in the archives of the E.I.C. about the
year 1619.]

A.

_Daily annotations of Pelsaert, 1629 (See infra)._
...This 16th [of June]...we were in Latitude 22 degrees 17 minutes. I
intended to sail to Jacop Remmessens river.

{Page 55}
B.

_Keppler Map (No. 6.--VII E)._
* * * * *

XXIII.

(1629). [*] SHIPWRECK OF THE SHIP BATAVIA UNDER COMMANDER FRANÇOIS PELSAERT
ON HOUTMANS ABROLHOS [**].--FURTHER DISCOVERY OF THE WEST-COAST OF
AUSTRALIA.

[* In the year 1628 certain other Dutch vessels sighted or touched
at the west-coast of Australia on their outward voyage to India
(see LEUPE, _Zuidland_, p. 58; my edition of the Daily Register of
Batavia, p. 341).
What we know on this point is without interest. I merely mention
the fact here, without entering into particulars.]
[** The fact and the particulars of this shipwreck have become
sufficiently known, the narrative of it having been published
repeatedly and in different languages (see TIELE, Mémoires
bibliographiques, pp.
262-268; _Id_. Bibliographie Land- en Volkenkunde, pp. 172, 190-191,
258f.--Cf. e.g. also MAJOR, Early Voyages, pp. LXXXIX--XCII; 59-74).
I accordingly print in the text only what is strictly necessary;
but I give almost _in extenso_ Pelsaert's journal of his exploratory
voyage along the west-coast of Australia.] 
A.
_Woeful diurnal annotations [of Commander PELSAERT] touching the
loss of our ship Batavia, run aground on the Abrolhos, or rocks of
Fredrick Houtman, situated in 28½ degrees S. Lat., at 9 miles'
distance from the Southland._
On the fourth of June [1619], it being Whitmonday, with a light,
clear full moon, about two hours before daybreak...I felt the ship's
rudder strike the rocks with a violent horrible shock. Upon which
the ship's course was forthwith checked by the rocks...I rushed on
deck, and found all the sails atop; the wind south-west; our course
during the night had been north-east by north, and we were now lying
amidst thick foam. Still, at the moment, the breakers round the
ship were not violent, but shortly after the sea was heard to run
upon us with great vehemence on all sides...
[When] day broke, we found ourselves surrounded by cliffs and
shoals...
I saw no land that I thought would remain above water at high tide,
except an island, which by estimation was fully three miles from
the ship. I therefore sent the skipper to two small islets or cliffs,
in order to ascertain whether our men and part of our cargo could
be landed there. About 9 o'clock the skipper returned, informing
me that it was well-nigh impossible to get through the rocks and
cliffs, the pinnace running aground in one place, and the water
being several fathom deep in another. As far as he could judge, the
islands would remain above water at high tide. Therefore, moved by
the loud lamentations raised on board by women, children, sick
people, and faint-hearted men, we thought it best first to land the
greater part of our people...
[On June 5] at their earnest instances to move me, it was determined,
as shown by the resolution, that we should try to find fresh water
in the neighbouring islands, or on the mainland coast in order to
save their lives and our own; and that, if no water should be found,
we should in that case at the mercy of God with the pinnace continue
our voyage to Batavia, there to make known our calamitous and
unheard-of disasters...

{Page 56}
This day the 6th do...[we] set sail in the pinnace, and on this day
touched at two separate islands, where we found at best some brackish
water, which had collected in the cavities of the rocks on the beach
after the rain, but it was largely mixed with seawater.When this was done they danced off the stage, and immediately,
as if in the distance, was heard the voice of a man singing.  It came
gradually nearer, and at last Buzzby, in the character of Ben Bolt,
swaggered up to the foot-lights with his hands in his breeches pockets.

  "I'm a jolly, jolly tar,
  Wot has comed from afar,
  An' it's all for to seek my fortin,"

sang Buzzby.  "But I've not found it yit," he continued, breaking into
prose, "and there don't seem much prospect o' findin' it here anyhow.
Wot an 'orrible cold place it is, ugh!"

Buzzby was received with enthusiastic cheers, for he was dressed in the
old familiar blue jacket, white ducks, pumps, and straw hat set jauntily
on one side of his head--a costume which had not been seen for so many
months by the crew of the _Dolphin_ that their hearts warmed to it as if
it were an old friend.

Buzzby acted with great spirit and was evidently a prime favourite.  He
could scarcely recollect a word of his part, but he remembered the
general drift of it, and had ready wit enough to extemporise.  Having
explained that he was the only survivor of a shipwrecked crew, he
proceeded to tell some of his adventures in foreign lands, and
afterwards described part of his experiences in a song, to which the
doctor played an accompaniment behind the scenes.  The words were
composed by himself, sung to the well-known Scotch air, "Corn Riggs",
and ran as follows:--

"The Jolly Tar.

  "My comrades, you must know
  It was many years ago
  I left my daddy's cottage in the green wood O!
  And I jined a man-o'-war
  An' became a jolly tar,
  An' fought for king and country on the high seas O!
  Pull, boys, cheerily, our home is on the sea.
  Pull, boys, merrily and lightly O!
  Pull, boys, cheerily, the wind is passing
  free
  An' whirling up the foam and water sky-high O!

  "There's been many a noble fight,
  But Trafalgar was the sight
  That beat the Greeks and Romans in their glory O!
  For Britain's jolly sons
  Worked the thunder-blazing guns,
  And Nelson stood the bravest in the fore-front O!
  Pull, boys, etcetera.

  "A roaring cannon shot
  Came an' hit the very spot
  Where my leg goes click-an'-jumble in the socket O!
  And swept it overboard
  With the precious little hoard
  Of pipe, an' tin, an' baccy in the pocket O!
  Pull, boys, etcetera.

  "They took me down below,
  An' they laid me with a row
  Of killed and wounded messmates on a table O!
  Then up comes Dr Keg,
  An' says, Here's a livin' leg
  I'll sew upon the stump if I am able O!
  Pull, boys, etcetera.

  "This good and sturdy limb
  Had belonged to fightin' Tim,
  An' scarcely had they sewed it on the socket O!
  When up the hatch I flew,
  An' dashed among the crew,
  An' sprang on board the Frenchman like a rocket O!
  Pull, boys, etcetera.

  "'Twas this that gained the day,
  For that leg it cleared the way--
  And the battle raged like fury while it lasted O!
  Then ceased the shot and shell
  To fall upon the swell,
  And the Union-Jack went bravely to the mast-head O!
  Pull, boys, etcetera."

We need scarcely say that this song was enthusiastically encored, and
that the chorus was done full justice to by the audience, who picked it
up at once and zang it with lusty vehemence.  At the last word Ben Bolt
nodded familiarly, thrust his hands into his pockets, and swaggered off
whistling "Yankee Doodle".  It was a matter of uncertainty where he had
swaggered off to, but it was conjectured that he had gone on his journey
to anywhere that might turn up.

Meanwhile Blunderbore had been bobbing his head up and down behind the
hummock in amazement at what he heard and saw, and when Ben Bolt made
his exit he came forward.  This was the signal for the two bears to
discover him and rush on with a terrific roar.  Blunderbore instantly
fetched them each a sounding whack on their skulls, leaped over both
their backs, and bounded up the side of the iceberg, where he took
refuge, and turned at bay on a little ice pinnacle constructed expressly
for that purpose.

An awful fight now ensued between the Giant and the two bears.  The
pinnacle on which Blunderbore stood was so low that the Big Bear, by
standing up on its hind-legs, could just scratch his toes, which caused
the Giant to jump about continually, but the sides of the iceberg were
so smooth that the bears could not climb up it.  This difficulty,
indeed, constituted the great and amusing feature of the fight, for no
sooner did the Little Bear creep up to the edge of the pinnacle than the
Giant's tremendous club came violently down on his snout (which had been
made of hard wood on purpose to resist the blows) and sent it sprawling
back on the stage, where the Big Bear invariably chanced to be in the
way, and always fell over it.  Then they both rose, and, roaring
fearfully, renewed the attack, while Blunderbore laid about him with the
club ferociously.  Fortune, however, did not on this occasion favour the
brave.  The Big Bear at last caught the Giant by the heel and pulled him
to the ground; the Little Bear instantly seized him by the throat, and,
notwithstanding his awful yells and struggles, it would have gone ill
with Blunderbore had not Ben Bolt opportunely arrived at that identical
spot at that identical moment in the course of his travels.

Oh! it was a glorious thing to see the fear-nothing, dare-anything
fashion in which, when he saw how matters stood, Ben Bolt threw down his
stick and bundle, drew his cutlass, and attacked the two bears at once,
single-handed, crying "Come on," in a voice of thunder.  And it was a
satisfactory thing, to behold the way, in which he cut and slashed at
their heads (the heads having been previously prepared for such
treatment), and the agility he displayed in leaping over their backs and
under their legs, and holding on by their tails, while they vainly
endeavoured to catch him.  The applause was frequent and prolonged, and
the two Esquimaux prisoners rolled about their burly figures and laughed
till the tears ran down their fat cheeks.  But when Ben Bolt suddenly
caught the two bears by their tails, tied them together in a double
knot, and fled behind a hummock, which the Big Bear passed on one side
and the little Bear on the other, and so, as a matter of course, stuck
hard and fast, the laughter was excessive; and when the gallant British
seaman again rushed forward, massacred the Big Bear with two terrific
cuts, slew the Little Bear with one tremendous back-hander, and then
sank down on one knee and pressed his hand to his brow as if he were
exhausted, a cheer ran from stem to stern of the _Dolphin_, the like of
which had not filled the hull of that good ship, since she was launched
upon her ocean home!

It was just at this moment that Whackinta chanced, curiously enough, to
return to this spot in the course of _her_ wanderings.  She screamed in
horror at the sight of the dead bears, which was quite proper and
natural, and then she started at the sight of the exhausted Bolt, and
smiled sweetly--which was also natural--as she hastened to assist and
sympathise with him.  Ben Bolt fell in love with her at once, and told
her so off-hand, to the unutterable rage of Blunderbore, who recovered
from his wounds at that moment and, seizing the sailor by the throat,
vowed he would kill, and quarter, and stew, and boil, and roast, and eat
him in one minute if he didn't take care what he was about.

The audience felt some fears for Ben Bolt at this point, but their
delight knew no bounds when, shaking the Giant off, and springing
backwards, he buttoned up his coat and roared, rather than said, that
though he were all the Blunderbores and Blunderbusses in the world
rolled together, and changed into one immortal blunder-cannon, he didn't
care a pinch of bad snuff for him, and would knock all the teeth in his
head down his throat.  This valorous threat he followed up by shaking
his fist close under the Giant's nose, and crying out: "Come on!"

But the Giant did not come on; he fortunately recollected that he owed
his life to the brave sailor, so he smiled, and, saying he would be his
friend through life, insisted on seizing him by the hand and shaking it
violently.  Thereafter he took Ben Bolt and Whackinta by their right
hands, and, leading them forward to the foot-lights, made them a long
speech to the effect that he owed a debt of gratitude to the former for
saving his life which he could never repay, and that he loved the latter
too sincerely to stand in the way of her happiness.  Then he joined
their right hands, and they went down on one knee, and he placed his
hands on their heads, and looked up at the audience with a benignant
smile, and the curtain fell amid rapturous cheers.

In this play it seemed somewhat curious and unaccountable that Whackinta
forgot to enquire for her demolished baby, and appeared to feel no
anxiety whatever about it; it was also left a matter of uncertainty
whether Ben Bolt and his Esquimaux bride returned to live happily during
the remainder of their lives in England, or took up their permanent
abode with Blunderbore; but it is not our province to criticise--we
merely chronicle events as they occurred.

The entertainments were to conclude with a hornpipe from Mivins, but
just as that elastic individual had completed the first of a series of
complicated evolutions, and was about to commence the second, a
vociferous barking of the dogs was heard outside, accompanied by the
sound of human voices.  The benches were deserted in a moment and the
men rushed upon deck, catching up muskets and cutlasses, which always
stood in readiness, as they went.  The sounds proceeded from a party of
about twenty Esquimaux, who had been sent from the camp with the stolen
property, and with a humble request that the offence might be forgiven,
and their chief and his wife returned to them.  They were all unarmed,
and the sincerity of their repentance was further attested by the fact
that they brought back, not only the hatchet and telescope, but a large
assortment of minor articles that had not been missed.

Of course the apology was accepted; and after speeches were delivered,
and protestations of undying friendship made on both sides, the party
were presented with a few trinkets and a plug of tobacco each, and sent
back in a state of supreme happiness to their village, where for a week
Awatok kept the men of his tribe, and Aninga the women, in a state of
intense amazement by their minute descriptions of the remarkable doings
of the white strangers.

The friendship thus begun between the Esquimaux and the _Dolphin's_ crew
was never once interrupted by any unpleasant collision during the months
that they afterwards travelled and hunted in company.  Strength of
muscle and promptitude in action are qualities which all nations in a
savage state understand and respect; and the sailors proved that they
possessed these qualities in a higher degree than themselves during the
hardships and dangers incident to Arctic life, while at the same time
their seemingly endless resources and contrivances impressed the simple
natives with the belief that white men could accomplish anything they
chose to attempt.


CHAPTER SEVENTEEN.

EXPEDITIONS ON FOOT--EFFECTS OF DARKNESS ON DOGS AND MEN--THE FIRST
DEATH--CAUGHT IN A TRAP--THE ESQUIMAUX CAMP.

"Don't know how it is, an' I can't tell wot it is, but so it is,"
remarked Buzzby to Grim, a week after the first night of the
theatricals, "that that 'ere actin' has done us all a sight o' good.
Here we are as merry as crickets every one, although we're short of
fresh meat, and symptoms o' scurvy are beginnin' to show on some of us."

"It's the mind havin' occupation, an' bein' prewented from broodin' over
its misfortins," replied Grim with the air of a philosopher.

Grim did not put this remark in turned commas, although he ought to have
done so, seeing that it was quoted from a speech made by the captain to
Singleton the day before.

"You see," continued Grim, "we've been actin' every night for a week
past; well, if we hadn't been actin', we should ha' been thinkin' an'
sleepin'--too much of which, you see, ain't good for us, Buzzby, and
would never pay."

Buzzby was not quite sure of this, but contented himself by saying:
"Well, mayhap ye're right.  I'm sorry it's to come to an end so soon,
but there is no doubt that fresh meat is ondispensable--an' that reminds
me, messmate, that I've not cleaned my musket for two days, an' it
wouldn't do to go on a hunt with a foul piece, nohow.  We start at 10
o'clock a.m., don't we?"

Grim admitted that they did--remarking that it might just as well be 10
p.m., for all the difference the _sun_ would make in it--and went below
with Buzzby.

In the cabin active preparations were making for an extended hunting
expedition, which the empty state of the larder rendered absolutely
necessary.  For a week past the only fresh provisions they had procured
were a white fox and a rabbit, notwithstanding the exertions of Meetuck,
Fred, and the doctor, who with three separate parties had scoured the
country for miles round the ship.  Scurvy was now beginning to appear
among them, and Captain Guy felt that although they had enough of salt
provisions to last them the greater part of the winter, if used with
economy, they could not possibly subsist on these alone.  An extended
expedition in search of seals and walrus was therefore projected.

It was determined that this should consist of two parties, the one to
proceed north, the other to travel south in the tracks of the Esquimaux,
who had left their temporary village in search of walrus--they also
being reduced almost to a state of starvation.

The plan of the expedition was as follows:--

One party, consisting of ten men, under Bolton, the first mate, was to
take the largest sledge, and the whole team of dogs, on which, with
twelve days' provisions and their sleeping-bags, they were to proceed
northward along the coast as far as possible; and, in the event of being
unsuccessful, they were to turn homeward on the eighth day, and make the
best of their way back on short allowance.

The other party, consisting of fifteen men under Saunders, the second
mate, was to set off to the southward on foot, dragging a smaller sledge
behind them, and endeavour to find the Esquimaux, who, it was supposed,
could not be far off, and would probably have fresh meat in their camp.

It was a clear, cold, and beautiful starlight day, when the two parties
started simultaneously on their separate journeys.  The coruscations of
the aurora were more than usually vivid, and the snow gave forth that
sharp, dry, _crunching_ sound, under the heels of the men as they moved
about, that denotes intense frost.

It may, I think, be safely inferred from these passages that the shore
is fringed in parts by coral-reefs; coloured red.--SANDWICH Island.
The east coast is said (Cook's "Second Voyage," volume ii., page
41) to be low, and to be guarded by a chain of breakers.

In the accompanying chart it is seen to be fringed by a reef; coloured
red.--MALLICOLLO. Forster speaks of the reef-bounded shore: the reef is
about thirty yards wide, and so shallow that a boat cannot pass over it.
Forster also ("Observations," page 23) says, that the rocks of the
sea-shore consist of madrepore. In the plan of Sandwich harbour, the
headlands are represented as fringed; coloured red.--AURORA and PENTECOST
Islands, according to Bougainville, apparently have no reefs; nor has
the large island of S. ESPIRITU, nor BLIGH Island or BANKS' Islands,
which latter lie to the N.E. of the Hebrides. But in none of these cases,
have I met with any detailed account of their shores, or seen plans on
a large scale; and it will be evident, that a fringing-reef of only
thirty or even a few hundred yards in width, is of so little importance
to navigation, that it will seldom be noticed, excepting by chance;
and hence I do not doubt that several of these islands, now left
uncoloured, ought to be red.

SANTA CRUZ GROUP.

VANIKORO (Figure 1, Plate I.) offers a striking example of a barrier-reef:

it was first described by the Chevalier Dillon, in his voyage, and was
surveyed in the "Astrolabe"; coloured pale blue.--TIKOPIA and FATAKA
Islands appear, from the descriptions of Dillon and D'Urville, to have
no reefs; ANOUDA is a low, flat island, surrounded by cliffs ("'Astrolabe'
Hydrog." and Krusenstern, "Mem." volume ii., page 432); these are
uncoloured. TOUPOUA (OTOOBOA of Dillon) is stated by Captain Tromelin
("Annales Marit." 1829, page 289) to be almost entirely included in
a reef, lying at the distance of two miles from the shore. There is a
space of three miles without any reef, which, although indented with
bays, offers no anchorage from the extreme depth of the water close to
the shore: Captain Dillon also speaks of the reefs fronting this island;
coloured blue.-- SANTA-CRUZ. I have carefully examined the works of
Carteret, D'Entrecasteaux, Wilson, and Tromelin, and I cannot
discover any mention of reefs on its shores; left uncoloured.

--TINAKORO is a constantly active volcano without reefs.--MENDANA ISLES
(mentioned by Dillon under the name of MAMMEE, etc.); said by Krusenstern
to be low, and intertwined with reefs. I do not believe they include a
lagoon; I have left them uncoloured.--DUFF'S Islands compose a small
group directed in a N.W. and S.E. band; they are described by Wilson
(page 296, "Miss.

Voy." 4to edition), as formed by bold-peaked land, with the islands
surrounded by coral-reefs, extending about half a mile from the shore;
at a distance of a mile from the reefs he found only seven fathoms.
As I have no reason for supposing there is deep water within these
reefs, I have coloured them red.
KENNEDY Island, N.E. of Duff's. I have been unable to find any account
of it.

NEW CALEDONIA.

The great barrier-reefs on the shores of this island have already been
described (Figure 5, Plate II.). They have been visited by Labillardiere,
Cook, and the northern point by D'Urville; this latter part so closely
resembles an atoll that I have coloured it dark blue. The LOYALTY group
is situated eastward of this island; from the chart and description
given in the "Voyage of the 'Astrolabe'," they do not appear to
have any reefs; north of this group, there are some extensive low
reefs (called ASTROLABE and BEAUPRE,) which do not seem to be
atoll-formed; these are left uncoloured.

AUSTRALIAN BARRIER-REEF.

The limits of this great reef, which has already been described, have
been coloured from the charts of Flinders and King. In the northern
parts, an atoll-formed reef, lying outside the barrier, has been
described by Bligh, and is coloured dark blue. In the space between
Australia and New Caledonia, called by Flinders the Corallian
Sea, there are numerous reefs.
Of these, some are represented in Krusenstern's "Atlas" as having an
atoll-like structure; namely, BAMPTON shoal, FREDERIC, VINE or
Horse-shoe, and ALERT reefs; these have been coloured dark blue.

LOUISIADE.

The dangerous reefs which front and surround the western, southern, and
northern coasts of this so-called peninsula and archipelago, seem evidently
to belong to the barrier class. The land is lofty, with a low fringe on
the coast; the reefs are distant, and the sea outside them profoundly
deep.
Nearly all that is known of this group is derived from the labours of
D'Entrecasteaux and Bougainville: the latter has represented one
continuous reef ninety miles long, parallel to the shore, and in
places as much as ten miles from it; coloured pale blue. A little distance
northward we have the LAUGHLAN Islands, the reefs round which are
engraved in the "Atlas of the Voyage of the 'Astrolabe'," in the same
manner as in the encircled islands of the Caroline Archipelago, the
reef is, in parts, a mile and a half from the shore, to which it does
not appear to be attached; coloured blue. At some little distance from
the extremity of the Louisiade lies the WELLS reef, described in G.
Hamilton's "Voyage in H.M.S.
'Pandora'" (page 100): it is said, "We found we had got embayed in a
double reef, which will soon be an island." As this statement
is only intelligible on the supposition of the reef being crescent
or horse-shoe formed, like so many other submerged annular reefs, I
have ventured to colour it blue.

SOLOMON ARCHIPELAGO.

The chart in Krusenstern's "Atlas" shows that these islands are not
encircled, and as coral appears from the works of Surville, Bougainville,
and Labillardiere, to grow on their shores, this circumstance, as in
the case of the New Hebrides, is a presumption that they are
fringed. I cannot find out anything from D'Entrecasteaux's "Voyage,"
regarding the southern islands of the group, so have left them
uncoloured.

--MALAYTA Island in a rough MS. chart in the Admiralty has its
northern shore fringed.--YSABEL Island, the N.E. part of this island,
in the same chart, is also fringed:
Mendana, speaking (Burney, volume i., page 280) of an islet adjoining the
northern coast, says it is surrounded by reefs; the shores, also of Port
Praslin appear regularly fringed.--CHOISEUL Island. In Bougainville's
"Chart of Choiseul Bay," parts of the shores are fringed by coral-reefs.--
BOUGAINVILLE Island.

According to D'Entrecasteaux the western shore abounds with coral-reefs,
and the smaller islands are said to be attached to the larger ones by
reefs; all the before-mentioned islands have been coloured red.

--BOUKA Islands. Captain Duperrey has kindly informed me in a letter that
he passed close round the northern side of this island (of which a plan
is given in his "Atlas of the 'Coquille's' Voyage"), and that it
was "garnie d'une bande de recifs a fleur d'eau adherentes au
rivage;" and he infers, from the abundance of coral on the islands
north and south of Bouka, that the reef probably is of coral;
coloured red.

Off the north coast of the Solomon Archipelago there are several small
groups which are little known; they appear to be low, and of
coral-formation; and some of them probably have an atoll-like
structure; the Chevallier Dillon, however, informs me that this is
not the case with the B. de CANDELARIA.

--OUTONG JAVA, according to the Spanish navigator, Maurelle, is thus
characterised; but this is the only one which I have ventured to
colour blue.

NEW IRELAND.

The shores of the S.W. point of this island and some adjoining
islets, are fringed by reefs, as may be seen in the "Atlases of the
Voyages of the 'Coquille' and 'Astrolabe'."

M. Lesson observes that the reefs are open in front of each streamlet.
The DUKE OF YORK'S Island is also fringed; but with regard to the other
parts of NEW IRELAND, NEW HANOVER, and the small islands lying
northward, I have been unable to obtain any information.

I will only add that no part of New Ireland appears to be fronted by
distant reefs. I have coloured red only the above specified
portions.

NEW BRITAIN AND THE NORTHERN SHORE OF NEW GUINEA.

From the charts in the "Voyage of the 'Astrolabe'," and from the
"Hydrog.
Memoir," it appears that these coasts are entirely without reefs, as
are the SCHOUTEN Islands, lying close to the northern shore of New
Guinea.

The western and south-western parts of New Guinea, will be treated of
when we come to the islands of the East Indian Archipelago.

ADMIRALTY GROUP.

From the accounts by Bougainville, Maurelle, D'Entrecasteaux, and the
scattered notices collected by Horsburgh, it appears, that some of the
many islands composing it, are high, with a bold outline; and others
are very low, small and interlaced with reefs.

All the high islands appear to be fronted by distant reefs rising
abruptly from the sea, and within some of which there is reason
to believe that the water is deep.

I have therefore little doubt they are of the barrier class.--In the
southern part of the group we have ELIZABETH Island, which is
surrounded by a reef at the distance of a mile; and two miles
eastward of it (Krusenstern, "Append." 1835, page 42) there is a
little island containing a lagoon.

--Near here, also lies CIRCULAR-REEF (Horsburgh, "Direct." volume i.,
page 691, 4th edition), "three or four miles in diameter having deep
water inside with an opening at the N.N.W. part, and on the
outside steep to." I have from these data, coloured the group pale
blue, and CIRCULAR-REEF dark blue.--the ANACHORITES, ECHEQUIER, and
HERMITES, consist of innumerable low islands of coral-formation,
which probably have atoll-like forms; but not being able to ascertain
this, I have not coloured them, nor DUROUR Island, which is described
by Carteret as low.

The CAROLINE ARCHIPELAGO is now well-known, chiefly from the
hydrographical labours of Lutke; it contains about forty groups of
atolls, and three encircled islands, two of which are engraved in
Figures 2 and 7, Plate I.

Commencing with the eastern part; the encircling reef round UALEN
appears to be only about half a mile from the shore; but as the
land is low and covered with mangroves ("Voyage autour du Monde,"
par F.

Lutke, volume i., page 339), the real margin has not probably been
ascertained. The extreme depth in one of the harbours within the reef
is thirty-three fathoms (see charts in "Atlas of 'Coquille's'
Voyage"), and outside at half a mile distant from the reef, no
bottom was obtained with two hundred and fifty fathoms.

The reef is surmounted by many islets, and the lagoon-like channel within
is mostly shallow, and appears to have been much encroached on by
the low land surrounding the central mountains; these facts show
that time has allowed much detritus to accumulate; coloured pale
blue.-- POUYNIPETE, or Seniavine.

In the greater part of the circumference of this island, the reef
is about one mile and three quarters distant; on the north side
it is five miles off the included high islets.

The reef is broken in several places; and just within it, the depth
in one place is thirty fathoms, and in another, twenty-eight, beyond
which, to all appearance, there was "un porte vaste et sur" (Lutke,
volume ii., page 4); coloured pale blue.--HOGOLEU or ROUG. This wonderful
group contains at least sixty-two islands, and its reef is one
hundred and thirty-five miles in circuit.

Of the islands, only a few, about six or eight (see "Hydrog.
Descrip." page 428, of the "Voyage of the 'Astrolabe'," and the large
accompanying chart taken chiefly from that given by Duperrey) are
high, and the rest are all small, low, and formed on the reef. The depth
of the great interior lake has not been ascertained; but Captain D'Urville
appears to have entertained no doubt about the possibility of taking in
a frigate. The reef lies no less than fourteen miles distant from the
northern coasts of the interior high islands, seven from their western
sides, and twenty from the southern; the sea is deep outside. This
island is a likeness on a grand scale to the Gambier group in the
Low Archipelago. Of the groups of low (In D'Urville and Lottin's chart,
Peserare is written with capital letters; but this evidently is
an error, for it is one of the low islets on the reef of Namonouyto
(see Lutke's charts)--a regular atoll.) islands forming the chief
part of the Caroline Archipelago, all those of larger size, have
the true atoll-structure (as may be seen in the "Atlas" by Captain
Lutke), and some even of the very small ones, as MACASKILL and
DUPERREY, of which plans are given in the "Atlas of the 'Coquille's'
Voyage."

There are, however, some low small islands of coral-formation, namely
OLLAP, TAMATAM, BIGALI, SATAHOUAL, which do not contain lagoons; but
it is probable that lagoons originally existed, but have since filled
up:
Lutke (volume ii., page 304) seems to have thought that all the low
islands, with only one exception, contained lagoons. From the sketches,
and from the manner in which the margins of these islands are
engraved in the "Atlas of the Voyage of the 'Coquille'," it might
have been thought that they were not low; but by a comparison with
the remarks of Lutke (volume ii., page 107, regarding Bigali) and
of Freycinet ("Hydrog.

Memoir 'L'Uranie' Voyage," page 188, regarding Tamatam, Ollap, etc.),
it will be seen that the artist must have represented the land
incorrectly.

The most southern island in the group, namely PIGUIRAM, is not coloured,
because I have found no account of it. NOUGOUOR, or MONTE VERDISON,
which was not visited by Lutke, is described and figured by Mr. Bennett
("United Service Journal," January 1832) as an atoll. All the
above-mentioned islands have been coloured blue.

WESTERN PART OF THE CAROLINE ARCHIPELAGO.

FAIS Island is ninety feet high, and is surrounded, as I have been
informed by Admiral Lutke, by a narrow reef of living coral, of
which the broadest part, as represented in the charts, is only 150
yards; coloured red.-- PHILIP Island., I believe, is low; but Hunter,
in his "Historical Journal," gives no clear account of it; uncoloured.

--ELIVI; from the manner in which the islets on the reefs are engraved,
in the "Atlas of the 'Astrolabe's' Voyage," I should have thought they
were above the ordinary height, but Admiral Lutke assures me this
is not the case: they form a regular atoll; coloured blue.

--GOUAP (EAP of Chamisso), is a high island with a reef (see chart in
"Voyage of the 'Astrolabe'"), more than a mile distant in most parts from
the shore, and two miles in one part. Captain D'Urville thinks that
there would be anchorage ("Hydrog. Descript. 'Astrolabe' Voyage," page
436) for ships within the reef, if a passage could be found; coloured
pale blue.--GOULOU, from the chart in the "'Astrolabe's' Atlas,"
appears to be an atoll. D'Urville ("Hydrog. Descript." page 437)
speaks of the low islets on the reef; coloured dark blue.

PELEW ISLANDS.

Krusenstern speaks of some of the islands being mountainous; the reefs
are distant from the shore, and there are spaces within them, and
not opposite valleys, with from ten to fifteen fathoms.

According to a MS. chart of the group by Lieutenant Elmer in the
Admiralty, there is a large space within the reef with deepish
water; although the high land does not hold a central position with
respect to the reefs, as is generally the case, I have little doubt
that the reefs of the Pelew Islands ought to be ranked with the
barrier class, and I have coloured them pale blue.

In Lieutenant Elmer's chart there is a horseshoe-formed shoal, laid down
thirteen miles N.W. of Pelew, with fifteen fathoms within the reef, and
some dry banks on it; coloured dark blue.--SPANISH, MARTIRES,
SANSEROT, PULO ANNA and MARIERE Islands are not coloured, because I know
nothing about them, excepting that according to Krusenstern, the second,
third, and fourth mentioned, are low, placed on coral-reefs, and therefore,
perhaps, contain lagoons; but Pulo Mariere is a little higher.

MARIANA ARCHIPELAGO, or LADRONES.

GUAHAN. Almost the whole of this island is fringed by reefs, which
extend in most parts about a third of a mile from the land. Even where
the reefs are most extensive, the water within them is shallow.
In several parts there is a navigable channel for boats and canoes
within the reefs.

In Freycinet's "Hydrog. Mem." there is an account of these
reefs, and in the "Atlas," a map on a large scale; coloured
red.--ROTA. "L'ile est presque entierement entouree des recifs" (page
212, Freycinet's "Hydrog. Mem.").
These reefs project about a quarter of a mile from the shore; coloured
red.--TINIAN. THE EASTERN coast is precipitous, and is without reefs;
but the western side is fringed like the last island; coloured
red.--SAYPAN.
The N.E. coast, and likewise the western shores appear to be fringed; but
there is a great, irregular, horn-like reef projecting far from
this side; coloured red.--FARALLON DE MEDINILLA, appears so regularly
and closely fringed in Freycinet's charts, that I have ventured to colour
it red, although nothing is said about reefs in the "Hydrographical
Memoir." The several islands which form the northern part of the
group are volcanic (with the exception perhaps of Torres, which resembles
in form the madreporitic island of Medinilla), and appear to be without
reefs.

--MANGS, however, is described (by Freycinet, page 219, "Hydrog.")
from some Spanish charts, as formed of small islands placed "au
milieu des nombreux recifs;" and as these reefs in the general chart
of the group do not project so much as a mile; and as there is no
appearance from a double line, of the existence of deep water within,
I have ventured, although with much hesitation, to colour them red.

Respecting FOLGER and MARSHALL Islands which lie some way east of
the Marianas, I can find out nothing, excepting that they are
probably low.

Krusenstern says this of Marshall Island; and Folger Island is written
with small letters in D'Urville's chart; uncoloured.

BONIN OR ARZOBISPO GROUP.

PEEL Island has been examined by Captain Beechey, to whose kindness I
am much indebted for giving me information regarding it: "At Port Lloyd
there is a great deal of coral; and the inner harbour is entirely
formed by coral-reefs, which extend outside the port along the
coast."

Captain Beechey, in another part of his letter to me, alludes to the
reefs fringing the island in all directions; but at the same time
it must be observed that the surf washes the volcanic rocks of the
coast in the greater part of its circumference.

I do not know whether the other islands of the Archipelago are
fringed; I have coloured Peel Island red.

--GRAMPUS Island to the eastward, does not appear (Meare's "Voyage," page
95) to have any reefs, nor does ROSARIO Island (from Lutke's chart), which
lies to the westward.
Respecting the few other islands in this part of the sea, namely
the SULPHUR Islands, with an active volcano, and those lying between
Bonin and Japan (which are situated near the extreme limit in
latitude, at which reefs are formed), I have not been able to find
any clear account.

WEST END OF NEW GUINEA.

PORT DORY.

From the charts in the "Voyage of the 'Coquille'," it would appear that
the coast in this part is fringed by coral-reefs; M. Lesson, however,
remarks that the coral is sickly; coloured red.--WAIGIOU. A considerable
portion of the northern shores of these islands is seen in the
charts (on a large scale) in Freycinet's "Atlas" to be fringed by
coral-reefs. Forrest (page 21, "Voyage to New Guinea") alludes to the
coral-reefs lining the heads of Piapis Bay; and Horsburgh (volume ii.,
page 599, 4th edition), speaking of the islands in Dampier Strait,
says "sharp coral-rocks line their shores;" coloured red.--In the sea
north of these islands, we have GUEDES (or FREEWILL, or ST. DAVID'S),
which from the chart given in the 4to edition of Carteret's "Voyage,"
must be an atoll.
Krusenstern says the islets are very low; coloured blue.--CARTERET'S SHOALS,
in 2 deg 53' N., are described as circular, with stony points showing
all round, with deeper water in the middle; coloured blue.

--AIOU; the plan of this group, given in the "Atlas of the Voyage of the
'Astrolabe'," shows that it is an atoll; and, from a chart in
Forrest's "Voyage," it appears that there is twelve fathoms within
the circular reef; coloured blue.

--The S.W.
coast of New Guinea appears to be low, muddy, and devoid of reefs.

The ARRU, TIMOR-LAUT, and TENIMBER groups have lately been examined
by Captain Kolff, the MS. translation of which, by Mr. W. Earl, I have
been permitted to read, through the kindness of Captain Washington,
R.N.

These islands are mostly rather low, and are surrounded by distant
reefs (the Ki Islands, however, are lofty, and, from Mr.

Stanley's survey, appear without reefs); the sea in some parts is shallow,
in others profoundly deep (as near Larrat). From the imperfection of the
published charts, I have been unable to decide to which class these
reefs belong.

From the distance to which they extend from the land, where the sea
is very deep, I am strongly inclined to believe they ought to come
within the barrier class, and be coloured blue; but I have been
forced to leave them uncoloured.

--The last-mentioned groups are connected with the east end of Ceram by
a chain of small islands, of which the small groups of CERAM-LAUT,
GORAM and KEFFING are surrounded by very extensive reefs,
projecting into deep water, which, as in the last case, I strongly
suspect belong to the barrier class; but I have not coloured them. From
the south side of Keffing, the reefs project five miles (Windsor
Earl's "Sailing Direct. for the Arafura Sea," page 9).

CERAM.

In various charts which I have examined, several parts of the coast are
represented as fringed by reefs.--MANIPA Island, between Ceram and
Bourou, in an old MS. chart in the Admiralty, is fringed by a very irregular
reef, partly dry at low water, which I do not doubt is of
coral-formation; both islands coloured red.

--BOUROU; parts of this island appear fringed by coral-reefs, namely,
the eastern coast, as seen in Freycinet's chart; and CAJELI BAY,
which is said by Horsburgh (volume ii., page 630) to be lined by
coral-reefs, that stretch out a little way, and have only a few
feet water on them.

In several charts, portions of the islands forming the AMBOINA GROUP
are fringed by reefs; for instance, NOESSA, HARENCA, and UCASTER,
in Freycinet's charts.

The above-mentioned islands have been coloured red, although the evidence
is not very satisfactory.

--North of Bourou the parallel line of the XULLA Isles extends: I have
not been able to find out anything about them, excepting that
Horsburgh (volume ii., page 543) says that the northern shore is
surrounded by a reef at the distance of two or three miles;
uncoloured.

--MYSOL GROUP; the Kanary Islands are said by Forrest ("Voyage,"
page 130) to be divided from each other by deep straits, and are
lined with coral-rocks; coloured red.

--GUEBE, lying between Waigiou and Gilolo, is engraved as if fringed;
and it is said by Freycinet, that all the soundings under five
fathoms were on coral; coloured red.

--GILOLO.

In a chart published by Dalrymple, the numerous islands on the western,
southern (BATCHIAN and the STRAIT OF PATIENTIA), and eastern sides appear
fringed by narrow reefs; these reefs, I suppose, are of coral, for it
is said in "Malte Brun" (volume xii., page 156), "Sur les cotes (of
Batchian) comme DANS LES PLUPART des iles de cet archipel, il y a de
rocs de medrepores d'une beaute et d'une variete infimies." Forrest,
also (page 50), says Seland, near Batchian, is a little island with reefs
of coral; coloured red.--MORTY Island (north of Gilolo).

Oot o' my gait."

The second mate made a rush so tremendous that something awful would
infallibly have resulted had he not struck his foot against a bit of ice
and fallen violently on his breast.  The impetus with which he had
started shot him forward till his head was within a foot of the walrus's
grim muzzle.  For one moment the animal looked at the man as if it were
surprised at his audacity, and then it recommenced its frantic
struggles, snorting blood, and foam, and water into Saunders's face as
he scrambled out of its way.  Immediately after, Awatok fixed another
harpoon in its side, and it dived again.

The struggle that ensued was tremendous, and the result seemed for a
long time to be doubtful.  Again and again shots were fired and
spear-thrusts made with effect, but the huge creature seemed
invulnerable.  Its ferocity and strength remained unabated, while the
men--sailors and Esquimaux alike--were nearly exhausted.  The battle had
now lasted three hours; the men were panting from exertion; the walrus,
still bellowing, was clinging to the edge of the ice, which for several
yards round the hole was covered with blood and foam.

"Wot a brute it is!" said Buzzby, sitting down on a lump of ice and
looking at it in despair.

"We might have killed it lang ago had I not wet my gun," growled
Saunders, regarding his weapon, which was completely drenched, with a
look of contempt.

"Give it another poke, Awatok," cried Amos Parr; "you'll know best
whereabouts its life lies; I can make nothin' o't."

Awatok obeyed, and gave it a thrust under the left flipper that seemed
to reach its heart, for it fell back into the water and struggled
violently.  At the same moment Davie Summers mounted to the top of a
hummock, part of which overhung the pool, and launched a harpoon down
upon its back.  This latter blow seemed to revive its ferocity, for it
again essayed to clamber out on the ice, and looked up at Davie with a
glance of seeming indignation, while Buzzby, who had approached, fell
backward as he retreated from before it.  At the same time Saunders
succeeded in getting his musket to go off.  The ball struck it in the
eye, and, entering the brain, caused instant death, a result which was
greeted with three enthusiastic cheers.

The getting of this enormous creature out of the water would have been a
matter of no small difficulty had there not been such a large party
present.  Even as it was, it took them a considerable time to accomplish
this feat, and to cut it up and pack it on the sledges.

While the battle above described was going on, two smaller walrus had
been killed and secured, and the Esquimaux were in a state of great
glee, for previous to the arrival of the sailors they had been
unsuccessful in their hunts, and had been living on short allowance.  On
returning home there was a general feasting and merry-making, and
Saunders felt that if he remained there long they would not only eat up
their own meat, but his also.  He therefore resolved to return
immediately to the ship with his prize, and leave part of his men behind
to continue the hunt until he should return with the sledge.

But he was prevented from putting this intention into practice by a
hurricane which burst over the Arctic regions with inconceivable
bitterness, and for two days kept all the inhabitants of the
snow-village confined to their huts.  This hurricane was the fiercest
that had swept over these bleak regions of ice since the arrival of the
_Dolphin_.  The wind shrieked, as it swept round the cliffs, and down
the ravines, and out upon the frozen sea, as if a legion of evil spirits
were embodied and concentrated in each succeeding blast.  The snow-drift
rose in solid masses, whirled madly round for a few seconds, and then
was caught by the blast, and swept away like sheets of white flame.  The
thermometer stood at 23 degrees below zero, a temperature that was mild
compared with what it usually had been of late, but the fierce wind
abstracted heat from everything exposed to it so rapidly that neither
man nor beast could face it for a moment.

Buzzby got a little bit of his chin frozen while he merely put his head
out at the door of the hut to see how the weather looked, and Davie
Summers had one of his fingers slightly frozen while in the act of
carrying in one of the muskets that had been left outside by mistake.

As for the Esquimaux, they recked not of the weather.  Their snow-huts
were warm, and their mouths were full, so like wise men and women they
waited patiently within-doors till the storm should blow itself out.
The doings of these poor people were very curious.  They ate
voraciously, and evidently preferred their meat raw.  But when the
sailors showed disgust at this, they at once made a small fire of moss,
mingled with blubber, over which they half-cooked their food.

Their mode of procuring fire was curious.  Two small stones were taken,
one a piece of white quartz, the other a piece of iron-stone, and struck
together smartly; the few sparks that flew out were thrown upon a kind
of white down, found on the willows, under which was placed a lump of
dried moss.  It was usually a considerable time before they succeeded in
catching a spark, but once caught they had no difficulty in blowing it
into a flame.

They had also an ingenious contrivance for melting snow.  This was a
flat stone, supported by two other stones, and inclined slightly at one
end; upon this flat stone a lump of snow was placed, and below it was
kindled a small fire of moss and blubber.  When the stone became heated,
the snow melted and flowed down the incline into a small seal-skin cup
placed there to catch it.

During the continuance of the storm the sailors shared the food and
lodging of these Esquimaux.  They were a fat, oily, hospitable, dirty
race, and vied with each other in showing kindness to those who had been
thus thrown into their society.  As Davie Summers expressed it, "they
were regular trumps"; and, according to Buzzby's opinion, "they wos the
jolliest set o' human walrusses wot he had ever comed across in all his
travels, and he ought to know, for he had always kep' his weather-eye
open, he had, and wouldn't give in on that p'int, he wouldn't, to no man
livin'."


CHAPTER NINETEEN.

THE NORTHERN PARTY--A NARROW ESCAPE, AND A GREAT DISCOVERY--ESQUIMAUX
AGAIN, AND A JOYFUL SURPRISE.

It is interesting to meditate, sometimes, on the deviousness of the
paths by which men are led in earthly affairs--even when the
starting-point and object of pursuit are the same.  The two parties
which left the _Dolphin_ had for their object the procuring of fresh
food.  The one went south and the other north, but their field was the
same--the surface of the frozen sea and the margin of the ice-girt
shore.  Yet how different their experiences and results were the sequel
will show.

As we have already said, the northern party was in command of Bolton,
the first mate, and consisted of ten men, among whom were our hero Fred,
Peter Grim, O'Riley, and Meetuck, with the whole team of dogs, and the
large sledge.

Being fine weather when they set out, they travelled rapidly, making
twenty miles, as near as they could calculate, in the first six hours.
The dogs pulled famously, and the men stepped out well at first, being
cheered and invigorated mentally by the prospect of an adventurous
excursion and fresh meat.  At the end of the second day they buried part
of their stock of provisions at the foot of a conspicuous cliff,
intending to pick it up on their return, and, thus lightened, they
advanced more rapidly, keeping farther out on the floes, in hopes of
falling in with walrus or seals.

Their hopes, however, were doomed to disappointment.  They got only one
seal, and that was a small one--scarcely sufficient to afford a couple
of meals to the dogs.

They were "misfortunate entirely", as O'Riley remarked, and, to add to
their misfortunes, the floe-ice became so rugged that they could
scarcely advance at all.

"Things grow worse and worse," remarked Grim, as the sledge, for the
twentieth time that day, plunged into a crack in the ice, and had to be
unloaded ere it could be got out.  "The sledge won't stand much o' sich
work, and if it breaks--good-bye to it, for it won't mend without wood,
and there's none here."

"No fear of it," cried Bolton encouragingly; "it's made of material as
tough as your own sinews, Grim, and won't give way easily, as the thumps
it has withstood already prove.  Has it never struck you, Fred," he
continued, turning to our hero, who was plodding forward in
silence,--"has it never struck you that when things in this world get
very bad, and we begin to feel inclined to give up, they somehow or
other begin to get better."

"Why, yes, I have noticed that; but I have a vague sort of feeling just
now that things are not going to get better.  I don't know whether it's
this long-continued darkness, or the want of good food, but I feel more
downcast than I ever was in my life before."

Bolton's remark had been intended to cheer, but Fred's answer proved
that a discussion of the merits of the question was not likely to have a
good effect on the men, whose spirits were evidently very much cast
down, so he changed the subject.

Fortunately at that time an incident occurred which effected the mate's
purpose better than any efforts man could have made.  It has frequently
happened that when Arctic voyagers have, from sickness and long
confinement during a monotonous winter, become so depressed in spirits
that games and amusements of every kind failed to rouse them from their
lethargic despondency, sudden danger has given to their minds the
needful impulse, and effected a salutary change, for a time at least, in
their spirits.  Such was the case at the present time.  The men were so
worn with hard travel and the want of fresh food, and depressed by
disappointment and long-continued darkness, that they failed in their
attempts to cheer each other, and at length relapsed into moody silence.
Fred's thoughts turned constantly to his father, and he ceased to
remark cheerfully, as was his wont, on passing objects.  Even O'Riley's
jests became few and far between, and at last ceased altogether.  Bolton
alone kept up his spirits, and sought to cheer his men, the feeling of
responsibility being, probably, the secret of his superiority over them
in this respect.  But even Bolton's spirits began to sink at last.

While they were thus groping sadly along among the hummocks, a large
fragment of ice was observed to break off from a berg just over their
heads.

"Look out! follow me, quick!" shouted the first mate in a loud, sharp
voice of alarm, at the same time darting in towards the side of the
berg.

The startled men obeyed the order just in time, for they had barely
reached the side of the berg when the enormous pinnacle fell, and was
shattered into a thousand fragments on the spot they had just left.  A
rebounding emotion sent the blood in a crimson flood to Fred's forehead,
and this was followed by a feeling of gratitude to the Almighty for the
preservation of himself and the party.  Leaving the dangerous vicinity
of the bergs, they afterwards kept more inshore.

"What can yonder mound be?" said Fred, pointing to an object that was
faintly seen at a short distance off upon the bleak shore.

"An Esquimaux hut, maybe," replied Grim.  "What think'ee, Meetuck?"

Meetuck shook his head and looked grave, but made no reply.

"Why don't you answer?" said Bolton; "but come along, we'll soon see."

Meetuck now made various ineffectual attempts to dissuade the party from
examining the mound, which turned out to be composed of stones heaped
upon each other; but, as all the conversation of which he was capable,
failed to enlighten his companions, as to what the pile was, they
instantly set to work to open a passage into the interior, believing
that it might contain fresh provisions, as the Esquimaux were in the
habit of thus preserving their superabundant food from bears and wolves.
In half an hour a hole large enough for a man to creep through was
formed, and Fred entered, but started back with an exclamation of horror
on finding himself in the presence of a human skeleton, which was seated
on the ground in the centre of this strange tomb with its head and arms
resting on the knees.

"It must be an Esquimaux grave," said Fred, as he retreated hastily;
"that must be the reason why Meetuck tried to hinder us."

"I should like to see it," said Grim, stooping and thrusting his head
and shoulders into the hole.

"What have you got there?" asked Bolton, as Grim drew back and held up
something in his hand.

"Don't know exactly.  It's like a bit o' cloth."  On examination the
article was found to be a shred of coarse cloth, of a blue or black
colour, and, being an unexpected substance to meet with in such a place,
Bolton turned round with it to Meetuck in the hope of obtaining some
information.  But Meetuck was gone.  While the sailors were breaking
into the grave, Meetuck had stood aloof with a displeased expression of
countenance, as if he were angry at the rude desecration of a
countryman's tomb; but the moment his eye fell on the shred of cloth an
expression of mingled surprise and curiosity crossed his countenance,
and without uttering a word he slipped noiselessly into the hole, from
which he almost immediately issued bearing several articles in his hand.
These he held up to view, and with animated words and gesticulations
explained that this was the grave of a white man, not of a native.

The articles he brought out were a pewter plate and a silver
table-spoon.

"There's a name of some kind written here," said Bolton, as he carefully
scrutinised the spoon.  "Look here, Fred, your eyes are better than
mine; see if you can make it out."

Fred took it with a trembling hand, for a strange feeling of dread had
seized possession of his heart, and he could scarcely bring himself to
look upon it.  He summoned up courage, however, but at the first glance
his hand fell down by his side, and a dimness came over his eyes, for
the word "_Pole Star_" was engraven on the handle.  He would have fallen
to the ground had not Bolton caught him.

"Don't give way, lad, the ship may be all right.  Perhaps this is one o'
the crew that died."

Fred did not answer, but, recovering himself with a strong effort, he
said: "Pull down the stones, men."

The men obeyed in silence, and the poor boy sat down on a rock to await
the result in trembling anxiety.  A few minutes sufficed to disentomb
the skeleton, for the men sympathised with their young comrade, and
worked with all their energies.

"Cheer up, Fred," said Bolton, coming and laying his hand on the youth's
shoulder, "it's _not_ your father.  There is a bit of _black_ hair
sticking to the scalp."

With a fervent expression of thankfulness Fred rose and examined the
skeleton, which had been placed in a sort of sack of skin, but was
destitute of clothing.  It was quite dry, and must have been there a
long time.  Nothing else was found, but from the appearance of the
skull, and the presence of the plate and spoon, there could be no doubt
that it was that of one of the _Pole Star's_ crew.

It was now resolved that they should proceed along the coast and examine
every creek and bay for traces of the lost vessel.

"Oh, Bolton, my heart misgives me!" said Fred, as they drove along; "I
fear that they have all perished."

"Niver a bit sir," said O'Riley in a sympathising tone, "yon chap must
have died and been buried here be the crew as they wint past."

"You forget that sailors don't bury men under mounds of stone, with
pewter plates and spoons beside them."

O'Riley was silenced, for the remark was unanswerable.

"He may ha' bin left or lost on the shore, and been found by the
Esquimaux," suggested Peter Grim.

"Is that not another tomb?" enquired one of the men, pointing towards an
object which stood on the end of a point or cape towards which they were
approaching.

Ere anyone could reply, their ears were saluted by the well-known bark
of a pack of Esquimaux dogs.  In another moment they dashed into the
midst of a snow village, and were immediately surrounded by the excited
natives.  For some time no information could be gleaned from their
interpreter, who was too excited to make use of his meagre amount of
English.  They observed, however, that the natives, although much
excited, did not seem to be so much surprised at the appearance of white
men amongst them as those were whom they had first met with near the
ship.  In a short time Meetuck apparently had expended all he had to say
to his friends, and turned to make explanations to Bolton in a very
excited tone; but little more could be made out than that what he said
had some reference to white men.  At length, in desperation, he pointed
to a large hut which seemed to be the principal one of the village, and,
dragging the mate towards it, made signs to him to enter.

Bolton hesitated an instant.

"He wants you to see the chief of the tribe, no doubt," said Fred;
"you'd better go in at once."

A loud voice shouted something in the Esquimaux language from within the
hut.  At the sound Fred's heart beat violently, and pushing past the
mate he crept through the tunnelled entrance and stood within.  There
was little furniture in this rude dwelling.  A dull flame flickered in a
stone lamp which hung from the roof, and revealed the figure of a large
Esquimaux reclining on a couch of skins at the raised side of the hut.

The man looked up hastily as Fred entered, and uttered a few
unintelligible words.

"Father!" cried Fred, gasping for breath, and springing forward.

Captain Ellice, for it was indeed he, started with apparent difficulty
and pain into a sitting posture, and, throwing back his hood, revealed a
face whose open, hearty, benignant expression shone through a coat of
dark brown which long months of toil and exposure had imprinted on it.
It was thin, however, and careworn, and wore an expression that seemed
to be the result of long-continued suffering.

"Father!" he exclaimed in an earnest tone; "who calls me father?"

What is the explanation of it?

The only explanation of it is to be found in the character of
Columbus.

We must try to see him as he is in this forty-second year of his
life, bargaining with notaries, bishops, and treasurers; we must
try to see where these forty years have brought him, and what they
have made of him.

Remember the little boy that played in the Vico Dritto di Ponticello,
acquainted with poverty, but with a soul in him that could rise
beyond it and acquire something of the dignity of that Genoa,
arrogant, splendid and devout, which surrounded him during his early
years.

Remember his long life of obscurity at sea, and the slow kindling
of the light of faith in something beyond the familiar horizons;
remember the social inequality of his marriage, his long struggle
with poverty, his long familiarity with the position of one who
asked and did not receive; the many rebuffs and indignities which
his Ligurian pride must have received at the hands of all those
Spanish dignitaries and grandees--remember all this, and then you
will perhaps not wonder so much that Columbus, who was beginning
to believe himself appointed by Heaven to this task of discovery,
felt that he had much to pay himself back for.

One must recognise him frankly for what he was, and for no conventional
hero of romance; a man who would reconcile his conscience with
anything, and would stop at nothing in the furtherance of what he deemed
a good object; and a man at the same time who had a conscience to
reconcile, and would, whenever it was necessary, laboriously and
elaborately perform the act of reconciliation.

When he made these huge demands in Granada he was gambling with his
chances; but he was a calculating gambler, just about as cunning
and crafty in the weighing of one chance against another as a gambler
with a conscience can be; and he evidently realised that his own
valuation of the services he proposed to render would not be without
its influence on his sovereign's estimate of them.

At any rate he was justified by the results, for on the 17th of April 1492,
after a deal of talk and bargaining, but apparently without any yielding
on Columbus's part, articles of capitulation were drawn up in which the
following provisions were made:--
First, that Columbus and his heirs for ever should have the title
and office of Admiral in all the islands and continents of the ocean
that he or they might discover, with similar honours and prerogatives
to those enjoyed by the High Admiral of Castile.

Second, that he and his heirs should be Viceroys and Governors-General
over all the said lands and continents, with the right of nominating
three candidates for the governing of each island or province, one
of whom should be appointed by the Crown.

Third, that he end his heirs should be entitled to one-tenth of all
precious stones, metals, spices, and other merchandises, however
acquired, within his Admiralty, the cost of acquisition being first
deducted.

Fourth, that he or his lieutenants in their districts, and the High
Admiral of Castile in his district, should be the sole judge in
all disputes arising out of traffic between Spain and the new
countries.

Fifth, that he now, and he and his heirs at all times, should have the
right to contribute the eighth part of the expense of fitting out
expeditions, and receive the eighth part of the profits.

In addition to these articles there was another document drawn up on
the 30th of April, which after an infinite preamble about the nature
of the Holy Trinity, of the Apostle Saint James, and of the Saints
of God generally in their relations to Princes, and with a splendid
trailing of gorgeous Spanish names and titles across the page,
confers upon our hitherto humble Christopher the right to call
himself "Don," and finally raises him, in his own estimation at any
rate, to a social level with his proud Spanish friends.

It is probably from this time that he adopted the Spanish form of his name,
Christoval Colon; but in this narrative I shall retain the more universal
form in which it has become familiar to the English-speaking
world.

He was now upon a Pisgah height, from which in imagination he could
look forth and see his Land of Promise.
It were impossible here to enter minutely into the details of all that
Captain Ellice related to Fred during the next few days, while they
remained together in the Esquimaux village.  To tell of the dangers, the
adventures, and the hairbreadth escapes that the crew of the _Pole Star_
went through before the vessel finally went down would require a whole
volume.  We must pass it all over, and also the account of the few days
that followed, during which sundry walrus were captured, and return to
the _Dolphin_, to which Captain Ellice had been conveyed on the sledge,
carefully wrapped up in deer-skins and tended by Fred.

A party of the Esquimaux accompanied them, and as a number of the
natives from the other village had returned with Saunders and his men to
the ship, the scene she presented, when all parties were united, was
exceedingly curious and animated.

The Esquimaux soon built quite a little town of snow-huts all round the
_Dolphin_, and the noise of traffic and intercourse was peculiarly
refreshing to the ears of those who had long been accustomed to the
death-like stillness of an Arctic winter.  The beneficial effect of the
change on men and dogs was instantaneous.  Their spirits rose at once,
and this, with the ample supply of fresh meat that had been procured,
soon began to drive scurvy away.

There was one dark spot, however, in this otherwise pleasant scene--one
impending event that cast a gloom over all.  In his narrow berth in the
cabin Joseph West lay dying.  Scurvy had acted more rapidly on his
delicate frame than had been expected.  Despite Tom Singleton's utmost
efforts and skill the fell disease gained the mastery, and it soon
became evident that this hearty and excellent man was to be taken away
from them.

During the last days of his illness Captain Ellice was his greatest
comfort and his constant companion.

It was on Christmas-day that West died.

Next day the body of Joseph West was put in a plain deal coffin and
conveyed to Store Island, where it was placed on the ground.  They had
no instruments that could penetrate the hard rock, so were obliged to
construct a tomb of stones, after the manner of the Esquimaux, under
which the coffin was laid and left in solitude.

New-year's Day came, and preparations were made to celebrate the day
with the usual festivities.  But the recent death had affected the crew
too deeply to allow them to indulge in the unrestrained hilarity of that
season.  Prayers were read in the morning, and both Captain Guy and
Captain Ellice addressed the men feelingly in allusion to their late
shipmate's death and their own present position.  A good dinner was also
prepared, and several luxuries served out, among which were the
materials for the construction of a large plum-pudding.  But no grog was
allowed, and they needed it not.  As the afternoon advanced, stories
were told, and even songs were sung, but these were of a quiet kind, and
the men seemed, from an innate feeling of propriety, to suit them to the
occasion.  Old friends were recalled, and old familiar scenes described.
The hearths of home were spoken of with a depth of feeling that showed
how intense was the longing to be seated round them again, and future
prospects were canvassed with keen interest and with hopeful voices.
New year's Day came and went, and when it was gone the men of the
_Dolphin_ did not say, "What a jolly day it was!"  They _said_ little or
nothing, but, long after, they _thought_ of it as a bright spot in their
dreary winter in the Bay of Mercy--as a day in which they had enjoyed
earnest, glad, and sober communings of heart.


CHAPTER TWENTY ONE.

FIRST GLEAM OF LIGHT--TRIP TO WELCOME THE SUN--BEARS AND STRANGE
DISCOVERIES--O'RILEY IS RECKLESS--FIRST VIEW OF THE SUN.

The wisest of men has told us that, "it is a pleasant thing for the eyes
to behold the sun," but only those who spend a winter in the Arctic
regions can fully appreciate the import of that inspired saying.

It is absolutely essential to existence that the bright beams of the
great luminary should fall on animal as well as plant.  Most of the poor
dogs died for want of this blessed light, and had it been much longer
withheld, doubtless our navigators would have sunk also.

About the 20th of January a faint gleam of light on the horizon told of
the coming day.  It was hailed with rapture, and, long before the bright
sun himself appeared on the southern horizon, the most of the men made
daily excursions to the neighbouring hill-tops to catch sight of as much
as possible of his faint rays.  Day by day those rays expanded, and at
last a sort of _dawn_ enlightened a distant portion of their earth,
which, faint though it was at first, had much the appearance in their
eyes of a bright day.  But time wore on, and _real_ day appeared!  The
red sun rose in all its glory, showed a rim of its glowing disc above
the frozen sea, and then sank, leaving a long gladsome smile of twilight
behind.  This great event happened on the 19th of February, and would
have occurred sooner but for the high cliffs to the southward, which
intervened between the ship and the horizon.

On the day referred to a large party was formed to go to the top of the
cliffs at Red Snow Valley to welcome back the sun.

"There's scarce a man left behind," remarked Captain Guy, as they
started on this truly joyous expedition.

"Only Mizzle, sir," said Buzzby, slapping his hands together, for the
cold was intense; "he said as how he'd stop and have dinner ready agin
our return."

There was a general laugh from the men, who knew that the worthy cook
had other reasons for not going--namely, his shortness of wind and his
inveterate dislike to ascend hills.

"Come, Fred," cried Captain Ellice, who had completely recovered from
his accident, "I shall be quite jealous of your friend Singleton if you
bestow so much of your company on him.  Walk with me, sirrah, I command
you, as I wish to have a chat."

"You are unjust to me," replied Fred, taking his father's arm, and
falling with him a little to the rear of the party; "Tom complains that
I have quite given him up of late."

"Och! isn't it a purty sight," remarked O'Riley to Mivins, "to see us
all goin' out like good little childers to see the sun rise of a
beautiful mornin' like this?"

"So it _h_is," answered Mivins, "but I wish it wasn't quite so cold."

It was indeed cold--so cold that the men had to beat their hands
together, and stamp their feet, and rush about like real children, in
order to keep their bodies warm.  This month of February was the coldest
they had yet experienced.  Several times the thermometer fell to the
unexampled temperature of 75 degrees below zero, or 107 degrees below
the freezing-point of water.  When we remind our young readers that the
thermometer in England seldom falls so low as zero, except in what we
term weather of the utmost severity, they may imagine--or, rather, they
may try to imagine--what 75 degrees _below_ zero must have been.

It was not quite so cold as that upon this occasion, otherwise the men
could not have shown face to it.

"Let's have leap-frog," shouted Davie; "we can jump along as well as
walk along.  Hooray! _hup_!"

The "hup" was rather an exclamation of necessity than of delight
inasmuch as that it was caused by Davie coming suddenly down flat on the
ice in the act of vainly attempting to go leap-frog over Mivins's head.

"That's your sort," cried Amos Parr; "down with you, Buzzby."

Buzzby obeyed, and Amos, being heavy and past the agile time of life,
leaped upon, instead of over, his back, and there stuck.

"Not so high, lads," cried Captain Guy.  "Come, Mr Saunders, give us a
back."

"Faix, he'd better go on his hands an' knees."

"That's it! over you go; hurrah, lads!"

In five minutes nearly the whole crew were panting from their violent
exertions, and those who did not, or could not, join, panted as much
from laughter.  The desired result, however, was speedily gained.  They
were all soon in a glow of heat, and bade defiance to the frost.

An hour's sharp climb brought the party almost to the brow of the hill,
from which they hoped to see the sun rise for the first time for nearly
five months.  Just as they were about to pass over a ridge in the
cliffs, Captain Guy, who had pushed on in advance with Tom Singleton,
was observed to pause abruptly and make signals for the men to advance
with caution.  He evidently saw something unusual, for he crouched
behind a rock and peeped over it.  Hastening up as silently as possible,
they discovered that a group of Polar bears were amusing themselves on
the other side of the cliffs, within long gunshot.  Unfortunately not
one of the party had brought firearms.  Intent only on catching a sight
of the sun, they had hurried off, unmindful of the possibility of their
catching sight of anything else.  They had not even a spear, and the few
oak cudgels that some carried, however effectual they might have proved
at Donnybrook, were utterly worthless there.

There were four large bears and a young one, and the gambols they
performed were of the most startling as well as amusing kind.  But that
which interested and surprised the crew most was the fact that these
bears were playing with barrels, and casks, and tent-poles, and sails!
They were engaged in a regular frolic with these articles, tossing them
up in the air, pawing them about, and leaping over them like kittens.
In these movements they displayed their enormous strength several times.
Their leaps, although performed with the utmost ease, were so great as
to prove the iron nature of their muscles.  They tossed the heavy casks,
too, high in the air like tennis-balls; and in two instances, while the
crew were watching them, dashed a cask in pieces with a slight blow of
their paws.  The tough canvas yielded before them like sheets of paper,
and the havoc they committed was wonderful to behold.

"Most extraordinary!" exclaimed Captain Guy, after watching them for
some time in silence.  "I cannot imagine where these creatures can have
got hold of such things.  Were not the goods at Store Island all right
this morning, Mr Bolton?"

"Yes, sir, they were."

"Nothing missing from the ship!"

"No, sir, nothing."

"It's most unaccountable."

"Captain Guy," said O'Riley, addressing his commander with a solemn
face, "haven't ye more nor wance towld me the queer thing in the deserts
they calls the _mirage_?"

"I have," answered the captain with a puzzled look.

"An' didn't ye say there was something like it in the Polar seas, that
made ye see flags, an' ships, an' things o' that sort when there was no
sich things there at all?"

"True, O'Riley, I did."

"Faix, then, it's my opinion that yon bears is a mirage, an' the sooner
we git out o' their way the better."

A smothered laugh greeted this solution of the difficulty.

"I think I can give a better explanation--begging your pardon, O'Riley,"
said Captain Ellice, who had hitherto looked on with a sly smile.  "More
than a year ago, when I was driven past this place to the northward, I
took advantage of a calm to land a supply of food, and a few stores and
medicines, to be a stand-by in case my ship should be wrecked to the
northward.  Ever since the wreck actually took place I have looked
forward to this _cache_ of provisions as a point of refuge on my way
south.  As I have already told you, I have never been able to commence
the southward journey, and now I don't require these things, which is
lucky, for the bears seem to have appropriated them entirely."

"Had I known of them sooner, Captain," said Captain Guy, "the bears
should not have had a chance."

"That accounts for the supply of tobacco and sticking-plaster we found
in the bear's stomach," remarked Fred, laughing.

"True, boy, yet it surprises me that they succeeded in breaking into my
_cache_, for it was made of heavy masses of stone, many of which
required two and three men to lift them, even with the aid of
handspikes."

"What's wrong with O'Riley?" said Fred, pointing to that eccentric
individual, who was gazing intently at the bears, muttering between his
teeth, and clenching his cudgel nervously.

"Shure, it's a cryin' shame," he soliloquised in an undertone, quite
unconscious that he was observed, "that ye should escape, ye villains;
av' I only had a musket now--but I han't.  Arrah, av' it was only a
spear!  Be the mortial!  I think I could crack the skull o' the small
wan!  Faix, then; I'll try!"

At the last word, before anyone was aware of his intentions, this son of
Erin, whose blood was now up, sprang down the cliffs towards the bears,
flourishing his stick, and shouting wildly as he went.  The bears
instantly paused in their game, but showed no disposition to retreat.

"Come back, you madman!" shouted the captain; but the captain shouted in
vain.

"Stop! halt! come back!" chorused the crew.

But O'Riley was deaf; he had advanced to within a few yards of the
bears, and was rushing forward to make a vigorous attack on the little
one.

"He'll be killed!" exclaimed Fred in dismay.

"Follow me, men," shouted the captain, as he leaped the ridge; "make all
the noise you can."

In a moment the surrounding cliffs were reverberating with the loud
halloos and frantic yells of the men, as they burst suddenly over the
ridge, and poured down upon the bears like a torrent of maniacs!

Bold though they were they couldn't stand this.  They turned tail and
fled, followed by the disappointed howls of O'Riley, and also by his
cudgel, which he hurled violently after them as he pulled up.

Having thus triumphantly put the enemy to flight the party continued
their ascent of the hill and soon gained the summit.

"There it is!" shouted Fred, who, in company with Mivins, first crossed
the ridge and tossed his arms in the air.

The men cheered loudly as they hurried up, and one by one emerged into a
red glow of sunshine.  It could not be termed _warm_, for it had no
power in that frosty atmosphere, and only a small portion of the sun's
disc was visible.  But his _light_ was on every crag and peak around;
and as the men sat down in groups, and, as it were, bathed in the
sunshine, winking at the bright gleam of light with half-closed eyes,
they declared that it _felt_ warm, and wouldn't hear anything to the
contrary, although Saunders, true to his nature, endeavoured to prove to
them that the infinitely small degree of heat imparted by such feeble
rays could not by any possibility be _felt_ except in imagination.  But
Saunders was outvoted.  Indeed, under the circumstances, he had not a
chance of proving his point; for the more warm the dispute became the
greater was the amount of animal heat that was created, to be placed,
falsely, to the credit of the sun.

Patience, however, is a virtue which is sure to meet with a reward.  The
point which Saunders failed to prove by argument was pretty well proved
to everyone (though not admitted) by the agency of John Frost.  That
remarkably bitter individual nestled round the men as they sat sunning
themselves, and soon compelled them to leap up and apply to other
sources for heat.  They danced about vigorously, and again took to
leap-frog.  Then they tried their powers at the old familiar games of
home.  Hop-step-and-jump raised the animal thermometer considerably; and
the standing leap, running leap, and high leap sent it up many degrees.
But a general race brought them almost to a summer temperature, and at
the same time, most unexpectedly, secured to them a hare.  This little
creature, of which very few had yet been procured, darted in an evil
hour out from behind a rock right in front of the men, who having begun
the race for sport now continued it energetically for profit.  A dozen
sticks were hurled at the luckless hare, and one of these felled it to
the ground.

After this they returned home in triumph, keeping up all the way an
animated dispute as to the amount of heat shed upon them by the sun, and
upon that knotty question:

"Who killed the hare?"

Neither point was settled when they reached the _Dolphin_, and, we may
add, for the sake of the curious reader, neither point is settled yet.


CHAPTER TWENTY TWO.

"THE ARCTIC SUN"--RATS!  RATS!  RATS!--A HUNTING-PARTY--OUT ON THE
FLOES--HARDSHIPS.

Among the many schemes that were planned and carried out for lightening
the long hours of confinement to their wooden home in the Arctic
regions, was the newspaper started by Fred Ellice, and named, as we have
already mentioned, _The Arctic Sun_.

It was so named because, as Fred stated in his first leading article, it
was intended to throw light on many things at a time when there was no
other sun to cheer them.  We cannot help regretting that it is not in
our power to present a copy of this well-thumbed periodical to our
readers; but being of opinion that _something_ is better than _nothing_,
we transcribe the following extract as a specimen of the contributions
from the forecastle.  It was entitled--

"John Buzzby's Oppinyuns o' Things in Gin'ral."

"Mr Editer,--As you was so good as to ax from me a contribootion to
your waluable peeryoddical, I beg heer to stait that this heer article
is intended as a gin'ral summery o' the noos wots agoin'.  Your reeders
will be glad to no that of late the wether's bin gittin' colder, but
they'll be better pleased to no that before the middle o' nixt sumer
it's likely to git a long chawk warmer.  There's a gin'ral complaint
heer that Mivins has bin eatin' the shuger in the pantry, an' that's
wot's makin' it needfull to put us on short allowance.  Davie Summers
sais he seed him at it, and it's a dooty the guvermint owes to the
publik to have the matter investigated.  It's gin'rally expected,
howsever, that the guvermint won't trubble its hed with the matter.
There's bin an onusual swarmin' o' rats in the ship of late, an' Davie
Summers has had a riglar hunt after them.  The lad has becum more than
ornar expert with his bow an' arrow, for he niver misses now--exceptin'
always, when he dusn't hit--an' for the most part takes them on the pint
on the snowt with his blunt-heded arow, which he drives in--the snowt,
not the arow.  There's a gin'ral wish among the crew to no whether the
north pole _is_ a pole or a dot.  Mizzle sais it's a dot and O'Riley
swears (no, he don't do that, for we've gin up swearin' in the
fog-sail); but he sais that it's a real post 'bout as thick again as the
main-mast, an' nine or ten times as hy.  Grim sais it's nother wun thing
nor anuther, but a hydeear that _is_ sumhow or other a fact, but yit
don't exist at all.  Tom Green wants to no if there's any conexshun
between it an' the pole that's connected with elections.  In fact, we're
all at sea, in a riglar muz abut this, an' as Dr Singleton's a
syentiffick man, praps he'll give us a leadin' article in your nixt--so
no more at present from--

"Yours to command, John Buzzby."

This contribution was accompanied with an outline illustration of Mivins
eating sugar with a ladle in the pantry, and Davie Summers peeping in at
the door--both likenesses being excellent.

Some of the articles in the _Arctic Sun_ were grave, and some were gay,
but all of them were profitable, for Fred took care that they should be
charged either with matter of interest or matter provocative of mirth.
And, assuredly, no newspaper of similar calibre was ever looked forward
to with such expectation, or read and reread with such avidity.  It was
one of the expedients that lasted longest in keeping up the spirits of
the men.

The rat-hunting referred to in the foregoing "summery" was not a mere
fiction of Buzzby's brain.  It was a veritable fact.  Notwithstanding
the extreme cold of this inhospitable climate, the rats in the ship
increased to such a degree that at last they became a perfect nuisance.
Nothing was safe from their attacks; whether substances were edible or
not, they were gnawed through and ruined, and their impudence, which
seemed to increase with their numbers, at last exceeded all belief.
They swarmed everywhere--under the stove, about the beds, in the
lockers, between the sofa-cushions, amongst the moss round the walls,
and inside the boots and mittens (when empty) of the men.  And they
became so accustomed to having missiles thrown at them that they
acquired to perfection that art which Buzzby described as "keeping one's
weather-eye open."

XXIII, pp. 55 ff).]
[*** About this latitude, between 32° and 33° S. Lat., also De Houtman
and Dedel estimated themselves to be, when they first came upon land.
They afterwards ran on on a northerly course.]
[**** See the documents sub No. XII (p. 17).]
[***** See No. XVI (p. 50) below, and the highly curious charts Nos.
Nos.
16 and 17.]
So much for the highly interesting chart of Hessel Gerritsz of the
year 1627.

If we compare with it the revised edition of the 1618 chart, we are
struck by the increase of our forefathers' knowledge of the south-west
coast. This revised edition gives the entire coast-line down to the
islands of St. François and St. Pieter (133° 30' E. Long. Greenwich),
still figuring in the maps of our day: the Land of Pieter Nuyts, discovered
by the ship het Gulden Zeepaard in 1627 [*].

[* See No. XVIII (p. 51) below.]
North of Willemsrivier, this so-called 1618 chart has still another addition,
_viz_. G. F. De Witsland, discovered in 1628 by the ship Vianen
commanded by G. F. De Witt [*]. In this case, too, it is difficult to
determine exactly the longitudes between which the coast-line thus
designated is situated. [**] But with great distinctness the chart exhibits
the chain of islands of which the Monte Bello and tha Barrow islands
are the principal, and besides, certain islands of the Dampier
Archipelago, afterwards so called after the celebrated English
navigator.
I would have these observations looked upon as hints towards the more
accurate determination of the site of this De Wit's land, and they
may be of the more value since the small scale of the chart renders an
exact determination of it exceedingly difficult.

[* See No. XXI (p. 54) below.]
[** See, however, No. XXI., C.

_infra_.]
In Gerritsz's chart of 1627, as well as in the so-called 1618 one, we
are struck by the fact, that on the west-coast the coast-line shows
breaks in various places: De Witt's land is not connected with the
coast of Willems-rivier; the coast-line of Eendrachtsland does not
run on; there is uncertainty as regards what is now called Shark-bay;
the coast facing Houtmans Abrolhos is a conjectural one only; the
coast-line facing Tortelduyf is even altogether wanting; Dedelsland
and 't Land van de Leeuwin are not marked by unbroken lines.

This fragmentary knowledge sufficiently accounts for the fact, that
about the middle of the seventeenth century navigators were constantly
faced by the problem of the real character of the South-land: was
it one vast continent or a complex of islands?

And the question would not have been so repeatedly asked, if the line
of the west-coast had been more accurately known.

{Page xii}

Tasman and Visscher [*] did a great deal towards the solution of this
problem, since in their voyage of 1644 they also skirted and mapped
out the entire line of the West-coast of what since 1644 has borne
the name of Nieuw-Nederland, Nova Hollandia, or New Holland, from
Bathurst Island to a point south of the Tropic of Capricorn.

In this case also certain mistakes were committed: they failed, for
instance, to recognise the real character of Bathurst Island,
which, like Melville Island, they looked upon as forming part of
the mainland; but if we make due allowance for the imperfection of
their means of observation, we are bound to say that the coast-line
has by them been mapped out with remarkable accuracy [**].
[* I pass by certain other exploratory voyages on the westcoast
(see e.g.

No. XXIV. _infra_, etc.).]
[** Cf.

Tasman's chart of 1644 in the Tasman Folio.]
About fifteen years after the west-coast was more accurately mapped
out also, to the south of the tropic of Capricorn.

In the year 1658 Samuel Volekersen with the ship de Wakende Boei
[Floating Buoy], and Aucke Pieters Jonck with the ship Emeloord
surveyed a portion of the west-coast, and the charts then made have
been preserved [*].

The coast-line from a point near the Tortelduyf down to past Rottenest
(the large island on which Volkertsen did not confer a name, preferring
to "leave the naming to the pleasure of the Hon.

Lord Governor-General") and the present Perth, were surveyed with special
care. In the same year the ship Elburg, commanded by Jacob Peereboom,
brought in further reports about the Land van de Leeuwin, where
she had been at anchor "in Lat. 33°
14' South, under a projecting point" (in Geographe Bay?).

[* See _infra_ No. XXIX., pp. 75 ff., and the charts sub No. XXIX. E, F
and I.]

The surveying of the lines of the west-coast was finally brought
to a close by the exploratory voyage of Willem De Vlamingh in 1696-7
with the ships Geelvink, Nijptang, and het Wezeltje. A remarkable
chart referring to this voyage, here reproduced [*], as well as
the ISAAC DE GRAAFF chart [**] of _circa_ 1700, give an excellent
survey of the expedition.

The whole coast-line from the so-called Willemsrivier (N.W. Cape) to a
point south of Rottenest, Garden-island and Perth, was now mapped
out.

And that, too, with great accuracy. Thus, for instance, the true situation
of the belt of islands enclosing Shark Bay was this time observed
with unerring exactitude, and Shark Bay itself actually discovered,
though its discovery is usually credited to Dampier (August,
1699).

[* No. 13.] 
[* No. 14.]

VI.

THE NETHERLANDERS TO EASTWARD OF PIETER NUYTS-LAND.

The south-east- and east-coasts of Australia have never been visited by
the ships of the East India Company. Tasman and Visscher [*] discovered
Tasmania (Van Diemen's land) in 1642, but were unaware of the existence
of what is now known as Bass Strait; they discovered the west-coast
of New Zealand (Staten-land) and certain island-groups east of Australia,
but did not touch at or sight the east-coast of Australia.

Of course, after the discovery of the west-coast of New Zealand and of the
island-groups east of Australia [**], the existence of an east-coast
of Australia to westward of the regions thus discovered, was an
indubitable fact, but this east-coast itself was never visited by
the Netherlanders.
[* See the journal of this voyage and the discussion of it in my
Tasman Folio.] 
[** In the year 1616 Lemaire and Schouten (No.

V), and in 1722 Roggeveen (No. XXXIV), also touched at various island-groups
east of Australia, but these voyages fall outside the plan of the
present work.]

{Page xiii}
VII.

OBJECT OF THE DUTCH VOYAGES FOR THE DISCOVERY OF THE
SOUTH-LAND.--CONCLUSION.

Although it is quite true that the south-east- and east-coasts of the
Australian continent were not discovered by Dutch ships, still it is
an undoubted fact that, so far as is known up to now, the whole of the
Australian coast-line from Prince of Wales Island and York Peninsula
and along the Gulf of Carpentaria, the north- and north-west-coast
of Australia then following, the whole of the west-coast, and the south-coast
down to the islands of St. François and St. Pieter (133° 30' E. L.
Greenwich) were in the 17th century discovered by vessels belonging to
the Netherlands [*].

[* It is true that Dampier touched at the north-west coast in 1688,
but at that time this coast had already been surveyed by Dutch
skippers.]
We now come to the question of the object which the Dutch authorities
had in view in arranging for the expeditions that ultimately led to
these discoveries.

In answering this question we shall have to distinguish between
two different categories of voyages: among the voyages undertaken
by Netherlanders that have led to discoveries on the coasts of
Australia, there are some which were not begun with the express
purpose of going in search of unknown lands; but there are others
also that were undertaken expressly with this end in view.

Of course the second class only can be called exploratory expeditions in
a more restricted sense--the voyages of the first category became
voyages of discovery through accidental circumstances.

The discoveries on the west- and south-west coasts of Australia down to
Tasman's time all bore an accidental character. Eendrachtsland
was discovered by accident in the year 1616, and after that time a number
of Dutch ships unexpectedly touched at those shores, thus continually
shedding additional, though always imperfect light on the question
of the conformation of the coast-line.

How was it, we may ask, that it was especially after 1616 that this coast
was so often touched at, whereas there had never been question of
this before that time? The question thus put admits of avery positive
answer.

When the Netherlanders set sail for India for the first time, they
naturally took the route which they knew to be followed by the Portuguese.
After doubling the Cape of Good Hope, they directly continued their
voyage on a north-eastern course, along the west-coast, or close by
the east-coast, of Madagascar, and then tried to reach India coming from
the west. To this route there were grave objections both as regards the
winds prevailing in those latitudes, the intense heat soon encountered,
the great number of "shallows or foul islands," etc.

Besides, the voyage was apt to last very long.

In 1611, however, certain ships going from the Netherlands to India
followed another route: directly after leaving the Cape they ran
on an eastern course (in about 36° S.

Lat.) for a considerable time, after which they tried to navigate to Java
on a northerly course. The commander of these ships, the subsequent
Governor-General {Page xiv} Hendrik Brouwer, wrote to the Managers of
the E.I.C. about "this fairway" in highly laudatory terms.

They adopted the idea suggested by Brouwer, of henceforth prescribing
this route in the instructions for the commanders and skippers sailing
for the Indies, leaving them a certain scope certainly as regards
the latitude in which the said easterly course was to be followed,
and the degree of longitude up to which it was to be kept.

As early as the beginning of 1613 such a route was enjoined on the ships'
captains by the Managers of the E.I.C.
The ship Eendracht also was directed to follow this course: she ran so
far to eastward as to come upon the west-coast of Australia, and
the same thing happened to subsequent vessels.

Although in the sense thus indicated we must here speak of _acczdental_
discoveries on the west-coast, yet the Dutch authorities were fully
aware of the importance of such discoveries.

As early as 1618, the Managers of the E.I.C. were considering the possibility
of "discovering the Southern Lands in passing," and in a letter
of September 9, 1620, with reference to "the discovery of a vast
land, situated south of Java...by the ship Eendracht", etc., they
expressly enjoined the G.

-G. and Counc. to dispatch a ship for the purpose of "resuming this
work with some hope of success." The lands discovered were to be mapped
out, and efforts made to ascertain "the situation and condition of
the country, its productions, what commodities it yields, the
character of the natives, their mode of life, etc."

The Managers had not preached to deaf ears: the direction of the Company's
affairs in India was at that time in the hands of Jan Pieternoon Coen,
who, being himself strongly disposed in favour of extending the
Dutch connections with the East [*], eagerly embraced the idea thus
suggested, as is proved by the instructions, dated September 29,
1622, for the ships Haring and Hazewind, "destined for the discovery
of the South-land". [**] Thus we see that one of the projects
contemplated by the Dutch authorities certainly was the dispatching
of ships also to the west-coast of Australia for the purpose of
further discovery and of definitely ascertaining the real state of
affairs there.

[* See below.] 
[** See below, No.

XIII, B (pp. 18 ff.)]

But not for the purpose of further discovery exclusively, although this
continued to be "the principal end in view." The instructions of September
29, 1622, also point to other motives that led the Netherlanders
to reckon also with regions to be first discovered, in carrying out
their colonial policy.

The commanders of this expedition were "specially to inquire what
minerals, such as gold, silver, tin, iron, lead and copper, what precious
stones, pearls, vegetables, animals and fruits, these lands yield and
produce";--the commercial interests of the E.I.C.--and what was more
natural in the case of a trading corporation?

--were to take a foremost place. Wherever possible, also political
connections were to be formed, and the countries discovered "to
be taken possession of".

The authorities were even considering the idea of at some future date
"planting colonies" in some of the regions eventually to be
discovered.

Here we have the colonial policy of the E.I.C. of the period to its
full extent: commerce, increase of territory, colonies.

And these ideas were at the bottom of most of the voyages of discovery
to the north-coast of Australia before Tasman, and of Tasman's
voyages themselves.

The celebrated voyage of the ship Duifken (1605-6) {Page xv} bears
a character of intentionality, and if we bear in mind that the same
ship's voyage of 1602 had for its professed object the extension
of the Company's mercantile connections, we need not be in doubt
as to this being equally the motive or one of the motives of the
expedition on which she was dispatched in 1605-6.

We know, moreover, that New Guinea was then reported "to yield abundance
of gold."

The three principles of colonial policy just mentioned also underlay
the voyage undertaken by Jan Carstensz in 1623; for we know that this
commander got the instructions drawn up for the ships Haring and Hazewind,
but not then carried into effect, since these ships did not sail
on their ordained expedition [*].

These principles are found set forth with more amplitude than anywhere
else in the instructions drawn up for Tasman and his coadjutors in 1642
and 1644 [**]. The voyages, then planned, were to be undertaken "for
the enlargement, increase and improvement of the Dutch East India
Company's standing and commerce in the East."

[* See below, p. 21, Note 1.]
[** See these instructions in my Life of Tasman, pp. 131 ff. and 147 ff.]

In the instructions for Tasman's voyage of 1644 the G.-G. and Counc., who
drew them up, could still refer to "the express commands of the 'Heeren
Maijoores" [*] to "attempt the discovery of Nova Guinea and other
unknown Eastern and Southern lands."

And it is a fact certainly, that in the first half of the seventeenth
century the Governors-General who planned these exploratory voyages were
in their endeavours supported by the Managers of the E.I.C. in the
mother country [**]: it was especially Jan Pieterszoon Coen (1619-1623
and 1627-1629), Hendrik Broulwer (1632-1636) and Antonio van Diemen
(1636-1645), who were most efficiently backed in their efforts for
this purpose by their principals at home.
Among these Governors-General Van Diemen holds the foremost place as
regards the furtherance of discoveries by Netherlanders in the Far
East:
in the Pacific and on, "the mainland coasts of Australia."

It is, with complete justice, therefore, that a foreign author mentions
the name of Van Diemen as "a name which will ever rank among the
greatest promotors of maritime discovery".[***]
[* Meaning the Managers of the E.I.C.]
[** See also the instructions for the voyage of 1636, p. 64 _infra_.]
[*** BURNEY, Chronological History, III, p. 55.

Speaking of Van Diemen, we must not omit to call the reader's attention
to sentiments such as the following: "Whoever endeavours to discover
unknown lands and tribes, had need to be patient and long-suffering,
noways quick to fly out, but always bent on ingratiating himself"
(p. 65 _infra_), a piece of advice elsewhere taking the form of a
command, e.g. p. 66: "You will not carry off with you any natives
against their will".

And, sad to say, such injunctions were often imperiously necessary!]
And this same eminent manager of the Company's interests in India
lived to see at the end of his official career far narrower views
about colonial policy not only take root in the mother-country
(where isolated opinions that way had found utterance long before),
but even get the upper hand in the Company's councils.

Van Diemen's policy came ultimately to be condemned in the Netherlands,
whatever homage might there be paid to his eminent talents, whatever
acknowledgment vouchsafed to his great merits!

It may almost be called a matter of course that great differences of
opinions were bound surely, if slowly, to crop up between the
Managers on one hand, and able Governors-General on the other, touching
the line of conduct to be followed by the Netherlanders in the East.
The Managers were in the first place the directors of a trading
company: they hardly looked beyond the requirements of a purely
mercantile policy.

Eminent Governors-General on the contrary were conscious {Page xvi}
of being more than this: they were not only the representatives
of a body of merchants, they were also the rulers of a colonial
empire which in the East was looked up to with dread, with hatred
also sometimes, to be sure, but at the same time with respect and
awe!

There lay the ultimate cause of the fundamental difference of opinion
respecting the colonial policy to be followed [*]. Van Diemen dreamt
a bold dream of Dutch supremacy in the East and of the East India Company's
mastery "of the opulent Indian trade." To this end he deemed necessary:
"harassing of the enemy [**], continuation and extension of trade, together
with the discovering or new lands." But if he had lived to read the
missive [***], his grand projects would have received an effectual
damper as he perused the letter addressed to him by the Lords
Managers, on September 9, 1645, and containing the passage following:
"[We] see that Your Worships have again taken up the further
exploration of the coast of Nova Guinea in hopes of discovering
silver- and gold-mines there.

The floes,
too, were so rugged that they had frequently to lift the heavy sledge
and its living load over deep rents and chasms which, in circumstances
less desperate, they would have scarcely ventured to do.  Work as they
would, however, they could not make more than a mile an hour, and night
overtook them ere they reached the level floes.  But it was of the
utmost importance that they should continue to advance, so they pushed
forward until a breeze sprang up that pierced them through and through.

Fortunately there was a bright moon in the sky, which enabled them to
pick their way among the hummocks.  Suddenly, without warning, the whole
party felt an alarming failure of their energies.  Captain Guy, who was
aware of the imminent danger of giving way to this feeling, cheered the
men to greater exertion by word and voice, but failed to rouse them.
They seemed like men walking in their sleep.

"Come, Saunders, cheer up, man," cried the captain, shaking the mate by
the arm; but Saunders stood still, swaying to and fro like a drunken
man.  Mizzle begged to be allowed to sleep, if it were only for two
minutes, and poor Davie Summers deliberately threw himself down on the
snow, from which, had he been left, he would never more have risen.

The case was now desperate.  In vain the captain shook and buffeted the
men.  They protested that they did not feel cold--"they were quite warm,
and only wanted a little sleep."  He saw that it was useless to contend
with them, so there was nothing left for it but to pitch the tent.

This was done as quickly as possible, though with much difficulty, and
the men were unlashed from the sledge and placed within it.  The others
then crowded in, and, falling down beside each other, were asleep in an
instant.  The excessive crowding of the little tent was an advantage at
this time, as it tended to increase their animal heat.  Captain Guy
allowed them to sleep only two hours, and then roused them in order to
continue the journey; but short though the period of rest was, it proved
sufficient to enable the men to pursue their journey with some degree of
spirit.  Still, it was evident that their energies had been overtaxed,
for when they neared the ship next day, Tom Singleton, who had been on
the lookout, and advanced to meet them, found that they were almost in a
state of stupor, and talked incoherently; sometimes giving utterance to
sentiments of the most absurd nature, with expressions of the utmost
gravity.

Meanwhile good news was brought them from the ship.  Two bears and a
walrus had been purchased from the Esquimaux, a party of whom--sleek,
fat, oily, good-humoured, and hairy--were encamped on the lee side of
the _Dolphin_, and busily engaged in their principal and favourite
occupation--eating!


CHAPTER TWENTY FOUR.

WINTER ENDS--THE FIRST INSECT--PREPARATIONS FOR DEPARTURE--NARROW
ESCAPE--CUTTING OUT--ONCE MORE AFLOAT--SHIP ON FIRE--CREW TAKE TO THE
BOATS.

Winter passed away, with its darkness and its frost, and, happily, with
its sorrows; and summer--bright, glowing summer--came at last to gladden
the heart of man and beast in the Polar regions.

We have purposely omitted to make mention of spring, for there is no
such season, properly so called, within the Arctic Circle.  Winter
usually terminates with a gushing thaw, and summer then begins with a
blaze of fervent heat.  Not that the heat is really so intense as
compared with that of southern climes, but the contrast is so great that
it _seems_ as though the torrid zones had rushed towards the Pole.

About the beginning of June there were indications of the coming heat.
Fresh water began to trickle from the rocks, and streamlets commenced to
run down the icebergs.  Soon everything became moist, and a marked
change took place in the appearance of the ice-belt, owing to the pools
that collected on it everywhere and overflowed.

Seals now became more numerous in the neighbourhood, and were frequently
killed near the _atluks_, or holes; so that fresh meat was secured in
abundance, and the scurvy received a decided check.  Reindeer, rabbits,
and ptarmigan, too, began to frequent the bay, so that the larder was
constantly full, and the mess-table presented a pleasing variety--rats
being no longer the solitary dish of fresh meat at every meal.  A few
small birds made their appearance from the southward, and these were
hailed as harbingers of the coming summer.

One day O'Riley sat on the taffrail, basking in the warm sun, and
drinking in health and gladness from its beams.  He had been ill, and
was now convalescent.  Buzzby stood beside him.

"I've bin thinkin'," said Buzzby, "that we don't half know the blessin's
that are given to us in this here world till we've had 'em taken away.
Look, now, how we're enjoyin' the sun an' the heat just as if it wos so
much gold!"

"Goold!" echoed O'Riley in a tone of contempt; "faix, I niver thought so
little o' goold before, let me tell ye.  A red-capped trooper sprang down
jingling from one of the horses, and was joined by two others who
had followed the ambulance and who also dismounted.

Then the three approached a group of policemen who were lifting
something from the pavement.

At the same moment he heard voices beside him, and turning, found
that the girl had risen and was sitting on the campstool, her head
leaning against the little stranger's shoulder.

An officer stood looking down at her. His boots were spotless. The band
of purple on his red and gold cap showed that he was a surgeon.

"Can we be of any assistance to madame?" he inquired.

"I was looking for a cab," said Gethryn, "but perhaps she is not strong
enough to be taken to her home."
A frightened look came into the girl's face and she glanced anxiously
at the ambulance.

The surgeon knelt quietly beside her.

"Madame is not seriously hurt," he said, after a rapid examination.
"The right arm is a little strained, but it will be nothing, I
assure you, Madame; a matter of a few days, that is all."

He rose and stood brushing the knees of his trousers with his handkerchief.
"Monsieur is a foreigner?"

Gethryn smiled. "The accent?"

"On the contrary, I assure you, Monsieur," cried the officer with more
politeness than truth. He eyed the ambulance. "The people of Paris have
learned a lesson today," he said.

A trooper clattered up, leading an officer's horse, and dismounted,
saluting. The young surgeon glanced at his watch.

"Picard," he said, "stop a closed cab and send it here."

The trooper wheeled his horse and galloped away across the square,
and the officer turned to the others.

"Madame, I trust, will soon recover," he said courteously.
"Madame, messieurs, I have the honor to salute you."

And with many a clink and jingle, he sprang into the saddle and clattered
away in the wake of the slowly moving ambulance.

At the corner of the Rue Royale, Gethryn saw the trooper stop a cab
and point to the Obelisk. He went over and asked the canary-colored
stranger, "Will you take her home, or shall I?"

"Why, you, of course; you brought her here."
"No, I didn't. I never saw her until I noticed her being pushed about by
the crowd." He caught the girl's eye and colored furiously, hoping she
did not suspect the nature of their discussion.

Before her helplessness it seemed so brutal.

The cab drew up before the Obelisk and a gruff voice cried, "V'la!
M'ssieurs! -- 'dames!"
"Put your arm on my shoulder -- so," said Gethryn, and the two men
raised her gently.

Once in the cab, she sank back, looking limp and white. Gethryn turned
sharply to the other man.

"Shall I go?"
"Rather," replied the little stranger, pleasantly.

Opening his coat in haste, he produced a square of pasteboard. "My
card," he said, offering one to Gethryn, who bowed and fumbled in
his pockets.

As usual, his card-case was in another coat.

"I'm sorry I have none," he said at length, "but my name is Reginald
Gethryn, and I shall give myself the pleasure of calling to thank you
for -- "

"For nothing," laughed the other, "excepting for the sketch, which you
may have when you come to see me."
"Thanks, and au revoir," glancing at the card.

"Au revoir, Mr Bulfinch."
He was giving the signal to the cabby when his new acquaintance stopped
him.

"You're quite sure -- you -- er -- don't know any newspapermen?"
"Quite."
"All right -- all right -- and -- er -- just don't mention about my
having a flask, if you do meet any of them. I -- er -- keep it for others.
I don't drink."
"Certainly not," began Gethryn, but Mr T. Hoppley Bulfinch had seized
his campstool and trotted away across the square.

Gethryn leaned into the cab.

"Will you give me your address?" he asked gently.

"Rue Monsieur le Prince -- 430 -- " she whispered. "Do you know where it
is?"
"Yes," said Gethryn. It was his own number.

"Rue Monsieur le Prince 430", he repeated to the driver, and stepping
in, softly shut the door.

Four
Rain was falling steadily. The sparrows huddled under the eaves,
or hopped disconsolately along the windowsills, uttering short,
ill-tempered chirps. The wind was rising, blowing in quick, sharp
gusts and sweeping the forest of rain spears, rank upon rank, in
mad dashes against the glass-roofed studio.
Gethryn, curled up in a corner of his sofa, listlessly watched the
showers of pink and white blossoms which whirled and eddied down
from the rocking chestnuts, falling into the windy court in little
heaps.
One or two stiff-legged flies crawled rheumatically along the window
glass, only to fall on their backs and lie there buzzing.
The two bull pups had silently watched the antics of these maudlin
creatures, but their interest changed to indignation when one sodden
insect attempted a final ascent and fell noisily upon the floor
under their very noses. Then they rose as one dog and leaped madly
upon the intruder, or meant to; but being pups, and uncertain in
their estimation of distances, they brought up with startled yelps
against the wall.Buzzby, Grim, and several others sprang to obey, but, before they could
let go the fall-tackles, the mass of ice rose suddenly high above the
deck, over which it projected several feet, and caught the boat.  In
another moment the timbers yielded; the thwarts sprang out or were
broken across, and slowly, yet forcibly, as a strong hand might crush an
egg-shell, the boat was squeezed flat against the ship's side.

"Shove, lads; if it comes on we're lost," cried the captain, seizing one
of the long poles with which the men were vainly straining every nerve
and muscle.  They might as well have tried to arrest the progress of a
berg.  On it came, and crushed in the starboard quarter bulwarks.
Providentially at that moment it grounded and remained fast; but the
projecting point that overhung them broke off and fell on the deck with
a crash that shook the good ship from stem to stern.  Several of the men
were thrown violently down, but none were seriously hurt in this
catastrophe.

When the storm ceased, the ice out in the strait was all in motion, and
that round the ship had loosened so much that it seemed as if the
_Dolphin_ might soon get out into open water and once more float upon
its natural element.  Every preparation, therefore, was made; the stores
were reshipped from Store Island; the sails were shaken out, and those
of them that had been taken down were bent on to the yards.  Tackle was
overhauled, and, in short, everything was done that was possible under
the circumstances.  But a week passed away ere they succeeded in finally
warping out of the bay into the open sea beyond.

It was a lovely morning when this happy event was accomplished.  At
daybreak the wind was S.E...we set sail from Taranga...shaping our
course to the S.S.W.

We could take no latitude at noon...

In the first watch we sailed S.S.W. the space of about 3 glasses; the wind
was S.E. with a fair breeze, and afterwards E.S.E.; we sailed to
southward for the time of 12 glasses; at the beginning of the day-watch
the wind was E.N.E. with a fresh breeze; we sailed S.E. for about eight
glasses...

On Tuesday the 10th do. In the morning about breakfast-time the wind
blew from the E.N.E. as before...

We estimated ourselves to have sailed 9½ miles on a generally Southern
course from last night to the present night.

On Wednesday the 11th do.

Course held S.S.E...We had sailed on a Southern and S. by E. course
about 11 miles by estimation during the last 24 hours...

On Thursday the 12th do. The wind E.S.E. as before...At noon we were
in Lat. 10° 2', so that I find we are farther to southward as would
accord with our estimation and our courses kept, on which account
I believe the current must have driven us a good deal to S.S.E..

In the afternoon the sky was overcast, the wind E.S.E. and S.E. by E.
with a light breeze; we sailed to S. by W. with our mainsails set.
Towards the evening the water became all of a sudden very smooth and
of a pale colour; after sunset we cast the lead in 40 fathom good
anchoring ground, fine sand, but could see no land: we took in our
foresail and sailed in the night with the mainsail only to avoid
press of sail.

We estimated ourselves to have sailed about 12 miles on a general S.W.
by S. course during the last 24 hours. In the night the wind was E. by
S., E.S.E. and S.E. by E. with fine, lovely, clear weather and a top-gallant
gale; throughout the night our average course was S., we cast the lead
now and then in 42, 39, 38, 36 and 25 fathom good anchoring-ground.

On Friday the 13th do., the wind was nearly S.E., with a top-gallant
gale and smooth water; course S.S.W. and S. by W.; the water was
very pale in colour, but we could see no land; the weather was
lovely and clear; at noon we found ourselves to be in 10° 50' S.L.

Shortly after noon we cast the lead in 32 fathom good anchoring-ground;
at four glasses in the afternoon we saw the land S.E. by S. of us, at
about 6 miles' distance from us it was a low-lying coast with small
hills; about 6 miles farther to westward we also saw land, not connected
with the first land, but upwards of three miles distant from
the same.

Towards the evening it fell a calm; at sunset there was a faint breeze
from the S.S.E.; we made out the extremity of the land to be at
about 3 miles' distance S.E. by S. of us; we were still in 32 fathom
good anchoring-ground; we accordingly went over to eastward, but
when shortly before the setting of the watch, the wind went down
still more and began to turn to the N.W., we dropped anchor in 29
fathom good anchoring-ground.

{Page 69}
On Saturday the 14th do. the current began to set to the S.E. in the
morning, and the wind to blow hard from the E.S.E., so that we could not
carry mainsails then; we weighed anchor and set sail on a South and
South-by-east course.

The water gradually shallowed, and seeing that we could not make the
easternmost land, we ran to the westernmost, where we came to
anchor at about a musket-shot's distance from the land in 10 fathom
good anchoring-ground.

Close along the shore the land is somewhat rock and reefy here; this
land extends here about 3 miles S.E. by S. and N.W. by N., both slightly
more to South and North.

In the afternoon we sent out our small boat to take soundings close
inshore; on returning the men reported that until they came to the reefs
they had found no less than 3½ fathom good anchoring-ground. Off the
point near which we lay at anchor, a river ran landinward; we hoisted
the white flag, and caused the little boat to paddle close along the
shore. We saw smoke, indeed, in many parts of the inland, but no
natives, houses or vessels.Suddenly a long tongue of flame issued from the smoking
cavern, and lapped round the mast and rigging with greedy eagerness.

"There's no hope," said Captain Ellice in a low voice, laying his hand
gently on Captain Guy's shoulder.

The captain did not reply, but gazed with an expression of the deepest
regret, for one moment, at the work of destruction.

Next instant he sprang to the falls of the larboard quarterboat.

"Now, lads," he cried energetically, "get out the boats.  Bring up
provisions, Mr Bolton, and a couple of spare sails.  Mr Saunders, see
to the ammunition and muskets.  Quick, men.  The cabin will soon be too
hot to hold you."

Setting the example, the captain sprang below, followed by Fred and Tom
Singleton, who secured the charts, a compass, chronometer, and quadrant;
also the log-book and the various journals and records of the voyage.
Captain Ellice also did active service, and, being cool and
self-possessed, he recollected and secured several articles which were
afterwards of the greatest use, and which, but for him, would in such a
trying moment have probably been forgotten.

Meanwhile the two largest boats in the ship were lowered.  Provisions,
masts, sails, and oars, etcetera, were thrown in.  The few remaining
dogs, among whom were Dumps and Poker, were also embarked, and the crew,
hastily leaping in, pushed off.  They were not a moment too soon.  The
fire had reached the place where the gunpowder was kept and, although
there was not a great quantity of it, there was enough, when it
exploded, to burst open the deck.  The wind, having free ingress, fanned
the fire into a furious blaze, and in a few moments the _Dolphin_ was
wrapped in flames from stem to stern.  It was a little after sunset when
the fire was discovered; in two hours later the good ship was burned to
the water's edge; then the waves swept in, and, while they extinguished
the fire, they sank the blackened hull, leaving the two crowded boats
floating in darkness on the bosom of the ice-laden sea.


CHAPTER TWENTY FIVE.

ESCAPE TO UPPERNAVIK--LETTER FROM HOME--MEETUCK'S GRANDMOTHER--DUMPS AND
POKER AGAIN.

For three long weeks the shipwrecked mariners were buffeted by winds and
waves in open boats, but at last they were guided in safety through all
their dangers and vicissitudes to the colony of Uppernavik.  Here they
found several vessels on the point of setting out for Europe, one of
which was bound for England; and in this vessel the crew of the
_Dolphin_ resolved to ship.

Nothing of particular interest occurred at this solitary settlement
except _one_ thing, but that one thing was a great event, and deserves
very special notice.  It was nothing less than the receipt of a letter
by Fred from his cousin Isobel!  Fred and Isobel, having been brought up
for several years together, felt towards each other like brother and
sister.

Fred received the letter from the pastor of the settlement shortly after
landing, while his father and the captain were on board the English brig
making arrangements for their passage home.  He could scarcely believe
his eyes when he beheld the well-known hand, but, having at last come to
realise the fact that he actually held a real letter in his hand, he
darted behind one of the curious, primitive cottages to read it.  Here
he was met by a squad of inquisitive natives; so, with a gesture of
impatience, he rushed to another spot; but he was observed and followed
by half a dozen Esquimaux boys, and in despair he sought refuge in the
small church near which he chanced to be.  He had not been there a
second, however, when two old women came in, and, approaching him, began
to scan him with critical eyes.  This was too much, so Fred thrust the
letter into his bosom, darted out, and was instantly surrounded by a
band of natives, who began to question him in an unknown tongue.  Seeing
that there was no other resource, Fred turned him round and fled towards
the mountains at a pace that defied pursuit, and, coming to a halt in
the midst of a rocky gorge that might have served as an illustration of
what chaos was, he sat him down behind a big rock to peruse Isobel's
letter.

Having read it, he re-read it; having re-read it, he read it over again.
Having read it over again, he meditated a little, exclaiming several
times emphatically: "My _darling_ Isobel," and then he read bits of it
here and there; having done which, he read the _other_ bits, and so got
through it again.  As the letter was a pretty long one it took him a
considerable time to do all this; then it suddenly occurred to him that
he had been thus selfishly keeping it all to himself instead of sharing
it with his father, so he started up and hastened back to the village,
where he found old Mr Ellice in earnest confabulation with the pastor
of the place.  Seizing his parent by the arm, Fred led him into a room
in the pastor's house, and, looking round to make sure that it was
empty, he sought to bolt the door, but the door was a primitive one and
had no bolt, so Fred placed a huge old-fashioned chair against it, and,
sitting down therein, while his father took a seat opposite, he unfolded
the letter, and, yet once again, read it through.

The letter was about twelve months old, and ran thus:--

"Grayton, 25th July.

"My Darling Fred,

"It is now two months since you left us, and it seems to me two years.
Oh, how I _do_ wish that you were back!  When I think of the terrible
dangers that you may be exposed to amongst the ice my heart sinks, and I
sometimes fear that we shall never see you or your dear father again.
But you are in the hands of our Father in heaven, dear Fred, and I never
cease to pray that you may be successful and return to us in safety.
Dear, good old Mr Singleton told me yesterday that he had an
opportunity of sending to the Danish settlements in Greenland, so I
resolved to write, though I very much doubt whether this will ever find
you in such a wild far-off land.

"Oh, when I think of where you are, all the romantic stories I have ever
read of Polar regions spring up before me, and _you_ seem to be the hero
of them all.  One really funny one I wish I could reproduce. It forbade
anyone to "wear a menacing look" but it did not say who was to be the
judge of this look.

Every one was too restless and unhappy to settle to anything, all the
most important shops were burnt down, and very few of those that were
left were open. The whole population seemed to spend all their
time in the street waiting for something to happen. Certainly the Germans
seem to have had a special "down" on Charleroi and its neighbourhood,
so many villages in its vicinity were burnt down and most abominable
cruelties practised on its inhabitants. The peasants who were left were
simply terrorized, as no doubt the Germans meant them to be, and a
white flag hung from nearly every cottage window denoting complete
submission.

In one village some German soldier wrote in chalk on the door of a house
where he had been well received, "Güte Leute hier," and these poor
people got chalk and tried to copy the difficult German writing on
every door in the street. I am afraid that did not save them, however,
when their turn came. It was the utter ruthlessness and foresight with
which every contingency was prepared for that appalled me and made
me realize what a powerful enemy we were up against.

Everything was thought out down to the last detail and must have
been prepared months beforehand.
Even their wagons for transport were all painted the same slate-grey colour,
while the English and Belgians were using any cart they could
commandeer in the early days, as I afterwards saw in a German camp
Pickford's vans and Lyons' tea carts that they had captured from us.

Even their postal arrangements were complete; we saw their grey
"Feld-Post" wagons going to and fro quite at the beginning of the
war.

Several people in Charleroi told me that the absolute system and
organization of destruction frightened them more than the actual
fire itself.

Every German soldier had a little hatchet, and when Charleroi was fired,
they simply went down the street as if they had been drilled to
it for months, cutting a square hole in the panel of each door, and
throwing a ball of celluloid filled with benzine inside.

This exploded and set the house on fire, and later on the soldiers
would return to see if it was burning well. They were entirely
indifferent as to whether anyone were inside or not, as the following
incident, which came under my notice, will show. Two English Red Cross
Sisters were working at an ambulance in Charleroi, and lodging with some
people in the centre of the city. When the town was being burnt they
asked leave to go and try to save some of their possessions. They
arrived at the house, however, and found it entirely burnt down, and all
their things destroyed. They were returning rather sorrowfully to their
hospital when an old woman accosted them and told them that a woman
with a new-born infant was lying in bed in one of the burning houses.

The house was not burning badly, and they got into it quite easily and
found the woman lying in bed with her little infant beside her, almost
out of her wits with terror, but too weak to move. The nurses found
they could not manage alone, so went down into the street to find a man.
They found, after some trouble, a man who had only one arm and got him
to help them take the woman to the hospital. One of the nurses was carrying
the baby, the other with the one-armed man was supporting the mother,
when the German soldiers fired at the little party, and the one-armed
man fell bleeding at the side of the road. The Sisters were obliged to
leave him for the moment, and went on with the mother and infant
to the hospital, got a stretcher and came back and fetched the man
and brought him also to the hospital.

It was only a flesh wound in the shoulder and he made a good recovery,
but what a pitiful little group to waste ammunition on--a newly
confined mother and her infant, two Red Cross Sisters and a crippled
man.

One can only imagine that they were drunk when they did these kind
of things, for individually the German soldier is generally a decent
fellow, though some of the Prussian officers are unspeakable.

Discipline is very severe and the soldiers are obliged to carry out
orders without troubling themselves about rights and wrongs.

"Have you seen Dumps or Poker anywhere?" enquired Fred.

Meetuck nodded and pointed to a corner where, comfortably rolled up on a
mound of dry moss, lay Dumps; Poker, as usual, making use of him as a
pillow.

"Thems is go bed," said Meetuck.

"Thems must get up then and come aboard," cried Fred, whistling.

At first the dogs, being sleepy, seemed indisposed to move, but at last
they consented, and, following Fred to the beach, were soon conveyed
aboard the ship.

Next day Captain Guy and his men bade Meetuck and the kind, hospitable
people of Uppernavik farewell, and, spreading their canvas to a fair
breeze, set sail for England.


CHAPTER TWENTY SIX.

THE RETURN--THE SURPRISE--BUZZBY'S SAYINGS AND DOINGS--THE NARRATIVE--
FIGHTING BATTLES O'ER AGAIN--CONCLUSION.

Once again we are on the end of the quay at Grayton.  As Fred stands
there, all that has occurred during the past year seems to him but a
vivid dream.

Captain Guy is there, and Captain Ellice, and Buzzby, and Mrs Buzzby
too, and the two little Buzzbys also, and Mrs Bright, and Isobel, and
Tom Singleton, and old Mr Singleton, and the crew of the wrecked
_Dolphin_, and, in short, the "whole world"--of that part of the
country.

It was a great day for Grayton, that.  It was a wonderful day--quite an
indescribable day; but there were also some things about it that made
Captain Ellice feel somehow that it was a mysterious day, for, while
there were hearty congratulations, and much sobbing for joy on the part
of Mrs Bright, there were also whisperings which puzzled him a good
deal.

"Come with me, brother," said Mrs Bright at length, taking him by the
arm, "I have to tell you something."

Nor did he fail to point out that the bestowal of them was a matter
altogether contingent on results; if there were no results, there
would be no rewards; if there were results, they would be worthy
of the rewards.

This action of Columbus's deserves close study.
said the captain in an earnest tone, for
he felt that they had something serious to communicate.

"Dear Uncle," said Isobel, "you remember the time when the pirates
attacked--"

She paused, for her uncle's look frightened her.

"Go on, Isobel," he said quickly.

"Your dear wife, Uncle, _was not lost at that time_--"

Captain Ellice turned pale.  "What mean you, girl?  How came you to know
this?"  Then a thought flashed across him.  Seizing Isobel by the
shoulder he gasped, rather than said:

"Speak quick--is--is she alive?"

"Yes, dear Uncle, she--"

The captain heard no more.  He would have fallen to the ground had not
Fred, who was almost as much overpowered as his father, supported him.
At one a girl sat singing merrily with her back to the graveyard; and
from another came the shrill tones of a scolding woman. Every here and
there was a town garden full of sickly flowers, or a pile of crockery
inside upon the window-seat.

But you do not grasp the full connection between these houses of the
dead and the living, the unnatural marriage of stately sepulchres and
squalid houses, till, lower down, where the road has sunk far below
the surface of the cemetery, and the very roofs are scarcely on a
level with its wall, you observe that a proprietor has taken advantage
of a tall monument and trained a chimney-stack against its back. It
startles you to see the red, modern pots peering over the shoulder
of the tomb.Buzzby's feelings had been rather powerfully stirred up by the joy of
all around, and a tear _would_ occasionally tumble over his
weather-beaten cheek, and hang at the point of his sunburnt, and oft
frost-bitten nose, despite his utmost efforts to subdue such outrageous
demonstrations.

"Sit down, John, dear," said Mrs Buzzby in kind but commanding tones,
when she got her husband fairly into his cottage, the little parlour of
which was instantly crowded to excess.  "Sit down, John, dear, and tell
us all about it."

"Wot! begin to spin the whole yarn o' the voyage afore I've had time to
say `How d'ye do?'" With a grim irony they recall the banners in the
Invalides, banners as appropriate perhaps over the sepulchres of tailors
and weavers as these others above the dust of armies. Why they put
things out to dry on that particular morning it was hard to imagine. The
grass was grey with drops of rain, the headstones black with
moisture.

Yet, in despite of weather and common sense, there they hung between
the tombs; and beyond them I could see through open windows into miserable
rooms where whole families were born and fed, and slept and died.
"Werry good, then here goes!"

Buzzby was a man of action.  He screwed up his weather-eye (the one next
his wife, _of course_, that being the quarter from which squalls might
be expected) and began a yarn which lasted the better part of two hours.

It is not to be supposed that Buzzby spun it off without interruption.
Besides the questions that broke in upon him from all quarters, the two
Buzzbys junior scrambled, as far as was possible, into his pockets,
pulled his whiskers as if they had been hoisting a main-sail therewith,
and, generally, behaved in such an obstreperous manner as to render
coherent discourse all but impracticable.  He got through with it,
however, and then Mrs Buzzby intimated her wish, pretty strongly, that
the neighbours should vacate the premises; which they did, laughingly,
pronouncing Buzzby to be a "trump", and his better half a "true blue."

"Good-day, old chap," said the last who made his exit; "tiller's fixed
agin--nailed amidships? First the twain fall desperately in love, and _Edith_, the Catholic,
discovers _Ben_ to be an innocent _divorcé_.

Marriage impossible, they part. But it is apparently quite in order for
her to marry, without loving, a cocoa king who drinks--anything
but cocoa; which done, to add to the bitterness of the cup, _Ben's_
wife is reported dead.

Whereafter the king in a drunken fit poisons himself, and the widow,
fearing to be suspect, flies with her big _Ben_ to his secret _Nobody's
Island_ (HURST AND BLACKETT), off the New Guinea coast, where they live
comfortably off ambergris. Eventually tracked down by the dead
king's brother, who allows himself to be persuaded of _Edith's_
innocence on what seems to me the most inadequate evidence, the
lovers, after protracted mental agonies and physical dangers, are
about to enjoy deserved peace when _Ben's_ wife turns up again,
necessitating further separation; till finally _Edith_, with a
handsome babe and the news that after all _Ben's_ first wife wasn't
a wife at all, finds her way back to Nobody's Island.

Now that does seem to be rather overdoing it. But I hasten to credit
the writer with a very happy gift of description, which brings the
Papuan forests and mountains (or something plausibly like them) vividly
before the reader, while the characters, including a boy villain
ingenuously bizarre, are amusing puppets capably manipulated.

* * * * *
Mrs. BARNES-GRUNDY possesses a wonderful supply of sprightly humour.
_Her Mad Month_ (HUTCHINSON) is funny without being flippant, and
although the heroine is very naughty she is never naughty enough to
shock her creator's unhyphened namesake. Perhaps _Charmian's_ exploits
in escaping from a severe grandmother, and going unchaperoned to
Harrogate (where a very pretty piece of philandering ensued), do
not amount to much when seriously considered, but it is one of Mrs.

BARNES-GRUNDY'S strong points that you cannot take her seriously.

I am on her side all the time when she is giving me light comedy, but
when she leaves that vein and bathes her heroine in tears I cannot
conjure up any real sympathy.

I never for a moment doubted that _Charmian's_ lover, though reported
as having "died from wounds," would turn up again. I am afraid the War
is responsible for a great deal of rather obvious fiction

.

* * * * *

Miss MARIE HARRISON has investigated the condition of Ireland, and
in _Dawn in Ireland_ (MELROSE) she presents the results of her
studies.

The book is inspired by a great deal of the right kind of enthusiasm, and
the advice given is so excellent as to arouse the fear that it will
not be taken. Yet Miss HARRISON is justified of her endeavours.
She shows how often the English governors of Ireland have failed, in spite
of the best intentions, only because they applied their remedy too late
and thus, to their own great surprise, wasted the generosity of which
they were perhaps too conscious. According to Miss HARRISON the gombeenman
is the curse of Ireland, the serpent whose presence, if only he can be
reduced to being an absentee, warrants us in regarding Ireland as a
possible Eden. Miss HARRISON will please to take the preceding sentence
as proving my entire sympathy with Irish modes of thought and expression
and, generally, with Ireland.

Against the gombeener (who is a shop-keeper running his business
on the long-credit system) she invokes a vision of the blessings
of co-operation.

"So ye're right," rejoined Buzzby; "but Providence sent the crew to one
o' the islands that had bin visited by a native Christian missionary
from one o' the other islands, and the people had gin up some o' their
worst practices, and wos thinkin' o' turnin' over a new leaf altogether.
So the crew wos spared, and took to livin' among the natives, quite
comfortable like.  But they soon got tired and took to their boats agin,
and left.  Mrs Ellice, however, determined to remain and help the
native Christians, till a ship should pass that way.  For three years
nothin' but canoes hove in sight o' that lonesome island; then, at last
a brig came, and cast anchor offshore.  It wos an Australian trader that
had been blown out o' her course on her way to England, so they took
poor Mrs Ellice aboard, and brought her home--and that's how it wos."

Buzzby's outline, although meagre, is so comprehensive that we do not
think it necessary to add a word.  Soon after he had concluded, the
guests of the evening came in, and the conversation became general.

"Buzzby's jollification", as it was called in the village, was long
remembered as one of the most interesting events that had occurred for
many years.  One of the chief amusements of the evening was the spinning
of long yarns about the incidents of the late voyage, by men who could
spin them well.

Their battles in the Polar Seas were all fought o'er again.  The
wondering listeners were told how Esquimaux were chased and captured;
how walrus were lanced and harpooned; how bears were speared and shot;
how long and weary journeys were undertaken on foot over immeasurable
fields of ice and snow; how icebergs had crashed around their ship, and
chains had been snapped asunder, and tough anchors had been torn from
the ground, or lost; how schools had been set agoing and a theatre got
up; and how, provisions having failed, rats were eaten--and eaten, too,
with gusto.  All this and a great deal more was told on that celebrated
night--sometimes by one, sometimes by another, and sometimes, to the
confusion of the audience, by two or three at once, and, not
unfrequently, to the still greater confusion of story-tellers and
audience alike, the whole proceedings were interrupted by the outrageous
yells and turmoil of the two indomitable young Buzzbys, as they romped,
in reckless joviality, with Dumps and Poker.  But at length the morning
light broke up the party, and stories of the World of Ice came to an
end.

And now, reader, our tale is told.  But we cannot close without a
parting word, in regard to those, with whom we have held intercourse so
long.

It must not be supposed that from this date everything in the affairs of
our various friends flowed on in a tranquil, uninterrupted course.  This
world is a battle-field, on which no warrior finds rest until he dies;
and yet, to the Christian warrior on that field, the hour of death is
the hour of victory.  "Change" is written in broad letters on everything
connected with Time; and he who would do his duty well, and enjoy the
greatest possible amount of happiness here, must seek to prepare himself
for _every_ change.  Men cannot escape the general law.  "Oh, I knew you
were waiting to see me place the second joint in the butt first!" She
deftly ran the silk through the guides, and then scientifically knotting
the leader, slipped on a cast of three flies and picked her way daintily
to the river bank. As she waded in the sudden cold made her gasp a
little to herself, but she kept straight on without turning her
head, and presently stepped on a broad, flat rock over which the
water was slipping smoothly.

Gethryn waited near the bank and watched her as she sent the silk hissing
thirty feet across the stream. The line swished and whistled, and the
whole cast, hand fly, dropper and stretcher settled down lightly on the
water. He noticed the easy motion of the wrist, the boyish pose of the
slender figure, the serious sweet face, half shaded by the soft woolen
Tam.

Swish--h--h! Swish--h--h! She slowly spun out forty feet, glancing back
at Gethryn with a little laugh. Suddenly there was a tremendous splash,
just beyond the dropper, answered by a turn of the white wrist, and then
the reel fairly shrieked as the line melted away like a thread of smoke.
Gethryn's eyes glittered with excitement, and the colonel took his
cigar out of his mouth. But they didn't shout, "You have him! Go easy
on him! Want any help!" They kept quiet.

Cautiously, and by degrees, Ruth laced her little gloved fingers over
the flying line, and presently a quiver of the rod showed that the
fish was checked.

She reeled in, slowly and steadily for a moment, and then, whiz--z--z!
off he dashed again. At seventy feet the rod trembled and the trout
was still. Again and again she urged him toward the shore, meeting his
furious dashes with perfect coolness and leading him dexterously away
from rocks and roots. When he sulked she gave him the butt, and soon
the full pressure sent him flying, only to end in a furious full length
leap out of water, and another sulk.

The colonel's cigar went out.
At last she spoke, very quietly, without looking back.
"Rex, there is no good place to beach him here; will you net him,
please?" Rex was only waiting for this; he had his landing net
already unslung and he waded to her side.
"Now!" she whispered. The fiery side of a fish glittered just beneath
the surface.Captain Ellice was also celebrated for his garden, which
was a remarkably fine one; for his flag-staff, which was a remarkably
tall and magnificent one; and for his telescope, which constantly
protruded from his drawing-room window, and pointed in the direction of
the sea.

As for the others--Captain Guy continued his career at sea, as commander
of an East Indiaman.  He remained stout and true-hearted to the last,
like one of the oak timbers of his own good ship.

Bolton, Saunders, Mivins, Peter Grim, Amos Parr, and the rest of them,
were scattered in a few years, as sailors usually are, to the four
quarters of the globe.  O'Riley alone was heard of again.  He wrote to
Buzzby, "by manes of the ritin' he had larn'd aboord the _Dolfin_,"
informing him that he had forsaken the "say" and become a small farmer
near Cork.  He had plenty of murphies and also a pig--the latter
"bein'," he said, "so like the wan that belonged to his owld grandmother
that he thought it must be the same wan comed alive agin, or its
darter."

And Buzzby--poor Buzzby--he, also, gave up the sea, much against his
will, by command of his wife, and took to miscellaneous work, of which
there was plenty for an active man in a seaport like Grayton.  His
rudder, poor man, was again (and this time permanently) lashed
amidships, and whatever breeze Mrs Buzzby chanced to blow, his business
was to sail _right before it_.  The two little Buzzbys were the joy of
their father's heart.  They were genuine little true-blues, both of
them, and went to sea the moment their legs were long enough, and came
home, voyage after voyage, with gifts of curiosities and gifts of money
to their worthy parents.

Dumps resided during the remainder of his days with Captain Ellice, and
Poker dwelt with Buzzby.  These truly remarkable dogs kept up their
attachment to each other to the end.  Indeed, as time passed by, they
drew closer and closer together, for Poker became more sedate, and,
consequently, a more suitable companion for his ancient friend.  
According to the written statements of Jan Huygen [*], and the opinion
of sundry other persons, certain parts of this South-land are
likely to yield gold, a point into which you will inquire as
carefully as possible.

[* _Scil_.

Van Linschoten.]Together they
went through life respected by all who knew them--each year as it passed
cementing closer and closer that undying friendship which had first
started into being in the gay season of boyhood, and had bloomed and
ripened amid the adventures, dangers, and vicissitudes of the World of
Ice.