SIEGE OF WASHINGTON, D.C.

WRITTEN EXPRESSLY FOR LITTLE PEOPLE.

BY F. COLBURN ADAMS, CAPT.,

AUTHOR OF THE "STORY OF TROOPER," AND OTHER BOOKS.

NEW YORK:

1867


PREFACE.


MY publisher gives it as his opinion that a great many persons will
be offended at what I have said in this work. These doors folded
neatly into a slightly protruding ridge or arch almost opposite the
door by which he had entered, and were screened from observation
by heavy damask curtains, which drooped over the archway slightly
into the room.

Evidently the deceased judge had been in the habit of using the
divided rooms as a single apartment, for the heavier furniture
in both halves of it was of the same pattern. The chairs and
tables were of heavy, ponderous, mid-Victorian make, and they
were matched by a number of old-fashioned mahogany sideboards and
presses, arranged methodically at regular intervals on both sides
of the room. Rolfe, as his eye took in these articles, wondered why
Sir Horace Fewbanks had bought so many. One sideboard, a vast
piece of furniture fully eight feet long, had a whisky decanter
and siphon of soda water on it, as though Sir Horace had served
himself with refreshments on his return to the house. The tops of
the other sideboards were bare, and the presses, use in such a
room Rolfe was at a loss to conjecture, were locked up. The antique
sombre uniformity of the furniture as a whole was broken at odd
intervals by several articles of bizarre modernity, including a few
daring French prints, which struck an odd note of incongruity in
such a room.

The murdered man had been laid on an old-fashioned sofa at the end
of this double apartment which was furthest from the window.

Rolfe walked slowly over the thick Turkey carpets and rugs with
which the floor was covered, glanced at the sofa curiously, and
then turned down the sheet from the dead man's face.

At the time of his death Sir Horace Fewbanks was 58 years of age,
but since death the grey bristles had grown so rapidly through his
clean-shaven face that he looked much older.

The face showed none of the wonted
placidity of death. The mouth was twisted
in an ugly fashion, as though the
murdered man had endeavoured to cry for help
and had been attacked and
killed while doing so. One
of Sir Horace's
arms--the right one--was thrust
forward diagonally across
his breast as if in self-defence, and the hand was tightly
clenched. Rolfe, who had
last seen His Honour presiding on the Bench in
the full pomp and majesty of law, felt a chill
strike his heart at the fell power of death which
did not even respect the person of a
High Court judge, and had stripped him of every vestige of
  human dignity in the pangs of a violent end.

The face he had last seen on the Bench full of wisdom and austerity
of the law was now distorted into a livid mask in which it was hard
to trace any semblance of the features of the dead judge.

Rolfe's official alertness of mind in the face of a mysterious crime
soon reasserted itself, however, and he shook off the feeling of
sentiment and proceeded to make a closer examination of the dead body.

Let me say to you, my son, that the siege of Washington, however
much people abroad may laugh at it, was one of the most
extraordinary events in the history of modern warfare. It took place
in the year of our Lord, 1864; and there is no other event in the
war of the great rebellion to compare with it. You will, therefore,
my son, understand why it is that the history of an event of so much
importance should be written only by an impartial historian--one who
has courage enough to tell the truth, and no official friends to
serve at the expense of honor. I must tell you, also, my son, that
the great military problem of this siege has afforded a subject of
deep study for our engineers, from General Delafield downward, who
have puzzled their wits over it without finding a solution.

Should we be unfortunate enough to have another great war, and the
nation again be compelled to give itself up to the profession of
arms, the conduct of this siege would afford us an excellent
example, as well as a profitable key to the art of war, as
understood by our War Department in the said year of our Lord, 1864.
This, then, is another reason why this great military event should
be faithfully rendered. I will also add, my son, that though I may
fail to instruct you after the manner and style of the most profound
historian of our day, I will at least make my account of this great
siege so plain and simple that you will comprehend it in all its
multiplicity of parts.

But first let me tell you a few things about Washington, the capital
city of this great nation. You, my son, may have seen one hundred
other cities, and yet it will remind you of none of them. It is very
elongated, and spreads over a great deal of ground, apparently for
personal inconvenience. Indeed, my son, it has the appearance of
having been dropped down late of a Saturday night by some eccentric
gentleman who had a large quantity of architectural odds and ends on
hand, and had no other use for them. It has been famous always for
its acute angles and broad avenues. The former, I have heard more
than one person say, were skillfully arranged by a very
accommodating French engineer, for the special benefit of persons
who went home late of nights and were liable to get confused on the
way. The population is rather a curious one, and may be classified
as the distinct and indistinct, the settled and unsettled. The
census report, a remarkably unreliable account, has it that they
number "some" sixty thousand. A large proportion of this settled and
unsettled population is of such variety of color as to render it
almost impossible to define the nice proportions of blood it is so
strongly mixed with. On this point, my son, you must not be too
particular, but accept it as your father does, as a proof that the
races, whom we are told can never be got to live in harmony
together, have, to say the least, gone very extensively into a
system which gives strength to the belief that it could be done. The
French call this the commingling system, and their philosophers
argue from it, and with much force, that it is impossible to
establish the question as to what kind of blood the best society is
based upon. For myself, I feel that we can with safety accept these
French philosophers as good authority in such matters. You will also
find among the population of Washington natives of nearly every
country on the face of the globe. These speak no end of tongues,
follow all manner of professions and occupations, and what is most
valuable, preserve that delightful diversity for which what is
called the "old society" has always been famous. Picturesque hills
encircle the city at a distance, and a beautiful river flows past on
its way to the sea. The city has many fathers and few friends. These
fathers, while in an ornamental mood, built a grand canal into the
very bowels of the city, after the manner of Venice, that commerce
might be encouraged, and such persons as had a passion for moonlight
and gondolas could gratify it. But the people were not given to
sailing in gondolas, so this famous canal was diverted from the
object for which it was originally intended. It is now used as a
tomb where deceased animals of a domestic nature are carefully
deposited. The old inhabitants regard this tomb with a reverence I
never could understand clearly, even though I had sought for a cause
in their instinctive opposition to all and every manner of reform.
Indeed, the fathers of the city regard this grand canal as
performing a very humane part, inasmuch as it supplies an excellent
and very convenient burial-place for their domestic animals, and
increases the practice of a large number of doctors. The city
fathers, I am informed, find some consolation in the fact that other
canals have performed equally humane services.

And it came to pass, my son, that there was a great war in all the
land; and greater than was ever known before in any other land. Thus
Washington became the centre of our anxieties and our thoughts. The
people of the North, and the people of the West, and the people of
the South, who constituted the people of one great nation, had long
held different opinions as to the right of making merchandise of
men, of women, and of little children. Yes, my son, it was at last
claimed to be in accordance with Christianity to doom these people
to a life at once hopeless and miserable. As you grow up, my son,
and begin to think and act for yourself, you will think it very
strange that such a great national crime as this should have existed
in a land so blessed with the fruits of a ripe civilization. And it
will be a cause of wonder to you that a society based upon such an
abomination did not sooner break down under the burden of its
wrongs. And yet you must always bear in mind, my son, that men do
not view great crimes alike, and that even good and great men differ
as to what constitutes national rights and national wrongs. It is
said that great nations have gone to decline because their people
became blind with pride, and refused to think right. A nation is
always safe while its people think right; but you must teach the
children right before you can have the people think right. Education
and association had much to do in training the thoughts of men in
the South into wrong channels. Taking this view of the subject you
may find much to forgive in a political system that seems wrong in
your eyes and right in the eyes of its supporters. Indeed, my son, I
would enjoin you to treat with a reasonable amount of deference the
arguments advanced by those who differ with you on questions of
public policy, and also to remember that right and reason are your
strongest weapons. Never get angry with your opponent, never use
language that will cause you a regret; and if you cannot convince by
the moral force of your argument, abandon the undertaking. And
whatever else you do to advance your material prosperity, never let
it be said of you that you advocated a great political wrong merely
because it was popular and brought you the applause of the
unthinking. You cannot do so with a clear conscience; and what is
life without it?

Hill was unaware that his master was returning, and the first he
learned of the murder was the brief announcement in the evening
papers on Thursday.

CHAPTER III

Inspector Chippenfield, who had come into prominence in the newspapers
as the man who had caught the gang who had stolen Lady Gladville's
jewels--which included the most costly pearl necklace in the
world--was placed in charge of the case. It was to his success in
this famous case that he owed his promotion to Inspector. He had the
assistance of his subordinate, Detective Rolfe. So generous were
the newspaper references to the acumen of these two terrors of
the criminal classes that it was to be assumed that anything which
inadvertently escaped one of them would be pounced upon by the
other.

On the morning after the discovery of the murdered man's body, the
two officers made their way to Tanton Gardens from the Hampstead tube
station. Inspector Chippenfield was a stout man of middle age,
with a red face the colour of which seemed to be accentuated by the
daily operation of removing every vestige of hair from it. He had
prominent grey eyes with which he was accustomed to stare fiercely
when he desired to impress a suspected person with what some of the
newspapers had referred to as "his penetrating glance." His companion,
Rolfe, was a tall well-built man in the early thirties. Like
most men in a subordinate position, Rolfe had not a high opinion
of the abilities of his immediate superiors. He was sure that he
could fill the place of any one of them better than it was filled
by its occupant. He believed that it was the policy of superiors
to keep junior men back, to stand in their light, and to take all
the credit for their work. He was confident that he was destined
to make a name for himself in the detective world if only he
were given the chance.

When Inspector Chippenfield had visited Riversbrook the previous
afternoon, Rolfe had not been selected as his assistant. A careful
inspection of the house and especially of the room in which the
tragedy had been committed had been made by the inspector. He had
then turned his attention to the garden and the grounds surrounding
the house.
Whatever he had discovered and what theories he had formed were not
disclosed to anyone, not even his assistant.That bishops should put aside their lawn, and
gird on the sword--that they should lead men to war and death,
instead of the baptismal, and all to perpetuate the sorrows of an
oppressed race, is, my son, only another proof that error may gain a
victory over truth in the hearts and feelings of the best of us.


CHAPTER II.

WE GO TO WAR TO SETTLE OUR DIFFERENCES.


HERE let me present you, my son, with an exact portrait of the
distinguished general who is commonly accepted as striking the first
blow of this war. He was kindly educated at the expense of the
nation, and was first among its enemies. For a time his fame ran
high enough, and timid people were inclined to give him the
character of a monster. But it turned out in time that he was a very
peaceable gentleman, and not so much of a terrible warrior, after
all.

But I want to tell you, my son, how it was that the people of this
great nation took to swords and cannon, to settle their differences
of opinion.

The people of the great North, and the people of the great West,
were educated to a very different way of thinking on the question of
slavery; and differed with the people of the South as to what
constituted a national blessing. They were willing, for the sake of
peace, to tolerate slavery, as a great evil it were dangerous to
attempt to remove; but it was too much to ask them to accept it as a
great national blessing. These people were energetic, thrifty,
lovers of right and justice, and had grown rich and powerful by
their own industry. They could not see why the whole people of so
great a nation as ours should be required to bow down and worship
what the rest of the civilized world had stigmatized as the greatest
scourge of mankind. Seeing the power this great wrong was obtaining
over the nation, as well as the danger it was causing us by
corrupting the minds of the people, they consulted together and
elected a President after their own way of thinking. And this so
offended the people of the South, who were a brave people, and quick
to anger, that they gathered together from all parts of their
country, gave up their peaceful pursuits, and went to war for what
they called their independence. But I always found, my son, that
independence was an abused phrase, much on the tongues of these
people. Indeed their idea of independence extended only to giving
one class the full and exclusive right to enslave the other. The
Southern idea of independence was so shaped as to contain the very
worst features of a despotism. But you must look with forgiveness on
these people, my son, and seek to forget many of those acts of
vindictiveness which characterized them during the war.

At the same time, my son, you must not lose sight of the lesson
which the result of this war teaches. Let it be a guide to your own
actions that these people went to war to tear down what they could
not build up, to destroy a Government the world had come to respect
and admire, and under which they had found a safe refuge and a
tolerance for their institution of slavery. But the edifice they
sought to build up crumbled to the ground, and they are now left
without even a safe refuge for their pride. Yes, my son, these
people scorned the example of the Christian world, went to war in
defense of a great crime, and ceased only when they had destroyed
themselves.

I have been thus serious while instructing you as to how the war
began, because I am aware that a very large number of writers will
tell you that it began in a very different manner. If the account I
may hereafter give of what took place at the siege may be less
serious, you must charge it to my love for the truth of history.
Indeed much that occurred during that remarkable military event, was
not of so serious a nature as is generally conceded by an
intelligent public. Unless, then, it be written down as it occurred,
we shall not convey a faithful picture of it to the public.

Now that the war spirit was full to the brim, the people of the
South gathered in great numbers on the plains of Manassas. They were
earnest, serious, and even savage in their intentions; and they
brought with them their powder and shot-guns, and a large quantity
of whisky. They also brought with them a great number of negroes,
who were to build the forts, and do all work it would not become a
gentleman to do. And while this work was progressing, the
"gentlemen" soldiers of the South were to talk very loudly and
courageously, and invite all the Yankees round about to come out and
get whipped. These people resolved themselves into a great and
powerful army, with Peter Beauregard, the French gentleman of whom I
have before spoken, for its commander. This gentleman was somewhat
eccentric, and much given to saying things, the true meaning of
which he did not understand. A waggish friend of mine once told me
that this Mr. Beauregard was educated for an apothecary at West
Point, a place where young gentlemen are instructed in the various
ways of getting a living honestly. Being very skillful in the use of
mortars, he was held by Mr. Davis as a most proper person to command
a southern army, inasmuch as he could give the Yankees all the
physic they wanted in the shortest time. And as it is always
expected that a great general will say a great many things that are
neither sensible nor wise, and which afford politicians an excellent
opportunity of picking them to pieces, he is a wise general who
issues his orders and keeps his lips sealed on politics. I say this,
my son, because it is popularly understood that a general who knows
his business bears the same relations to a politician that pepper
does to the stomach.

And it came to pass that the people of the North and the people of
the West became seriously alarmed at the capers Mr. Beauregard and
his men were cutting at Manassas. Indeed, many false reports were
circulated concerning the great power of this Mr. Beauregard; and
our people began to give way to their fears, and to declare that he
might enter the capital any dark night and capture or send the
Government on a traveling expedition. The aged gentlemen at the head
of our Government shook their heads discouragingly, and declared
there was no safety in going to bed at night while Mr. Beauregard
was so near a neighbor. The honest farmers in the country round
about were also very much alarmed at the unruly conduct of Mr.
Beauregard's men, who carried off their pigs and chickens, and eat
up all their vegetables. They also made a great noise, and planted
guns on all the adjacent hills, a proceeding the honest farmers did
not fully comprehend. Then these unruly men became very defiant,
felt like fighting the world, and, in the honest belief that they
could do it, invited all the rest of the nation to come out and get
whipped. Yes, my son, and to show what confidence they had in
themselves, they said we might bring "five for one;" and for that
matter, all Germany and all Ireland. It was considered wisdom with
them to say nothing about England and France. Those two peaceably
inclined nations might, at some future day, be disposed to step in
and help them out--in a quiet way. It was not so much humanity as a
matter of profitable trade with these two great nations, and if
things should take a successful turn, they might see the confederacy
in a strong light, and give it material as well as moral help,
notwithstanding it had slavery for its foundation. In short, these
Southern gentlemen acted on the wise axiom, that it will not do to
make enemies in a direction where you may need friends and
assistance.

Now, my son, the eccentric French gentleman, of whom I have spoken
as capable of administering physic enough to settle the question
with the Yankees, soon became an object of great admiration with his
noisy people. And this so pleased him, that he came in time to
admire himself, and to firmly believe in his own mind that the world
had no greater warrior. Self-confidence, my son, is one of the most
necessary things in war. I have sometimes thought that this element
of an army's strength was not fully understood. It was at least not
understood by us when the war began. If it had been, a much less
number of our people would have shared Mr. Beauregard's opinion of
himself. As it was, our timid people so magnified his proportions as
to see danger in his very shadow. But then, my son, we were very
innocent of the practical part of war when the great rebellion
began; and this innocence led us into the very grave error of giving
our adversary more than his proper dimensions. It was this that led
the Northern mind to over-measure Mr. Beauregard.

I have always had a good deal of sympathy for Mr. Beauregard, and
never believed him anything but a pleasant, harmless gentleman, who
got into bad company by mere accident. Nor do I believe he ever had
any more serious design on the capital of the nation than to look at
it longingly from a distance, and perhaps a desire now and then to
enjoy the hospitality of some old friend. That he would have played
the ruthless invader, if he had got into the city, no reflecting
mind ever believed. But then there were people ready enough to
believe anything in those days--even to believe that there was truth
to be found in the stories told by Mr. Detective Baker.

It was natural enough that Mr. Beauregard should amuse his soldiers
by telling them romantic stories of the pleasant days he had spent
in Washington, as well as the great value of what it contained. It
was necessary also that he should ascertain how far the Government
at Washington could be frightened, and what were the best means to
that end. You must know, my son, that a Frenchman regards it as one
of the first principles in war to find out how far you can frighten
your adversary before proceeding to fight him. This will account for
a good deal that Mr. Beauregard said and did while at Manassas, and
which, at the time, was somewhat unintelligible.

As we were not sure, however, as to what the real intentions of Mr.
Beauregard and his master were, it was concluded that we could
better preserve our respect for them, as well as the peace of mind
of our own people, by applying the proper means to keep them at a
respectful distance outside. Indeed the capital contained a great
many things which would be extremely useful to an ambitious
gentleman resolved on setting up a government of his own, and with
the machinery all working according to his own way of thinking. And
as the honest intentions of these ambitious men (I refer to Mr.
Beauregard and his master) were no more to be trusted than their
loyalty, we set our engineers to work building a cordon of forts,
such as the world had never seen before, and supposed to be strong
enough to keep all our enemies out. And these forts were mounted
with such reasoning powers as the largest cannon in the world were
capable of.

Among the things in Washington so very desirable to a gentleman
about to set up a government of his own was the White House. Mr.
Davis had long regarded this pleasant looking old mansion as a
desirable residence for a gentleman born to rule over a people. Once
comfortably seated in this pleasant mansion, a wonderful change
would be worked in the political opinions of those whose minds were
in doubt. Considered as master of the situation, his friends in the
North would increase fourfold. And there was no knowing the turn
respect for him abroad might take. A gentleman quietly settled down
in the White House, if only for four years, is sure to have a large
increase in the number of his friends, all ready either to accept
his favors or sound his virtues. Even slavery, that had scourged
mankind for so many generations, would have found a great increase
of friends and admirers if Mr. Davis had made a home in the White
House; so prone is weak human nature to bow to power. Indeed, I am
not so sure that, with such a turn in our political affairs, those
preachers who had been asserting the divine origin of slavery would
not then have proclaimed that God himself was its great protector--a
blasphemy the Christian Church will some day be ashamed of.

In addition to the White House being a desirable residence for Mr.
Davis, there were those fine public buildings so much admired by
strangers. They were just what Mr. Davis and his friends wanted in
starting a new government, and would come in very handy. With
Washington in his possession, and our worthy President and his
Cabinet locked up in the arsenal, or sent on a traveling expedition
into a colder climate for the benefit of their health, Mr. Davis's
new enterprise would become a fixture in the history of nations. And
there was a time when Mr. Davis could, with the means in his power,
have accomplished all these things.

The arsenal, too, was full of gunpowder, of great guns, of valuable
military stores and equipments. And these were just such things as a
gentleman resolved to be a ruler and have a government according to
his own way of thinking would stand most in need of. In short, the
powder and big guns might be needed as a means of convincing those
who differed with him that his opinions must be respected. This is a
queer world, my son, and man is the strangest and most
uncontrollable animal in it. Mr. Davis understood this as well as
any gentleman within my knowledge. And if he had kept as keen an eye
on his finances as he had on his political fortune, it would have
been much better for him. He knew that if he could show to the world
that his new government was sound financially, and likely to
continue so, his prospects would be bright indeed. And with
Washington, and what Washington contained, in his possession, he
could set up his claim to the confidence of the financial world with
more than ordinary pretensions.

It was indeed said (but I think in a strain of slander) that Mr.
Beauregard looked with an air of great condescension on our noble
Treasury building, and promised his fighting followers a share of
its contents as soon as it came into his master's possession. Indeed
it was said that Mr. Beauregard promised his men that when they got
Washington they should have luxuries for rations, and fight with
their pockets filled with silver and gold. And with their
expectations firmly fixed on a specie basis, who could doubt as to
what the result would be? This was the golden prize Mr. Davis hoped
to win with Washington. And with it he saw, or rather thought he
saw, England extending to him the right hand of fellowship, and the
Emperor of France making him one of his very best bows, and thanking
him for the liberty he had taken with the freedom of a people.

These, then, my son, are some of the reasons why we concluded to
close the gates of Washington against Mr. Davis and his rebellious
people, and to keep them closed by raising a cordon of strong forts
around the city.


CHAPTER III.

CONCERNING THE DISTINGUISHED OFFICER WHO BUILT THE FORTS.


I HAVE thought it no more than right, my son, to present you with a
pleasant, but very exact picture of the distinguished officer of
engineers, to whose skill we are indebted for the forts that more
than once saved Washington. I do this out of respect to the truth of
history, and from an apprehension that there are others, perhaps,
higher in rank, who may lay claim to the honor, at some future day.
I have also presented you with a more extended and complete portrait
of him in the frontispiece of this work. He appears here in his
usually calm, meditative mood, with his pipe and Professor Mahan's
last great work on fortifications. He is, I must tell you, my son, a
man of large brain, and generous nature, fond of his joke, and very
fertile in the art of rearing earthworks. In figure he is
Falstaffian, and when on his rounds among the fortifications wears
immense canvas-legged boots, and a hat with a high crown and
extremely broad brim. Indeed, his figure is what may be called
formidable, and there would be no mistaking him were you to meet him
on the road. And, notwithstanding his peaceable disposition, and his
scrupulous regard for the rights of others, the farmers round about
Washington regard him with fear and trembling. In short, my son, his
approach near a farm house is sure to send all the children
scampering with fear. And even the curs and other domestic animals,
seem to have an instinctive knowledge that his visits portend no
good to their master's domicil. It is curious to see those domestic
animals how they bark and snap, and then shrink away at his
approach, uttering signs of their dislike. In truth, my son, he has
a bad reputation among these worthy farmers, whose farms he quietly
takes possession of, and then indulges in his favorite amusement of
building forts on them. In this way many an honest farmer has
suddenly found himself dispossessed of his property, and his means
of getting an honest living; thereby bringing great distress on his
family. To remonstrate would be useless. He must submit to the fate
of war, and look to Heaven for redress. Now it is by no means
pleasant for a quietly-disposed farmer to have his home turned
suddenly into a fortress, and his acres made a camping ground for
soldiers, who are not the most desirable guests, even under the best
of circumstances. But the farmer lays all his sorrows at the door of
our distinguished engineer, forgetting that he is only carrying out
the orders of his superiors. Thus it was that he got a bad
reputation, just as General Gilmore got a bad reputation with the
people of Charleston, and South Carolina generally, for throwing
shells into their city.

While, then, our distinguished engineer progressed in his work of
building forts, with a view to saving the city, the people of the
North, and the people of the great West, seeing that war was upon us
in all its stern reality, were much agitated as to what was best to
be done. They were a peaceable, prospering people, and much attached
to the Government that had conferred so many blessings on them. But
the fire of their patriotism had already been kindled; and they went
wisely to work adding fuel to it. The trumpet of war had sounded
over the land, their gallant militiamen came together, boldly and
earnestly. And these they sent to Washington, by regiments, to quiet
the fears of the people, and save the nation.

Now these gallant militiamen were very full of courage, and their
courage increased as their numbers multiplied in the capital, and
they sent word to Mr. Beauregard and his men that they would be out
there soon and thrash him out of Manassas. Some of these gallant men
came for thirty days, others for ninety, our wise rulers being
satisfied in their own mind that the latter number of days would be
quite enough to finish up the small job of putting down the
rebellion. These militiamen wore gay and many-colored uniforms, and
had the fat of the land for rations. They were the nation's favored
guests, and every man was set down for a gentleman and a hero, who
would as soon shed his blood for his country as eat his breakfast.
And these gallant militiamen were organized into a grand army, so
full of pomp and circumstance, that we were sure the enemy would run
away as soon as he saw it coming. But in order to make the thing
safe beyond peradventure, we gave the command of this grand army to
General McDowell, a man of solid parts, a gentleman, and a
soldier. Our wise political rulers at that time held to the idea
that a gentleman who had seen service must be a great general. Hence
it was that General McDowell, being a gentleman and a scholar, and
ready enough to square his political sentiments with the predominant
ideas, was accepted as just the soldier who would lead our gallant
militiamen to victory, and never think of running from the enemy.
Indeed, according to our military politicians, we were to get no end
of glory through General McDowell's success. And Mr. Beauregard was
to be driven back to his master, bag and baggage.


CHAPTER IV.

THE BATTLE OF BULL-RUN, AND HOW IT ENDED.


I CONSIDER it of the greatest importance, my son, to present you
with an exact portrait of the very distinguished general who led our
gallant militiamen to battle at Bull-Run, and followed them home
without gaining a victory. Greater battles than this of Bull-Run
have been fought, as well in modern as in ancient times; but it is
my honest opinion that it has never had its equal in the small
number killed and wounded, as compared to the very large number that
got frightened and ran away. But I shall speak of this more
particularly hereafter.

When the bold McDowell had got the courage of our gallant militiamen
well up, and was sure they would look the enemy right in the eye,
and give him powder and shot to his heart's content, he led them
forth with such pomp and pageantry as had never been seen before.
Yes, my son, our gallant militiamen marched forth on the morning of
the 21st of July, 1861, every man a hero, and every man intent on
fighting the battle according to his own peculiar notions of how a
great and glorious victory ought to be gained. There was great
blowing of bugles, beating of drums, playing of bands, and
fluttering of colors; all of which told Mr. Beauregard to put in his
powder, that we were coming, and in earnest. The nation went into a
very fever of joy. Several of our grave Congressmen got up their
courage, put pistols in their pockets, and went forth with the army
to set our brave boys a noble example by their presence on the
field. Indeed, many otherwise reflecting persons looked forward to
this great clash of arms as a grand entertainment, which was to wind
up with a feast, to which the vanquished enemy was to be invited.
And to that end they went amply provided with provisions and good
wines. In truth, my son, there was a strong rear guard, made up of
Congressmen, editors, and distinguished citizens, all going to see
the battle, in wagons well-filled with luxuries. This was a new
feature in the history of war, and quiet people along the road
wondered at the sight.

The morning was hot and sultry, and the air was misty with dust
clouds. Our brave boys, who were not up to long marches, had a hard
time of it. But they were full of patriotism, and bore up under it
with great fortitude. Meeting the enemy near Bull-Run, we gave him
battle. That is, we pitched into him and he pitched into us, the
fight becoming general and extending over a great deal of ground.
Then the fighting became so mixed up and confused that it was
difficult to tell on which side victory was smiling. Indeed, neither
general could tell how things were going. For a long time both
armies kept at a respectful distance, under the evident apprehension
that somebody would get injured. In short, there was a great deal of
good ammunition wasted, and a great deal of wild and harmless firing
done. And just as we were about to proclaim a great victory over the
enemy--for many far-sighted persons declared they could see Mr.
Beauregard and his men with the toes of their boots turned towards
Richmond--a strange chapter of accidents occurred and changed the
whole scene. A number of our brave boys got killed, a greater number
got hurt, and a still greater number got frightened and thought it
high time to look to their own safety. A backward movement, not
ordered by our gallant general, began, and this soon resolved itself
into a grand race for Washington, where, it was thought, shelter and
safety were to be found behind its forts. What caused this sudden
backward movement still remains an undecided question. It was first
noticed among a regiment of brave Pennsylvanians, who had been
homesick for several days, and wanting to go home, started for that
purpose. The example of these gallant fellows was soon followed by
our Congressmen, editors, and citizens generally, each leaving his
stock of luxuries, and, indeed, everything he had, as a
peace-offering to the enemy, and resolved not to be outdone in the
race, especially in a case where it was made so clear that
discretion was the better part of valor. Indeed, these distinguished
non-fighting gentlemen proved themselves remarkably fleet of foot,
and not to be outdone in a race where personal safety was at stake.
But the worst of it was that their example was at once imitated by a
regiment of fierce Zouaves, from New York, who firmly believed, when
they went out to meet the enemy, that they were more than a match
for him. It is reported that these fierce Zouaves became very much
alarmed, and did some of the very best running of the day, under the
apprehension that they were followed by not less than a troop of
savage horsemen, better known as the black-horse cavalrymen, whose
sabres they had no taste for. But I have always been of opinion, my
son, that these fierce Zouaves were so intent on making the best
speed they were capable of, that they never looked behind them to
see if these savage horsemen were men of buckram or real substances.
I have also heard it intimated that the good speed made by these
red-legged heroes was owing to the fact that they had left their
courage at home, and were returning to get it. Another very
plausible theory I have heard advanced by an Englishman, who had
very profound ideas as to how war should be carried on and battles
fought. He very gravely told me (adding that he had undoubted
authority for his statement), that what set the gallant Zouaves to
scampering was this: There were a large number among them who had a
weakness for office-holding. Knowing this, a mischievous member
started the report that there was a vacancy in the New York
Custom-house. The fellow could not have done a more rash act, for it
sent them all scampering off the battle-field, each in the hope of
being first to gain the prize. Her Majesty's sagacious subject
contended that this sufficiently accounted for the good speed made
in retreat by that gallant regiment, and also for its leaving more
firearms than dead men on the field.

Indeed, my son, each man ran for his life, the excitement increasing
at every step, until the race became general; and in this way it was
kept up until our grand army of gallant militiamen reached the
forts, when they breathed freer and felt safe. This was a dark day
for Washington and the nation, which became bowed down with sorrow
and disappointment. The brave general followed his army into
Washington; and I have heard it intimated that he boasted of having
the most fleet-footed divisions history had any account of.

You will see, my son, that forts have a moral as well as a material
effect. The enemy might, had he known our forlorn condition, have
followed up his victory and marched into Washington with flying
colors. He was probably restrained by his fears of what we might
have in store for him when he reached the forts. As to the
provisions for the feast, we left them for the enemy to enjoy, which
he did with many thanks to us for the bounty, his own fare being
very scanty. And now, my son, I shall leave to my artist the task of
giving you an exact picture of our army as it appeared on its way to
Washington after the battle of Bull-Run.


CHAPTER V.


THE wise men of Washington agreed that McDowell was not the general
we took him for, so we sent for George B. McClellan, who had been
whipping the rebels up in Northern Virginia. We felt sure that he
was the man who would whip the rebels for us, and gain us victories;
who would dispel the gloom hanging over the land, and bring us
plenty of sunshine. Indeed, my son, the nation began to feel very
happy in the possession of such a man; for, according to the
newspapers, he had displayed remarkable military traits when only a
boy, such as great attention to the study of maps, and the making of
little dirt piles. It was also added that while yet a youth he was
very obedient to his father, and affectionately fond of his mother.
And these excellent traits of character, in one so young, it was
held by our wise men, must, when improved and enlarged by manhood,
make the man, who had given his mind to the study of arms a great
general. So, my son, you see what an opportunity there is before
you.

Well, George came to us flush from the field of his glories, and we
proceeded at once to make him a hero before he had made us an army.
The nation recovered from its disappointment, the sky brightened,
the people began to send into the capital troops of a different
sort, and the general we had put our faith in went to work making an
army--the grand old Army of the Potomac. Poul made his dispositions
accordingly. Dividing his force into two bodies, he fell upon the
insurgents impetuously from two sides, taking them completely by
surprise. They hastily put themselves in order of battle, but their
muskets, wet with rain, would not fire, and Laporte hastened
with his men to seek the shelter of a cliff near at hand.
While in the act of springing from one rock to another, he was seen
to stagger and fall. He had been shot dead by a musket bullet,
and his career was thus brought to a sudden close. His followers
at once fled in all directions.

Poul cut off Laporte's head, as well as the heads of the other Camisards
who had been killed, and sent them in two baskets to Count Broglie.
Next day the heads were exposed on the bridge of Anduze; the day
after on the castle wall of St. Hypolite; after which these ghastly
trophies of Poul's victory were sent to Montpellier to be permanently
exposed on the Peyrou.

Such was the end of Laporte, the second leader of the Camisards.

Seguier, the first, had been chief for only six days; Laporte, the
second, for only about two months. Again Baville supposed the
pacification of the Cevennes to be complete. He imagined that Poul,
in cutting off Laporte's head, had decapitated the insurrection.
But the Camisard ranks had never been so full as now, swelled as
they were by the persecutions of the Royalists, who, by demolishing
the homes of the peasantry, had in a measure forced them into the
arms of the insurgents. Nor were they ever better supplied with
leaders, even though Laporte had fallen. No sooner did his death
become known, than the "Children of God" held a solemn assembly
in the mountains, at which Roland, Castanet, Salomon, Abraham,
and young Cavalier were present; and after lamenting the death of
their chief, they with one accord elected Laporte's nephew, Roland,
as his successor.

* * * * *
A few words as to the associates of Roland, whose family and origin
have already been described.

André Castanet of Massavaque, in the Upper Cevennes, had been a
goatherd in his youth, after which he worked at his father's trade
of a wool-carder. An avowed Huguenot, he was, shortly after
the peace of Ryswick, hunted out of the country because of his attending
the meetings in the Desert; but in 1700 he returned to preach and
to prophesy, acting also as a forest-ranger in the Aigoal Mountains.
Of all the chiefs he was the greatest controversialist, and in his
capacity of preacher he distinguished himself from his companions
by wearing a wig.

There must have been something comical in his appearance, for
Brueys describes him as a little, squat, bandy-legged man, presenting
"the figure of a little bear." But it was an enemy who drew the
picture.

Next there was Salomon Conderc, also a wool-carder, a native of the
hamlet of Mazelrode, south of the mountain of Bougès. For twenty
years the Condercs, father and son, had been zealous worshippers
in the Desert--Salomon having acted by turns as Bible-reader,
precentor, preacher, and prophet. We have already referred to the
gift of prophesying. All the leaders of the Camisards were
prophets. Elie Marion, in his "Théâtre Sacré de Cevennes," thus
describes the influence of the prophets on the Camisard War:--
"We were without strength and without counsel," says he; "but our
inspirations were our succour and our support. They elected our
leaders, and conducted them; they were our military discipline.
It was they who raised us, even weakness itself, to put a strong
bridle upon an army of more than twenty thousand picked soldiers.

It was they who banished sorrow from our hearts in the midst of the
greatest peril, as well as in the deserts and the mountain fastnesses,
when cold and famine oppressed us. Our heaviest crosses were but
lightsome burdens, for this intimate communion that God allowed us
to have with Him bore up and consoled us; it was our safety and our
happiness."
Many of the Condercs had suffered for their faith. The archpriest
Chayla had persecuted them grievously. One of their sisters was
seized by the soldiery and carried off to be immured in a convent at
Mende, but was rescued on the way by Salomon and his brother
Jacques. Of the two, Salomon, though deformed, had the greatest
gift in prophesying, and hence the choice of him as a leader.

Abraham Mazel belonged to the same hamlet as Conderc. They
were both of the same age--about twenty-five--of the same trade,
and they were as inseparable as brothers. They had both been engaged
with Seguier's band in the midnight attack on Pont-de-Montvert, and
were alike committed to the desperate enterprise they had taken in
hand. The tribe of Mazel abounds in the Cevennes, and they had
already given many martyrs to the cause. Some emigrated to America,
some were sent to the galleys; Oliver Mazel, the preacher, was hanged
at Montpellier in 1690, Jacques Mazel was a refugee in London
in 1701, and in all the combats of the Cevennes there were Mazels
leading as well as following.

Nicholas Joany, of Genouillac, was an old soldier, who had seen much
service, having been for some time quartermaster of the regiment of
Orleans.

Among other veterans who served with the Camisards, were Espérandieu
and Rastelet, two old sub-officers, and Catinat and Ravenel, two
thorough soldiers. Of these Catinat achieved the greatest notoriety.
His proper name was Mauriel--Abdias Mauriel; but having served as a
dragoon under Marshal Catinat in Italy, he conceived such an
admiration for that general, and was so constantly eulogizing him,
that his comrades gave him the nickname of Catinat, which he
continued to bear all through the Camisard war.

But the most distinguished of all the Camisard chiefs, next to
Roland, was the youthful John Cavalier, peasant boy, baker's apprentice,
and eventually insurgent leader, who, after baffling and repeatedly
defeating the armies of Louis XIV., ended his remarkable career as
governor of Jersey and major-general in the British service.

Cavalier was a native of Ribaute, a village on the Gardon, a little
below Anduze. His parents were persons in humble circumstances,
as may be inferred from the fact that when John was of sufficient
age he was sent into the mountains to herd cattle, and when a little
older he was placed apprentice to a baker at Anduze.

His father, though a Protestant at heart, to avoid persecution,
pretended to be converted to Romanism, and attended Mass. But his
mother, a fervent Calvinist, refused to conform, and diligently trained
her sons in her own views. She was a regular attender of meetings
in the Desert, to which she also took her children.

Cavalier relates that on one occasion, when a very little fellow,
he went with her to an assembly which was conducted by Claude
Brousson; and when he afterwards heard that many of the people had
been apprehended for attending it, of whom some were hanged and
others sent to the galleys, the account so shocked him that he felt
he would then have avenged them if he had possessed the power.

As the boy grew up, and witnessed the increasing cruelty with which
conformity was enforced, he determined to quit the country; and,
accompanied by twelve other young men, he succeeded in reaching
Geneva after a toilsome journey of eight days.

He had not been at Geneva more than two months, when--heart-sore,
solitary, his eyes constantly turned towards his dear Cevennes--he
accidentally heard that his father and mother had been thrown into
prison because of his flight--his father at Carcassone, and his
mother in the dreadful tower of Constance, near Aiguesmortes, one of
the most notorious prisons of the Huguenots.

He at once determined to return, in the hope of being able to get
them set at liberty. On his reaching Ribaute, to his surprise he found
them already released, on condition of attending Mass. As his
presence in his father's house might only serve to bring fresh
trouble upon them--he himself having no intention of conforming--he
went up for refuge into the mountains of the Cevennes.

The young Cavalier was present at the midnight meeting on the
Bougès, at which it was determined to slay the archpriest Chayla.
He implored leave to accompany the band; but he was declared to be
too young for such an enterprise, being a boy of only sixteen, so he
was left behind with his friends.

Being virtually an outlaw, Cavalier afterwards joined the band of
Laporte, under whom he served as lieutenant during his short career.

At his death the insurrection assumed larger proportions, and
recruits flocked apace to the standard of Roland, Laporte's
successor.
Harvest-work over, the youths of the Lower Cevennes hastened to
join him, armed only with bills and hatchets. The people of the
Vaunage more than fulfilled their promise to Roland, and sent him
five hundred men.

Cavalier also brought with him from Ribaute a further number of
recruits, and by the end of autumn the Camisards under arms, such
as they were, amounted to over a thousand men.

Roland, unable to provide quarters or commissariat for so large a
number, divided them into five bodies, and sent them into their
respective cantonments (so to speak) for the winter. Roland himself
occupied the district known as the Lower Cevennes, comprising the
Gardonnenque and the mountain district situated between the rivers
Vidourle and the western Gardon. That part of the Upper Cevennes,
which extends between the Anduze branch of the Gardon and
the river Tarn, was in like manner occupied by a force commanded
by Abraham Hazel and Solomon Conderc, while Andrew Castanet led
the people of the western Cevennes, comprising the mountain region
of the Aigoal and the Esperou, near the sources of the Gardon
d'Anduze and the Tarnon.

The rugged mountain district of the Lozère, in which the Tarn, the
Ceze, and the Alais branch of the Gardon have their origin, was placed
under the command of Joany. And, finally, the more open country
towards the south, extending from Anduze to the sea-coast, including
the districts around Alais, Uzes, Nismes, as well as the
populous valley of the Vaunage, was placed under the direction of
young Cavalier, though he had scarcely yet completed his seventeenth
year.

These chiefs were all elected by their followers, who chose
them, not because of any military ability they might possess, but
entirely because of their "gifts" as preachers and "prophets."
Though Roland and Joany had been soldiers, they were also preachers,
as were Castanet, Abraham, and Salomon; and young Cavalier had
already given remarkable indications of the prophetic gift.

Hence, when it became the duty of the band to which he belonged to
select a chief, they passed over the old soldiers, Espérandieu,
Raslet, Catinat, and Ravenel, and pitched upon the young baker lad
of Ribaute, not because he could fight, but because he could
preach; and the old soldiers cheerfully submitted themselves to
his leadership.

The portrait of this remarkable Camisard chief represents him as a
little handsome youth, fair and ruddy complexioned, with lively
and prominent blue eyes, and a large head, from whence his long
fair hair hung floating over his shoulders.

His companions recognised in him a supposed striking resemblance
to the scriptural portrait of David, the famous shepherd of Israel.

The Camisard legions, spread as they now were over the entire Cevennes,
and embracing Lower Languedoc as far as the sea, were for the most
part occupied during the winter of 1702-3 in organizing themselves,
obtaining arms, and increasing their forces. The respective districts
which they occupied were so many recruiting-grounds, and by
the end of the season they had enrolled nearly three thousand
men. They were still, however, very badly armed. Their weapons
included fowling-pieces, old matchlocks, muskets taken from the
militia, pistols, sabres, scythes, hatchets, billhooks, and even
ploughshares. They were very short of powder, and what they had was
mostly bought surreptitiously from the King's soldiers, or by
messengers sent for the purpose to Nismes and Avignon.
But Roland, finding that such sources of supply could not be depended
upon, resolved to manufacture his own powder.

A commissariat was also established, and the most spacious caves
in the most sequestered places were sought out and converted into
magazines, hospitals, granaries, cellars, arsenals, and powder
factories. Thus Mialet, with its extensive caves, was the head-quarters
of Roland; Bouquet and the caves at Euzet, of Cavalier; Cassagnacs
and the caves at Magistavols, of Salomon; and so on with the others.
Each chief had his respective canton, his granary, his magazine, and
his arsenal. To each retreat was attached a special body of
tradesmen--millers, bakers, shoemakers, tailors, armourers, and
other mechanics; and each had its special guards and sentinels.

We have already referred to the peculiar geological features of the
Cevennes, and to the limestone strata which embraces the whole
granitic platform of the southern border almost like a frame.
As is almost invariably the case in such formations, large caves,
occasioned by the constant dripping of water, are of frequent
occurrence; and those of the Cevennes, which are in many places of
great extent, constituted a peculiar feature in the Camisard
insurrection. There is one of such caves in the neighbourhood of
the Protestant town of Ganges, on the river Herault, which
often served as a refuge for the Huguenots, though it is now
scarcely penetrable because of the heavy falls of stone from the
roof. This cavern has two entrances, one from the river Herault,
the other from the Mendesse, and it extends under the entire mountain,
which separates the two rivers. It is still known as the
"Camisards' Grotto." There are numerous others of a like character
all over the district; but as those of Mialet were of special
importance--Mialet, "the Metropolis of the Insurrection," being
the head-quarters of Roland--it will be sufficient if we briefly
describe a visit paid to them in the month of June, 1870.

* * * * *

The town of Anduze is the little capital of the Gardonnenque,
a district which has always been exclusively Protestant. Even at the
present day, of the 5,200 inhabitants of Anduze, 4,600 belong to
that faith; and these include the principal proprietors, cultivators,
and manufacturers of the town and neighbourhood.

During the wars of religion, Anduze was one of the Huguenot
strongholds. After the death of Henry IV. the district continued
to be held by the Duc de Rohan, the ruins of whose castle are
still to be seen on the summit of a pyramidal hill on the north of
the town. Anduze is jammed in between the precipitous mountain
of St. Julien, which rises behind it, and the river Gardon, along
which a modern quay-wall extends, forming a pleasant promenade
as well as a barrier against the furious torrents which rush down
from the mountains in winter.

A little above the town, the river passes through a rocky gorge
formed by the rugged grey cliffs of Peyremale on the one bank
and St. Julien on the other. The bare precipitous rocks rise up
on either side like two cyclopean towers, flanking the gateway
of the Cevennes. The gorge is so narrow at bottom that there is
room only for the river running in its rocky bed below, and a
roadway along either bank--that on the eastern side having been
partly formed by blasting out the cliff which overhangs it.

After crossing the five-arched bridge which spans the Gardon,
the road proceeds along the eastern bank, up the valley towards Mialet.
It being market-day at Anduze, well-clad peasants were flocking
into the town, some in their little pony-carts, others with their
baskets or bundles of produce, and each had his "Bon jour, messieurs!"

for us as we passed. So long as the road held along the bottom of the
valley, passing through the scattered hamlets and villages north of
the town, our little springless cart got along cleverly enough.
But after we had entered the narrower valley higher up, and the
cultivated ground became confined to a little strip along either
bank, then the mountain barriers seemed to rise in front of us
and on all sides, and the road became winding, steep, and difficult.

A few miles up the valley, the little hamlet of Massoubeyran, consisting
of a group of peasant cottages--one of which was the birthplace of
Roland, the Camisard chief--was seen on a hill-side to the right; and
about two miles further on, at a bend of the road, we came in sight
of the village of Mialet, with its whitewashed, flat-roofed
cottages--forming a little group of peasants' houses lying in the
hollow of the hills.

The principal building in it is the Protestant temple, which continues
to be frequented by the inhabitants; the _Annuaire Protestant_ for
1868-70, stating the Protestant population of the district to be
1,325.

Strange to say, the present pastor, M.

Seguier, bears the name of the first leader of the Camisard
insurrection; and one of the leading members of the consistory, M.
Laporte, is a lineal descendant of the second and third leaders.

From its secluded and secure position among the hills, as well as
because of its proximity to the great Temelac road constructed by
Baville, which passed from Anduze by St.

Jean-de-Gard into the Upper Cevennes, Mialet was well situated as
the head-quarters of the Camisard chief. But it was principally
because of the numerous limestone caves abounding in the locality,
which afforded a ready hiding-place for the inhabitants in the
event of the enemies' approach, as well as because they were
capable of being adapted for the purpose of magazines, stores, and
hospitals, that Mialet became of so much importance as the citadel
of the insurgents. One of such caverns or grottoes is still to
be seen about a mile below Mialet, of extraordinary magnitude. It
extends under the hill which rises up on the right-hand side of the
road, and is entered from behind, nearly at the summit. The
entrance is narrow and difficult, but the interior is large and
spacious, widening out in some places into dome-shaped chambers,
with stalactites hanging from the roof. The whole extent of this
cavern cannot be much less than a quarter of a mile, judging from
the time it took to explore it and to return from the furthest point
in the interior to the entrance. The existence of this place had
been forgotten until a few years ago, when it was rediscovered
by a man of Anduze, who succeeded in entering it, but, being
unable to find his way out, he remained there for three days without
food, until the alarm was given and his friends came to his rescue
and delivered him.
Immediately behind the village of Mialet, under the side of the
hill, is another large cavern, with other grottoes branching out
of it, capable, on an emergency, of accommodating the whole population.
This was used by Roland as his principal magazine.This great general, then, when he had got comfortably settled in his
easy chair, must needs show the people what faith he had in his new
plan. So he ordered little George to pack up his baggage, stop
knocking at the enemy's back door, and bring his army back to
Washington on transports. Of course the rebels were very thankful to
him for this act of kindness, as it evinced a disposition to conduct
the war for their benefit. With General George and his army on their
way to Washington by ship, Richmond was no longer besieged. And then
the rebel army was at liberty to go where it pleased. And it very
soon pleased General Lee to march it against Washington at a rapid
pace, and over the shortest road. We had an army at sea, and a
number of others we did not know just exactly where. So things
military began to get so confused that the people did not understand
them. They were requested to be patient, however, and patient they
had to be.

Well, my son, we brought the scattered battalions we had on their
front together at the forts, and soon formed a good fighting army.
But where was the new general to lead it to victory for us? The
government cast about it for a man, and at last fixed its eye on
Pope. He was the shining star among generals, the man to take the
buckrum out of the rebels for us. And it was said of this great
general that he possessed uncommon virtues. His friends laid
numerous feats of valor at his door, and the whole history of war
was ransacked to find another such a hero. He had captured Islands,
whipped rebel armies (I have forgotten how many), and bagged
invisible prisoners enough to satisfy a Napoleon. This great
general, too, was remarkable for his modesty; and he was also a man
of strict veracity. Yes, my son, considering the times, he was a
rare example of a man who never boasts of his achievements, nor
claims a feather that belongs to another man's cap. Such were the
virtues of this great general.

Well, my son, we sent for him to come to Washington and take care of
us, and he came.


CHAPTER VIII.

HOW THE NEW GENERAL CAME TO TOWN.


MY artist has drawn you an exact picture of the manner in which this
great general entered the capital of the nation. The skies
brightened, and the country felt safe again at the thought of having
such a hero. Children laughed and gamboled, and said the rebels
would get it now Pope had come to town. Dogs ran out, and barked,
and snapped for joy. The crowd pressed forward to look at him, and
policemen, for once, had enough to do. Fair women waived
handkerchiefs and threw him kisses. And many were they who marvelled
that so great a soldier had remained so long undiscovered. You see,
my son, we are a people much given to excitement, and when we get to
heaping honors on a man we do it without mercy. [_Pour la Patrie._]

A MUTTON SALAD
Cut some slices of cold mutton or lamb, removing every bit of fat
and skin that you can, unless that destroys the firmness of the
slice.
Prepare a salad of lettuce, and if you cannot give a mayonnaise
sauce, add to the lettuce plenty of sliced cucumber, for that keeps
the mutton moist.

Put the salad on each slice and roll the meat over as tightly as
you can. Lay the rolls closely together in a dish and sprinkle a very
little salad dressing over them. This way of doing meat is very
useful for taking to picnics, or for taking on a long journey.

[_Pour la Patrie._]

SAUSAGE PATTIES
Half a pound of sausage meat of any kind that you like. Make some
rounds of paste, lay the meat on half of each round and fold over.
Steam for quarter of an hour, or stew in plenty of gravy.

[_Pour la Patrie_.]

SAUSAGE AND POTATOES
Roll some cooked sausage meat in mashed potatoes, making a roll
for each person. Brush the potatoes over with milk and put
them to bake till nicely browned. Decorate with gherkins on each
roll of butter.

[_Pour la Patrie_.]

RAGOUT OF COLD MEAT
Take any cold meat that you have, free it from fat and skin and cut
it in rounds like a five-franc piece. If you have some lean bacon
or ham, a little of that should be added.

I should tell you first of all to put some rice on to boil in boiling
water. Make a sauce of flour and butter in a pan, adding gravy if
you happen to have it, but failing that, use water and vinegar in
equal parts to thin it; season with pepper and salt and a small
spoonful of anchovy sauce. When the sauce is heating, put in the
meat and cover the pan, let it all heat for twelve minutes and then
place meat and sauce in the middle of a dish. By this time the rice
may be tender. Drain it well and put it as a border to the
stew.

[_Aimee._] 

A QUICKLY MADE STEW
Put a piece of butter in a stewpan, with an onion cut in pieces, a
few cloves, salt and pepper, a tablespoonful of shredded parsley,
and if you have it some good gravy or meat juice and water. Throw
into the sauce some cold meat, preferably underdone, and after it
has simmered for fifteen minutes take a cut onion and rub with it
the bottom of the dish that you are going to use.And again there
was great blowing of horns and beating of drums. And when he had got
his headquarters firmly established in the saddle, he invited the
enemy to come forward and get whipped. And the enemy came forward in
all their strength,--fierce and earnest, and a great and bloody
battle was fought on the plains of Manassas. And when they had
fought for three days General Pope declared his new method of
carrying on the war was a great success; that he had got the rebels
just where he wanted them, and would have them all in his trap for
us to-morrow. We all threw up our caps and felt so happy at this
good news. But our hopes were dashed to the ground again, and it
turned out that our Pope had made a slight mistake. It was the
rebels who had got him just where they wanted. The saddle was not a
good place from which to see what the enemy were doing. And as Pope
had given no heed to his rear, General Lee very wisely took the
responsibility of giving that important position his attention.

When, then, to-morrow came, our general, who was to give the rebels
such a whipping for us, found them in his rear, on his flank,
everywhere but where he wanted them. The very natural result of this
was that his army resolved itself into a state of confusion, and in
that manner came scampering back on Washington, leaving its
commander to take care of himself, which he did, though with the
loss of his wardrobe. It has been hinted that he returned to
Washington a much wiser general than when he left it.

The nation was again brought to grief, and fear and disorder reigned
in Washington. People were heard to say that Pope had made a
prodigious failure, and was not the general we took him for, or he
never would have let his army run away from him in this way. Others
declared he had opened the gates of the city to the enemy, and
invited him to walk in. And it was not with feelings of
encouragement that they saw gunboats move up and take position where
they could check the enemy's approach. Never did general lose his
laurels so quickly. Indeed, my son, when he returned to Washington,
with little else than his saddle, there was not a dog to bark him a
welcome, nor a chambermaid to wave a napkin in his honor.

Timid people fancied every hour of the day that they could see the
rebel army deploying over the hills of Arlington, and loud calls
were made for a general who could save us. But we had something
better than a mere general to save us. We had the grim and silent
strength of the forts. And these the enemy dare not approach. Their
effect on the enemy was manifest and he turned aside from them, and
passed up into Maryland, victorious and defiant.

I ought to tell you, my son, that while Pope was illustrating the
beauties of his new plan at the front, and bringing confusion on our
arms, General George arrived with his good old army of the Potomac,
which still loved him, still worshipped him as its hero. And just
when he was most needed, to save Pope from his disaster, the
government relieved him of his command, as if to increase the
confusion already prevailing. The army felt this as a slight offered
to itself, and called loudly for the restoration of its favorite
general. And then the general, whose portrait I have placed at the
head of a previous chapter, and who sat in his easy chair in
Washington, and brought our armies to grief, called loudly for
General George to come and help him out of his trouble. This, you
will see, my son, was first tying a man's hands, and then asking him
to come and help whip a giant.

Yes, my son, there was toil and trouble enough in Washington just
then; and the errors our wise men had committed were like witches
rising up and haunting them. It is said that the little bell-ringer
of the State Department had his traps packed up, and ready to move;
and that fear had made the burly man in the War Department civil.
It was an experience never to be repeated and never to be
forgotten!

[Illustration: "THE STORY OF VICTOR."]
* * * * *
As you sit at twilight in the "sweet safe corner of the household
fire," the sound of the raindrops on the window-pane mingling with
the laughing treble of childish voices in some distant room, you see
certain pictures in the dying flame,--pictures unspeakably precious
to every one who has lived, or loved, or suffered.

I have my memory-pictures, too; and from the fairest frame of all
shines Patsy's radiant face as it looked into mine long ago when
I told him the story of Victor.

CHAPTER VI.

A LITTLE "HOODLUM'S" VIRTUE KINDLES AT THE TOUCH OF JOY.

"If you make children happy now, you will make them happy twenty
years hence by the memory of it."

The next morning when I reached the little tin shop on the corner,--a
blessed trysting-place, forever sacred, where the children
waited for me in sunshine, rain, wind, and storm, unless forbidden,--there
on the step sat faithful Patsy, with a clean and shining morning
face, all glowing with anticipation. How well I remember my poor
lad's first day!

Where should I seat him? There was an empty space beside little Mike
Higgins, but Mike's character, obtained from a fond and candid parent,
had been to the effect "that he was in heaven any time if he could
jest lay a boy out flat"! And there was a place by Moses, but he
was very much of a fop just then, owing to a new "second-hand" coat,
and might make scathing allusions to Patsy's abbreviated
swallow-tail.

But a pull at my skirt and a whisper from the boy decided me.

"Please can't I set aside o' you, Miss Kate?"
"But, Patsy, the fun of it is I never do sit."
"Why, I thought teachers never done nothin' but set!"
"You don't know much about little boys and girls, that's sure! Well,
suppose you put your chair in front and close to me. Here is
Maggie Bruce on one side.

She is a real little Kindergarten mother, and will show you just
how to do everything.

Won't you, Maggie?"

We had our morning hymn and our familiar talk, in which we always
"outlined the policy" of the new day; for the children were apt
to be angelic and receptive at nine o'clock in the morning, the
unwillingness of the spirit and weakness of the flesh seldom
overtaking them till an hour or so later.

It chanced to be a beautiful day, for Helen and I were both happy
and well, our volunteer helpers were daily growing more zealous
and efficient, and there was no tragedy in the immediate foreground.

In one of the morning songs, when Paulina went into the circle and
threw good-morning kisses to the rest, she wafted a dozen of them to
the ceiling, a proceeding I could not understand.

"Why did you throw so many of your kisses up in the air, dear?" I
asked, as she ran back to my side.

"Them was good-mornings to Johnny Cass, so 't he wouldn't feel
lonesome," she explained; and the tender bit of remembrance was
followed out by the children for days afterward. Was it not
enough to put us in a gentle humor?

Patsy was not equal to the marching when, later on, the Lilliputian
army formed itself in line and kept step to the music of a lively
tune, and he was far too shy on the first day to join in the play,
though he watched the game of the Butterfly with intense interest
from his nook by the piano.

After the tiny worm had wriggled itself realistically into a cocoon
it went to sleep; and after a moment of dramatic silence, the
little one chosen for the butterfly would separate herself from
the still cocoon and fly about the circle, sipping mimic honey
from the child-flowers.

To see Carlotty Griggs "being a butterfly," with utter intensity
of joy and singleness of purpose, was a sight to be remembered. For
Carlotty was a pickaninny four years old, and blacker than the Ace
of Spades! Her purple calico dress, pink apron, and twenty little
woolly braids tied with bits of yellow ribbon made her the most
tropical of butterflies; and the children, having a strong sense of
color and hardly any sense of humor, were always entirely carried
away by her antics.

[Illustration: CARLOTTY GRIGGS "BEING A BUTTERFLY."]
Carlotty had huge feet,--indeed, Carlotty "toed in," for that
matter; but her face shone with delight; her eyes glistened, and so
did her teeth; and when she waved her ebony hands and flitted among
the children, she did it as airily as any real butterfly that ever
danced over a field of clover blossoms.

And if Patsy's joy was great in the play, it was greater still in
the work that came afterward. When Helen gave him a scarlet and gold
mat to weave, his fingers trembled with eagerness; and the
expression of his face caused that impulsive young person to fly
to my side and whisper, "Oh, why should one ever 'want to be an
angel' when one can be a Kindergartner!"
* * * * *
From this time on, Patsy was the first to come in the morning and the
last to leave at night. He took the whole institution under his
guardianship, and had a watchful eye for everybody and everything
belonging to it.

He soon learned the family history of every child in the school, and
those family histories, I assure you, were of an exciting nature;
but so great were Patsy's prudence and his idea of the proprieties
that he never divulged his knowledge till we were alone. Then
his tongue would be loosed, and he would break into his
half-childlike, half-ancient and reflective conversation.

He had a stormy temper, which, however, he was fast learning to control,
and he was not always kind and gentle with his little playfellows;
for he had been raised in a hard school, and the giving and
taking of blows was a natural matter, to him the only feasible manner
of settling a misunderstanding.

His conduct to me, however, was touching in its devotion and perfect
obedience; and from the first hour he was my poor little knight
_sans peur et sans reproche_.

Meanwhile, though not perfect, he was greatly changed for the better.
We had given him a neat little coat and trousers, his hair was short
and smooth, and his great dark eyes shone with unutterable content.
He was never joyous; born under a cloud, he had lived in its shadow,
and sorrow too early borne had left its indelible impress, to be
removed only by that "undisturbed vision of the Father's face, which
is joy unutterable;" but for the first time in his life he
was at peace.

The Duchess of Anna Street had moved into a house a trifle better
suited to her exalted station in life; one where the view was better,
and the society worthy of a fish-peddler's family. Accordingly we
transferred the Kennetts into Number 32, an honor which they
took calmly at first, on account of the odor of fish that pervaded
the apartments. The three and four year old Kennetts were now members
of our flock, the dull baby was cared for daily by the Infant
Shelter, and Mrs. Kennett went out washing; while her spouse upheld
the cause of labor by attending sand-lot meetings in the afternoon
and marching in the evening.

So, in the rainy winter afternoons, when the other children had
gone, Patsy and I stayed together and arranged the next day's
occupations.
Slang was being gradually eliminated from his conversation; but it is
no small task to correct nine years of bad grammar, and I never
succeeded in doing it. Alas! the time was all too short.

It was Patsy who sorted the wools and threaded the needles, and set
right the sewing-cards of the babies; and only the initiated can
comprehend the labyrinthine maze into which an energetic three-year-old
can transform a bit of sewing.

It was he who fished the needles from the cracks in the floor, rubbed
the blackboards, and scrubbed the slates, talking busily the
while.

"Jiminy! (I take that back.) Miss Kate, we can't let Jimmy Buck have
no more needles; he sows 'em thick as seed round his chair. Now,
now jis' look yere! Ef that Battles chap hain't scratched the hull
top of this table with a buzzer! I'd lam him good ef I was
you, I would."

"Do you think our Kindergarten would be the pleasant place it
is if I whipped little boys every day?"
"No-o-o! But there is times"--
"Yes, I know, Patsy, but I have never found them."
"Jim's stayin' out nights, this week," said he one day, "'nd I hez
to stay along o' Mis' Kennett till nine o'clock."
"Why, I thought Jim always stayed at home in the evening."
"Yes, he allers used ter; but he's busy now lookin' up a girl,
don't yer know."
"Looking up a girl! What do you mean, Patsy?"
Patsy scratched his head with the "ten-toothed comb of Nature,"--a
habit which prevailed with terrible and suggestive frequency when
I first came "into my kingdom,"--and answered:-- 
"Lookin' up a girl!

Why, I s'posed yer knew that. I dunno 'zackly. Jim says all the
fellers does. He says he hates to git the feed an' wash the dishes
orfly, 'nd girls likes ter do it best of anything."
"Oh!" cried I, light bursting in upon my darkened intellect when
dish-washing was mentioned; "he wants to get married!"
"Well, he has ter look up a girl first, don't yer s'pose?"
"Yes, of course; but I don't see how Jim can get money enough
to take care of a wife. He only has thirty dollars a month."
"Well, he's goin' ter get a girl what'll 'go halveys,'
don't yer know, and pay for her keep. He'd ruther have a 'millingnary'
girl--they're the nicest; but if he can't, he's goin' to try for
one out of the box factory."
"Oh, Patsy! I wish"--
"Why, didn't I ought ter say that?"
"I wish you had a mother, dear."
"If I had, I'd know more 'n I do now," and a great sigh heaved itself
upward from beneath the blue jacket.

"No, you wouldn't know so much, Patsy, or at least you would get
the right end first.

Never mind, dear boy, you can't understand."

"Jim says Mis' Kennett 'nd I needn't set such store by you, 'cause
the fust chance you gits you'll git married." (I always did have an
elective antipathy for Jim.) "Shall yer, Miss Kate?"
"Why, dear, I think we are very happy as we are, don't you?"

"Yes, ef I could only stay f'rever, 'nd not go ter the reel
school. Jim says I ought ter be gittin' book learnin' pretty soon."

"Did you tell him that Miss Helen was teaching you to read and write
a little while every afternoon?"
"Yes, I told him. He liked it fust rate. Mis' Kennett said she'd
let her childern stay f'rever with yer, ef they never larned a
thing, 'nd so would I, dear, dear Miss Kate! Oh, I bet God would
like to see you in that pretty blue dress!" and he hung over me with
a speechless caress; his first, and last indeed, for he was shy and
reticent in emotion, and never once showed his affection in the
presence of the other children.

[Illustration: PAULINA'S "GOOD-MORNINGS TO JOHNNY CASS."]

CHAPTER VII.

PATSY FINDS HIS THREE LOST YEARS.

"Now God be thanked for years enwrought With love which softens
yet.
Now God he thanked for every thought Which is so tender it has
caught Earth's guerdon of regret."

Well, Jim did not succeed in finding his girl, although he "looked"
industriously. Either the "millingnaries" did not smile
upon him and his slender bank account, or they were not willing to
wash the dishes and halve the financial responsibilities besides;
but as the winter days slipped by, we could not help seeing
that Patsy's pale face grew paler and his soft dark eyes larger
and more pathetic. In spite of better care than he had ever had before,
he was often kept at home by suffering all too intense for a child
to bear. It was almost as if a sixth sense came to him in those
days, so full was he of strange thoughts and intuitions.
His eyes followed me wistfully as I passed from one child to
another, and when my glance fell upon him, his loving gaze seemed
always waiting for mine.

When we were alone, as he pored over picture-books, or sat
silently by the window, watching the drops chase each other down
the pane, his talk was often of heaven and the angels.

[Illustration: "HE SAT SILENTLY BY THE WINDOW."]
Daga Ohlsen had left us. Her baby eyes had opened under Norway
skies, but her tongue had learned the trick of our language when her
father and mother could not speak nor understand a word, and so she
became a childish interpreter of manners and customs in general.
But we knew that mothers' hearts are the same the world over, and,
lacking the power to put our sympathy in words, we sent Daga's last
bit of sewing to her mother. Sure enough, no word was needed; the
message explained itself; and when we went to take a last look at the
dear child, the scrap of cardboard lay in the still hand, the
needle threaded with yellow wool, the childish knot, soiled and
cumbersome, hanging below the pattern just as she had left it. It
was her only funeral offering, her only funeral service, and was
it not something of a sermon? It told the history of her industry,
her sudden call from earthly things, and her mother's tender thought.
It chanced to be a symbol, too, as things do chance sometimes,
for it was a butterfly dropping its cocoon behind it, and spreading
its wings for flight.

Patsy had been our messenger during Daga's illness, and his mind was
evidently on that mystery which has puzzled souls since the
beginning of time; for no anxious, weary, waiting heart has ever
ceased to beat without its passionate desire to look into the
beyond.

"Nixy Jones's mother died yesterday, Miss Kate. They had an orful
nice funeral."
"Yes, I'm sorry for the poor little children; they will miss their
mamma."
"Not 'nuff to hurt 'em!

Them Joneses never cared nuthin' for nobody; they was playing on tin
oyster cans the hull blessed ev'nin', till Jim went 'nd stop't 'em,
'nd told 'em it warn't perlite. Say how dretful it must be to go
down into the cold, dark ground, and be shut up in a tight box,
'nd want to git out--git out--'nd keep hollerin' 'nd a-hollerin',
and nobody come to fetch yer, cause yer's dead!"
"Oh, Patsy, child, stop such fearful thoughts! I hope people
are glad and willing to stay when they are dead. The part of them
that wonders and thinks and feels and loves and is happy or sad--you
know what I mean, don't you?"
"Yes," he said slowly, leaning his head on his hand.

"God takes care of that part; it is His own, and He makes it all
right.
And as for our bodies, Patsy, you don't care about keeping your poor
little aching back, do you? You talk about the cold, dark earth.
Why, I think of it as the tender, warm earth, that holds
the little brown acorn until it begins to grow into a spreading
oak-tree, and nurses the little seeds till they grow into lovely
blossoming flowers. Now we must trot home, Patsy. Wrap this
shawl over your shoulders, and come under my umbrella."
"Oh, I don't need any shawl, please. I'm so orful hot!"
"That's just the reason," I replied, as I looked with anxious eyes
at his flushed cheeks.

I left him at the little door on Anna Street, and persuaded Mrs. Kennett
to give him some hot soup at dinner-time.

The next morning I was startled from a profound sleep by a tremendous
peal of the door-bell. Though only half awakened, my forebodings
seemed realized; and the bell rang "Patsy" in my ears.

I hastily slipped on my dress, and, going to the door, saw just whom
I expected,--Jim.

"What's the matter with Patsy?"
"He's turrible bad, miss; he got took with one o' them fits the
worst kind in the night, and liked ter died.

Yer could a heerd him screech a block off."
"Oh, my poor boy! Have you had a doctor? What did he say?"
"Well, he said he guessed it was the last one, miss, 'nd I'm
afraid it is, sure."
"Who is with him now? Are you going right back?"
"Yes, miss, soon as I go 'nd git leave from the boss. Mis' Kennett's
went to her washin'. She couldn't 'ford ter lose a job. I found
Mr.
Kennett, 'nd he's mindin' Patsy.

He cries for you; he says he don't want nothin' but jest Miss Kate,
and he's that crazy he wants to git up 'nd come to the Kindergarten."

"Dear little lad!"

I said, trying to keep back the tears. "Here, Jim, take the school
keys to Miss Helen, and ask her to take my place to-day.
I'll start in ten minutes for Patsy."
"Thank yer, miss. I tell yer, he's a crooked little chap, but he's
as smart as they make 'em; 'nd annyhow, he's all the folks I've
got in the world, 'nd I hope we kin pull him through."
* * * * *
"Pull him through!" Had years passed over Patsy's head since I saw
him last? He seemed to have grown old with the night's pain, but
the eyes shone out with new lustre and brilliancy, making ready, I
thought, to receive the heavenly visions.
We were alone. I could not bear Mr. Kennett's presence, and had
dispatched him for the doctor. I knelt by the bedside, and took his
cold hand in mine. I could not pray God to spare him, it was so
clear that He had better take him to Himself.
"I knowed you'd come, Miss Kate," he said faintly; "I knowed you'd
hurry up; you's allers hurryin' up for us boys."
Oh, how beautiful, how awesome, it is to be the messenger of peace
to an unhappy soul! So great a joy is it to bear that it is not
given to many twice in a lifetime.
The rain beat upon the frail roof, the wind blew about the little
house, and a darkness of fast-gathering black clouds fell into the
room in place of the morning sunbeams. It was a gloomy day for a
journey, but if one were traveling from shadow into sunshine, I
thought, it would not matter much.
"Mis' Kennett says I must hev a priest, but I don't want no priest
but you," whispered the faint voice as I bent over the pillows.
"What does priests do when folks is sick, Miss Kate?"
"They pray, Patsy." 
"What fur?"
I paused, for in my grief I could think of no simple way of telling
that ignorant little child what they did pray for.
"They will pray for you, dear," I said at length, "because they
will want to talk to God about the little boy who is coming to Him;
to tell Him how glad they are that he is to be happy at last, but
that they shall miss him very, very much."
"The priest lives clear out Market Street, 'nd he wouldn't git 'ere
'fore God knew the hull thing 'thout his tellin' of it. You pray,
Miss Kate."
_"O thou dear, loving Father in Heaven, Patsy's Father and mine,
who givest all the little children into their mothers' arms, if one
of them is lost and wandering about the world forlorn and alone,
surely Thou wilt take him to a better home! We send little Patsy
to Thee, and pray that his heart may be fitted with joy and
thankfulness when he comes to live in Thy house."_
"Tell 'im 'bout them three years what I lost, so 't He'll make
'lowance, jest as you did."
_"O God, who saw fit to lay a heavy burden on Patsy's little shoulders
and take away his three years, make them up to him in his heavenly
life."_
"Yer never said Amen! 'T ain't no good 'thout yer say Amen!"
_"Amen!"_
Silence for many minutes. The brain was alive with thoughts, but
the poor tired body was weakened already with the labor of telling
them.
When he spoke again, it was more slowly and with greater difficulty.
"I guess--Heaven--is kind o' like--our Kindergartent--don't you?
'nd so--I ain't goin' to feel--strange!In short, we followed him back
timidly to Orange Court House, where he made a settlement for the
winter. There was a good deal of small fighting done during the
autumn and winter, but neither side seemed to gain any advantage.
The fate of war hung in the balance. If we gained an advantage one
day, the enemy would do something to offset it on the next. This
state of things was a source of great grief to the nation. The
people wanted something more positive for the great amount of life
and treasure they were wasting. They called for more earnestness and
more resolution on the part of our generals, and a better system of
carrying on the war on the part of the authorities at Washington.
So, my son, the people's impatience was at length heeded, and when
spring came (I mean the spring of 1864), and the people were weary
of the war, and demanded a change in the policy of conducting it, so
that an end be put to it as speedily as possible, the government
began to wake up to its duty. We had fought battles for two years
and hung the nation in mourning, and still Washington was as often
in danger as Richmond. Indeed, the fortune of war seemed in favor of
Richmond. Then the government began to see that if we would gain
victories our armies must be commanded by soldiers, not politicians.

Yes, my son, the people were excited to joy when the government
changed its military policy, and the great General Grant was brought
to Washington and placed in command of all our armies. The sun of
our hopes brightened then, for the people had confidence in that
general. He had whipped the rebels so well for us in the West, and
he had gained for us so many glorious victories.

And now, my son, we come to this remarkable siege of Washington. I
say remarkable, for it is destined to stand on the pages of military
history without anything to compare with it. Not that it was as
bloody, or that the city was as obstinately attacked and defended as
heroically, as some other cities that have been besieged, in ancient
as well as modern times. But you must know that sieges, like
battles, derive their great importance and all that makes them
remembered hereafter, not so much from the amount of blood that has
been shed during them, not so much from the impetuosity of the
attacks made or the heroic defences, as from the manner in which
they affect the fate of nations. Some sieges are remarkable for one
thing, some another. The siege of Washington was more remarkable for
the manner in which the city was defended than the manner in which
it was attacked. No fields were fertilized with carnage, nor banners
bathed in blood.

You, remember, my son, the tale of storied Troy, with all its "pomp
and circumstance of glorious war." But, my son, it has never seemed
to me more interesting than the passage of Thermopyl. Nor will
Agamemnon live in history after Leonidas is forgotten. And yet these
events in ancient war were small compared with the battles our Grant
fought. His deeds will brighten as you read of them in history, and
become greater than them all.

And now, my son, let us hie to the siege of Washington. Washington
was besieged and Washington was saved; and the history of its
salvation must not perish. Rome, you know, was saved by the cackling
of a goose. And when I tell you that Washington, the capital city of
this great nation was saved by the too free use of a barrel of
whisky, you must not be surprised. When its great circle of
fortifications, now bristling with cannon, and filled with busy
soldiers, shall become so many grassy mounds, their history must
still live to excite the patriotism of those who come after us.

Remember, my son, that had Washington fallen the nation had
perished. To this remarkable siege, then, and its results, let all
the succeeding glories of this great Republic be attributed.

As I have told you before, my son, after the first battle of
Manassas, when our militia did such good running, there was nothing
to prevent the rebels from entering and capturing it but the few
hastily constructed forts, or ttes de pont, on the Virginia side.
Nor could these have offered any resistance worth naming. Our
demoralized troops, however, never halted until they got safe inside
of them. And but for these forts, weak as they were, the city would
have fallen. When General McClellan assumed command, he saw at once
the necessity of properly fortifying the city. And the nation ought
never to forget him for his decision. Experienced engineers, with
large gangs of laborers, were set to work throwing up these huge
masses of earthwork. To this was added the labor of a large number
of the troops of the Army of the Potomac, during its organization in
the autumn and winter of 1861 and 1862. When, therefore, the army
moved for the Peninsula in the spring of 1862, the city was so
strongly fortified that it was considered safe by General McClellan
and his corps commanders. That is, my son, if its forts were
properly garrisoned, and there was a working force of forty thousand
men. But nothing was safe against the fears of a timid
administration.

But forts, my son, however strong, are only inert masses. They
cannot fight themselves; and to give them strength and action they
require to be properly and fully garrisoned. And the troops in them
require to be properly instructed in all their duties. Now, my son,
it was a question with the government, which was very timid at that
time, whether General George had left, in and around Washington, a
force sufficient to make the city perfectly safe when he started on
his memorable campaign. It is the opinion of nearly all our best
military men that he did. But the politicians got frightened, the
government got frightened, and the political generals got
frightened. And all the frightened people got their heads together;
and they made the President and Secretary of War believe just as
they believed--that Washington had been "unarmed," and that
Washington was in danger. Yes, my son, our good-hearted President,
who was no coward, was sorely troubled about the safety of
Washington. And his Secretary of War was also much troubled, as was
common with him on the appearance of danger. And the "Chief of
Staff" was also in trouble, and went to issuing orders, of a
memorable kind, few of which were understood, much less obeyed. The
result of all this was that there was great conflict of action. I
have no better name to call it by, my son. Hence it was, my son,
that our good President halted McDowell, and McDowell's corps. And
both looked on from a distance while General George was fighting
desperate battles with the enemy. This was the way the War
Department carried on the war at that time. Now, my son, it is my
purpose to so instruct you that you will know the whole truth
concerning the way the war was carried on.

The detention of General McDowell and his corps, while it
illustrated the great anxiety of the President and Secretary of War
for the safety of Washington, caused the failure of the campaign on
the Peninsula. All the sophistry in the world, my son, cannot change
that decision.

General George, with his army, was driven to the James River, and as
the enemy, then at Richmond, was between him and General Pope, and
might strike either at his pleasure, the government's fears about
Washington so increased that General George was finally recalled
from the James, to save the capital. The result was, as I have told
you before, that General Pope was driven back with the wreck of his
army to the very gates of the capital, and General George arrived
barely in time to save it. Yes, my son, General George, not only so
saved the capital, but extricated the government and the Chief of
Staff out of the difficulties they had brought on themselves.

When, then, the victorious rebel army turned aside from the
fortifications of Washington, and marched triumphantly into
Maryland, strong garrisons were left in the forts, and more troops
were poured into the city to insure its safety. It was, indeed,
resolved by the government, which began now to profit by experience,
and by the fact that the capital of the nation had twice been placed
in extreme peril, that for the future, come what might, it should at
least be made secure. Experienced officers of rank were placed in
command of the defenses, north as well as south of the Potomac. The
troops were drilled constantly, and soon became good artillerists.
They were also instructed in and soon became efficient in the art of
defending forts. They studied well, and became familiar with the
ground in their front; and, what was more than all, they knew their
guns, and how to fight them. I have been very particular concerning
these things, my son, because I desire to impress you with their
future importance.

But alas for the instability of human resolutions! Washington was to
be exposed, after all.

You will remember, my son, how everybody was seized with admiration
at the ease with which the great General Grant picked up the Army of
the Potomac, and moved off with it against the rebels. That was in
the month of May, 1864. It was then that the army moved against
Richmond for the last time: that is, not to return to us until it
had captured that rebel stronghold.

Grant had not gone far when he met a more stubborn resistance than
he had expected, fought a number of desperate and bloody battles,
and lost a great many men. Fight and move forward, was his motto, so
he resolved not to turn his face towards Washington and his back
towards Richmond, as others had done before him. The terrible waste
of human life that followed his battles, found him in want of
recruits. No reserves of any consequence had been organized, and the
government were sorely troubled to find men to fill the thinned
ranks of our heroic army. Where were these men to be got from in
time to be of service?

Think of it, my son, we had 25,000 instructed artillerists in the
forts around Washington. Here was a temptation hard to be resisted.
These men could do good service in the field as infantry; and, in an
evil hour, it was decided to send them to Grant's army for that
purpose.

Then the great question arose, how were their places to be supplied?
How were the forts to be defended, in case of attack, without them?
It would not do to strip the defenses of all troops, and leave the
forts without garrisons. If we did, the enemy would surely find it
out, for Washington was full of his spies, and we should come to
grief. The President, the cabinet, and all the generals, had
resolved, from the first, that that this must never be done, under
any contingency.

But what, at the time, was considered a happy thought, seized on the
government. I have said a happy thought, my son, but it was a very
unwise one. Let the future historian record it, for it is recorded
in the dispatches, as well as in the acts of the government.

Yes, my son, it was resolved, first, that Richmond should fall in an
hundred days, or at least during the summer; second, that to insure
the fall of Richmond within that time, the experienced troops, then
in the fortifications of Washington, should be sent to the Army of
the Potomac; third, that to replace these and other garrisons, a
call should be made on some of the States for 100,000 militiamen, to
serve for one hundred days. To the end of developing this grand
idea, all the old artillery regiments were sent away to Grant. And
their places were filled by an equal number of "hundred days' men,"
nice and fresh, fresh and green, mostly from the State of Ohio.

I have no doubt, my son, that it will seem strange to you, as it
will to all intelligent readers hereafter, that raw troops should
have been called to defend the capital in the fourth year of a great
war. But the War Department carried on the war according to this
method then. The result is not just now very pleasant to
contemplate; but it was what ordinary foresight might have
predicted. Our error was the enemy's opportunity, and he quickly
proceeded to take advantage of it. Washington was in danger, and
Washington might have been captured with but little trouble had the
enemy sent the right man to command his troops. How near it came
being lost, and how accidentally it was saved, I shall record
hereafter, for the benefit of the future historian.


CHAPTER XI.

ALARMING SYMPTOMS OF THE ENEMY'S APPROACH.


I KNOW you will be anxious to see a portrait of the distinguished
general who was first assigned to the defense of Washington during
the siege. And here I have presented you with a very clever one.
This general, McDowell McCook, chanced to be in the city, when the
government, becoming alarmed, placed him in command, and sent him
out to defend the capital. This was unfortunate for the poor
gentleman, and he at once became alarmed at finding himself in such
a position, and so near the War Department. The poor man knew
nothing of the defenses, much less of the roads. And to make the
matter worse he had no troops to command. What was a general to do
under such circumstances? Although this distinguished general had
seen some service, and served his country well in the West, he was
in no way qualified to fill the position now assigned him. And I am
inclined to accept this as a reason why the government selected him.

But before I proceed further, my son, I must instruct you as to what
happened in the Shenandoah Valley just about this time, and which,
of right, should constitute a part of the siege of Washington. The
troops in the valley had been commanded by no less than four
unfortunate generals. Patterson, Banks, Milroy, and Siegel, the last
from Germany. Of the many misfortunes of these generals, the
historian who comes after me will give you a more enlarged account
than I have time or space to do at present. Heaven knows, they were
manifold.

When, then, Grant moved against the enemy with the Army of the
Potomac, General Franz Siegel was put at the head of a column at
Winchester, and marched up the valley with a great flourish of
trumpets. This German general was in high feather then, and declared
he would drive the rebels before him, like so many chickens, and
never stop until he got them all cooped up in Richmond. But the
rebels were not inclined to submit to this cooping process. Indeed,
they soon discovered that this General Franz Siegel was not so much
of a general after all, and that he had an eccentric way of moving
his troops. So when he had driven them, as he supposed, to
Newmarket, they turned upon him in a very angry manner, gave him
battle, defeated him, and forced him back in disorder. This was
unfortunate for Siegel, and more unfortunate for his German
admirers, who declared him to be the greatest general of modern
times. But he had fought this battle so badly that the government
for once made up its mind that it would be wisdom not to let him try
his hand at another.

Major-General David Hunter was fixed upon as the right man to reform
Siegel's disordered army and correct his mistakes. Hunter had
patriotism enough, and no man doubted his courage. He was earnest in
the defense of right, even zealous in the cause of his country, and
quick in the punishment of traitors, with whom he was not in very
high favor. The general took command of this disordered army, and so
managed as to get a little discipline and some degree of order into
it. Now, it has always seemed to me, my son, that you could put a
general to no more severe trial than to place him at the head of an
army demoralized by the inefficiency of his predecessor and expect
him to fight battles and gain victories. And yet General Hunter did
this and to the satisfaction of the country. Had he been less active
with the torch, his reward in history would have been much higher.

Well, my son, the general marched with his army, and reorganized it
as he marched. And he met the enemy, and he fought him, and fought
him well, and whipped him well, and drove him back up the valley, to
the very gates of Lynchburg. But there, my son, he stopped. His
supplies had given out, and the enemy had detached a large force,
and sent it to reinforce the rebel army at Lynchburg. Our great
Chief of Staff at Washington had promised that this should not be
done, without timely notice being sent to Hunter. But it was done,
and done without any notice being sent by the Chief of Staff, whose
spies were found wanting when most needed. General Sheridan, too,
was detached from the Army of the Potomac with two brigades of
cavalry, and sent to form a junction with and succor Hunter. But the
Chief of Staff failed to send Hunter any information concerning this
movement, and hence Hunter was kept in ignorance of its design.
Sheridan was driven back before superior numbers, and failed to
carry out the plan of his instructions. Had Hunter received
information of this movement, he would not only have saved Sheridan
from defeat, but, having formed a junction with him near
Charlottesville, could leave beaten the enemy and gone where he
pleased. So much for what the Chief of Staff ought to have done but
did not do.

Of course the gates of Lynchburg were swung wide open, and there was
nothing for the famous Early, who commanded the rebel hosts, to do,
but to come out and brush Hunter away from before them. And he did
this, and more than this. He cut Hunter's communications, and sent
him flying over a different road, to the Ohio River, in search of
supplies.

And it was now, my son, that the veritable Jubal, known to his old
classmates at West Point as the late Mr. Early, saw the road open,
and the great prize before him. Scorning, as it were, to pursue
Hunter, he marched directly for Washington by the most direct road.

It was early in July, then, when General Early, at the head of his
rebel hosts, reached and crossed the Potomac. And this movement sent
the people of Washington into a state of great alarm. The southern
sympathizers at the capital were in high feather at the prospect of
Washington being captured by their friends, the rebels. Magnificent
stories were set afloat, the government got into a state of great
confusion, and timid people went about shaking their heads, and
wondering what the War Department was doing. Everybody wanted to do
something, and yet nobody knew what to do. The Chief of Staff sat in
his easy chair, and issued orders by the dozen. The Secretary of War
ran about excited, and issued orders that conflicted with everybody
else's orders. The President, not to be behind either of them,
issued orders that agreed with none of them. The great wonder is,
that some one of these high officials, so much given to issuing war
orders, did not issue a proclamation, warning Mr. Early that it
would not be comfortable for him to bring his rebels this way.

I am not prepared to say what effect such a notice would have had on
Mr. Early, who turned his column in this direction, and, marching
with great rapidity, was in a few days on the banks of the Monocacy.
And, as if to increase our alarm, he sent that festive young
trooper, Harry Gilmore, galloping down into Maryland, where his old
friends received him with open arms, and entertained him
sumptuously. Never was hero so entertained by his friends. And when
this bold trooper had enjoyed the trip, and shared the hospitality
of his friends as much as pleased him, he went to work disturbing
our military arrangements. Yes, my son, he captured one of our
railroad trains on its way to New York, and all the passengers in
it. And, what was worse than all, there was one of our most
distinguished major-generals in it, and he was made a prisoner of
war by this bold trooper. Thus he cut our communication with the
North. He did all this, and walked away leisurely and unmolested.
Although his Maryland friends set him up for a great hero, I
confess, as there was no one to oppose him, not to see in what his
heroism consisted.

As you may naturally suppose, my son, these little affairs increased
our alarm greatly. Our authorities, generally, went into a state of
perspiration; and would have sent for General Grant and his army to
come back and protect us, but for the fear that that general would
not read the order correctly. In short, they had already become
convinced that Grant was not the man to turn back when there was
anything to be made by going ahead. Then our high officials called
on the North for help, but called in vain. The North was not
inclined to share the fears of our high officials, and had been too
often sent for to come and take care of Washington.

It was common with us, then, to keep a lot of third-rate troops
scattered around Baltimore; and over Maryland. These were hastily
got together, and placed under the command of that famous warrior
Lew Wallace. The administration was sure, now, that Mr. Early would
get whipped, and that the capital would be saved. There were,
however, a few unbelieving people who shook their heads, and were
heard to say that General Wallace was not the soldier to drive Mr.
Early and his men into the Potomac.

I must do the general the credit, however, to say, that he marched
out boldly enough, and engaged Early and his men in battle as soon
as he met him. And although he had pluck enough, he was no match for
the rebel, who brushed him away before him, and sent his scattered
columns flying back into Baltimore, in great distress. Perhaps the
only sensible man surprised at this state of things was General
Wallace himself.

When those who come after us, my son, shall read of this, it will
seem very strange that the fate of Washington, the capital of this
great and powerful nation, should have depended on a battle between
General Lew Wallace, and his undisciplined troops, on the one side,
and Jubal Early and his stonewall troops on the other. And all this
in the fourth year of the war.

Now this battle, if it can be dignified with the name, was fought on
Saturday, the 9th of July. General Early took no further notice of
General Wallace, but started at once for the defenses of Washington.
And there was nothing to oppose him until he reached them; and
nothing then but some cannon, and some men who did not know how to
fire them.

When it got rumored round that the late General Early was not only
aiming to besiege Washington, but was not far away from the
defenses, there was considerable of a stir made in official circles.
Timid people tried to keep their courage up in various ways. Heroes,
who had never been out of Washington, now talked like very heroes;
and it was intimated that the Treasury Guard would come out, and
take the field. Those who had no taste for fighting, and they were
many, found it very uncomfortable, because there was no way of
getting out of the city.

During the war, my son, I frequently noticed that when a battle was
going on at the front there was sure to be a large number of heroes
in uniform doing promenade duty on the Avenue. Their number seemed
to have increased prodigiously just at this time. It was noticed
also that they walked at a more rapid pace than usual, did an
uncommon amount of eating and drinking, and had a large number of
friends they were always ready to discuss the last battle with. I
suppose this was all for the purpose of showing the amount of
courage they had.

They were ready enough to go to the front to-day if somebody would
only show them the way.

It was now the morning of the 10th of July; and a bright breezy
morning it was. The symptoms of the siege now took a positive form
and became really alarming. These symptoms were manifested in a
singular manner at two prominent points of the defenses. A
dilapidated and very much distressed mule, his ears erect and his
tail askance, galloped down the road into Tenallytown, making a
noise so hideous that the quiet inhabitants ran out in a state of
great alarm. They then went to packing up their household goods,
their tubs, tables, chairs, and crockery, and getting them ready for
removal to a place of safety. In addition to this, the unruly animal
sent terror into the very hearts of a number of cavalrymen who were
out picketing the distant hills. These gallant troopers put spurs to
their horses and never stopped until they got safely into
Georgetown, where they circulated numerous stories concerning Mr.
Early and his men, who, they declared, had driven them in.

The other remarkable manifestation took place at Brightwood, a
sleepy little town composed of four houses and a lamp-post, and
situated not far from the city, on the Fourteenth-street road. A
distressed cow came bellowing into this town just at daylight, with
her head and tail erect, and driving the pickets before her. The
antics of this otherwise kindly animal caused a great scattering
among the gallant defenders of Fort Stevens. Indeed, I have good
authority for saying that they evacuated that stronghold more
suddenly than had ever been done before, scampering down the
Fourteenth-street road at a rapid pace.

In short, my son, they mistook this wayward animal for Early's
advance guard, and came to the very wise conclusion that a fort was
not a pleasant place to stay in when an enemy outside was throwing
shells into it.

The good people of Brightwood betook themselves to packing up their
traps, and pondering over the question as to whether they had been
disloyal enough during the war to claim Mr. Early as a friend when
he arrived. It was a trying time with the good people of Brightwood.

When, however, the gallant defenders of the defenses found that it
was only a cow that had so disturbed them, they went boldly back to
their guns, and were as full of courage as could be for the rest of
the day.

As the morning wore on, the evidences of trouble outside increased.
Scattering contrabands, some with bundles on their backs, some with
chairs, buckets and wash-tubs on their heads, others with the family
table on their heads. There was an interesting group of three--two
male and one female member of the African family. One of the former
had brought his banjo, the other his fiddle. The female had a tub
well down on her head. These poor frightened people came trotting
into the city over the Tenallytown and Brightwood roads, seeking a
place of safety inside of the forts.

Then the roads became blocked with all manner of rickety vehicles,
many of them of the most primitive description, filled with the
families and furniture of peaceable farmers, who had left their
homes in fear of the approaching rebels. A more grotesque picture
than was presented by this anxious train it is impossible to
conceive.


CHAPTER XII.

THE GOVERNMENT GETS AGITATED, AND THE GREAT COMMANDER-IN-CHIEF TAKES
THE FIELD.


THIS, my son, is a portrait of General Auger, a dashing, handsome
officer, and a courteous gentleman. He commanded the department of
Washington during the memorable siege I am describing.

As I have said before, my son, as soon as it was known that General
Wallace had been driven back on Baltimore in search of rations, and
General Early was close upon Washington, the government waked up to
the fact that the capital was in danger, and began to take measures
for its defense. Our good President, believing, in the honesty of
his heart, that his presence at the front would do good, took the
field. And the Secretary of War and the Chief of Staff went to
issuing orders that no one seemed to obey. Indeed, their orders only
increased the confusion that had already taken possession of
everything military. The regular officers in command of the troops
in the fortifications, and who knew the location and details of the
forts as well as the roads leading to them, were superseded by
strangers, ignorant of all these things, and even of what their
commands consisted.

Why this was, my son, I cannot explain. Perhaps the Secretary of War
will, when he gets his historian, at $2,500 a year, to write a
national history of the war. Some malicious people said the
Secretary of War had two reasons for this: the first, to show his
contempt for military science; the second, because he wanted to show
what fools some of these strange generals were. I have also heard it
intimated that the reason why some of these strange generals were
assigned to such important posts at such a moment of peril to the
nation, was because they were of sufficient consequence to be made
victims. Boil them till tender, squeeze in a cloth. Rub them through
a sieve and make into a very thick puree with cream, pepper and salt.
Poach a fresh egg for each crouton, and slip it on, very quickly,
put some of the green puree round, and serve under a hot cover.

A SWEET FOR THE CHILDREN
If you have some little breads over, cut each one in four, soak
the pieces in milk sweetened and flavored with vanilla, for three
hours. When they are well soaked roll them for a moment in grated
and dried breadcrumbs, and dip them for a moment in boiling
fat, just as you would do croquettes. Sift some white sugar
over them and serve very hot.

[_Madame M._]

QUINCE CUSTARD
When you have quince preserves by you this is a quickly prepared
dish.
Make a good custard with a pint of rich milk, four eggs and a
little essence of almonds and two ounces of powdered sugar. Put
your quince preserve at the bottom of a fireproof circular dish
and fill up with custard. Put it to bake for half or hour or till
set. When set add some more quince (heated) on the top with some
chopped almonds and serve hot.
The same dish can be done with apples, which should be stewed,
flavored with the rind of a half lemon, and passed through a sieve.
Apple puree is put on the top in the same way, and it is decorated
with some thin lemon peel cut into stars.

[_Chef reconnaissant._]

YELLOW PLUMS AND RICE
Put half a pound of rice in hot milk till it has absorbed all it
can and is tender. Beat lightly the yolks of three eggs, beating
in a lump of fresh butter the size of a pullet's egg; add powdered
sugar and the whites of the eggs well beaten.

Put the rice into this mixture and place all in a mold. Cook it gently
for twenty-five minutes. Meanwhile take some very perfect yellow
plums, skin and stone them and heat them in half a bottle of light
white wine that you have seasoned with a little spice.
Turn out the rice, put the yellow plums on the top and pour round
the sauce, strained through muslin. Very good cold.

BRABANT PANCAKE
Butter first of all your pancakes, and you should have proper pancake
saucers fit to go to table. Heat half a pint of sweetened milk and
melt a quarter of a pound of salt butter with it. When well melted
pour it into a basin and sprinkle in nearly three ounces of flour.
Beat up the yolks of three large or four small eggs and incorporate
them, then add the whites well beaten.

Put a spoonful or two on each saucer and set to bake in the oven for
ten minutes and when done place each saucer on a plate with a good
lump of apricot jam on each. If you have no pancake saucers, put
the apricot preserve on one half of each pancake and fold
it up.

[_Jean O._]

DELICIOUS SAUCE FOR PUDDINGS
To a large wineglassful (say a glass for champagne wine) of new Madeira
add the yolks only of two eggs. Put in a very clean enamel saucepan
over the fire and stir in powdered sugar to your taste. Whisk it
over the fire till it froths, but do not allow it even to simmer.
Use for Genoese cakes and puddings.

[_Madame Groubet._]

FRUIT JELLIES
Jellies that are very well flavored can be made with fresh fruit,
raspberries, strawberries, apricots, or even rhubarb, using the
proportions of one ounce of gelatine (in cold weather) to every
pound of fruit puree. In hot weather use a little less gelatine.
As the fruit generally gives a bad color, you must use cochineal
for the red jellies and a little green coloring for gooseberry
jellies. The gelatine is of course melted in the fruit puree and
all turned into a mold. You can make your own green coloring in
this way. Pick a pound of spinach, throwing away the stalks and
midrib. Put it on in a pan with a little salt and keep the cover
down. Let it boil for twelve minutes. Then put a fine sieve over a
basin and pour the spinach water through it. Strain the spinach
water once or twice through muslin; it will be a good color and
will keep some time. Orange and lemon jellies are much more wholesome
when made at home than those made from bought powders. To the juice
of every six oranges you should add the juice of one lemon, and you
will procure twice as much juice from the fruit if, just before you
squeeze it, you let it soak in hot water for three or four
minutes.

[_Pour la Patrie_.]Nor could he get any
tidings concerning General Early and his rebels. Hence it was that
he concluded, and very naturally, that the enemy would not be within
sight of the defenses until morning, and that the city would at
least be safe until that time without any more of his generalship.

He therefore went into camp for the night, pitching his headquarters
in a clump of wood near Rock Creek, and not far from Crystal Spring.
And here let me record that the general had not even a camp guard.
To make the matter worse, there was no forage for the horses, and
nothing for supper. Never was general so much to be pitied. The two
orderlies, however, were willing fellows, and soon had a fire
lighted. They then proceeded to a neighboring house, and got
refreshments for the general, without which he must have gone hungry
to bed.

As the night advanced, the discomforts of the situation increased.
In short, it may as well be confessed, the general's headquarters
were besieged long before midnight, and that sleep was a thing not
to be enjoyed. You may have made up your mind that the besiegers
were an advance guard of the rebels; but they were not. They were
nothing less than an army of fierce musquitoes, who made such a
persistent attack on the general and his staff as to make his
position almost untenable. In truth, they so harassed the corpulent
engineer, in rear and flank, that he mounted his horse and returned
to the city, where he spent a comfortable night at Willard's Hotel,
and went back in the morning refreshed. My authority for this is the
distinguished engineer himself.

A little after midnight, the two orderlies became seriously alarmed
(I ought to mention that one was recently from Cork, and the other
from Kerry), and reported to the general that a conversation was
being carried on in an unknown language by two persons in the woods
beyond, and whom they verily believed to be spies of the enemy. The
general was not a little perplexed at this intelligence, for the
better informed orderly declared, that while one shouted in very bad
Irish, the other seemed to answer him in Dutch. The general listened
attentively for a minute or more, when the noise was again heard. It
turned out, however, that the intruders were only a pair of owls,
who had perched in some trees near by, and were exchanging hootings
for their own entertainment.


CHAPTER XIII.

THE KIND OF REINFORCEMENTS WE HAD TO DEFEND THE CITY.


THIS is an exact portrait of General Jubal A. Early, who was sent to
capture Washington, but arrived a little too late.

There was great excitement in the city during Sunday, the 10th of
July, and strange stories were set afloat concerning the arrival of
General Early, and his rebel army. There was also great excitement
in and around the forts north of the city. The hundred-day men did
not feel themselves safe in the forts, and those outside were making
a desperate effort to keep their courage up.

We had heroes enough in the city, but the great question was, how we
were to get them organized, provisioned, armed, and sent to the
front in time to be of service. The District militia, which we have
all heard so much of and seen so little, was not enrolled, and, of
course, could not be made available. It was said there would be some
desperate fighting done if the Treasury Guard only got to the front.
This valuable body of distinguished heroes was composed of nice
young men, who wore fine linen and patent leather boots, and in
appearance were unexceptionable.

It was a trying time for the nation, my son, and the young men of
this Treasury Guard felt that they had a duty to perform in
defending the capital, and must perform it with courage. There was
one little drawback, however, to their conduct as soldiers; and that
was, that each man wanted to go to the front encumbered with a
carpet bag, filled with sandwiches and clean shirts. Aside from
this, let me say, the guard was got in order for marching, and their
gallant commander, Colonel Floyd A. Willett, made a speech, in which
he declared there was not a chicken-hearted man in his ranks. And
when it marched for the front, which it did with drums beating, its
gallant colonel at its head, and Corporal Spinner, of Company B,
bringing up the rear, there was many a tear shed and handkerchief
waved by the pretty female clerks of the Department. Many of these
damsels had more than a friendly interest in these young heroes, who
they averred would never come back, but whiten the battle-field with
their bones.

As the War Department has not yet condescended to give us a report
in detail of the defense of Washington, I cannot inform you, my son,
of the heroic part performed by this distinguished body of nice
young men. There was a rumor that they returned to the city, after
the siege, in a very hungry condition; but had been so saving of
their powder and lead as not to waste a single round.

Now, our quartermaster-general was not to be beaten by any of them
when there was a chance for glory. Seeing the Treasury Guard march
off with so much courage and determination, the general mounted his
war horse, and assembled a whole brigade of his employees, as
gallant fellows as ever took the field, notwithstanding little could
be said of their discipline or soldierly appearance. This gallant
brigade was called the Bushwhackers, in contradistinction to the
Beef-eaters of the War Department. There was no mistaking this
brigade, for it was armed with muskets and bill-hooks. As it moved
off for the front, as it did with no very regular step, there was a
sight seldom seen. How else could it be, with our gallant
quartermaster-general at its head, and General Rucker bringing up
the rear! After a rapid march of four miles, the brigade reached the
front; and as no enemy was in sight, and there was no use for their
powder, the men went energetically to work, and did good service in
clearing away the bushes in front of the forts, so that our gallant
defenders could have an unobstructed view of the rebels as soon as
they made their appearance. This was a very happy thought; one for
which the quartermaster-general deserved the brevet he afterwards
got.

You will see by this, my son, that we were fast getting our gallant
defenders to the front. And now all that was needed to afford them
an opportunity to show themselves heroes was General Early and his
army of rebels.

I must also inform you that Provost-Marshal Todd, Captain and A. D.
C., had got a company of his men to the front, lying in ambush for
the rebels.

There was still another, and equally important force to be added to
our defenders. This was a brigade of what was called Ancient
Mariners, got together by that solid old salt, Admiral Goldsborough.
The admiral was brim-full of pluck, and his name had become famous
for not fighting the rebels afloat. Here was an opportunity to give
them a broadside or two ashore, and the admiral was not the man to
let it slip through his fingers. Indeed, he sounded his war trumpet
as quick as any of them, and when he had piped his Ancient Mariners
to arms, he told them that God and their country demanded them to do
their duty.

Meanwhile, prepare a good white sauce, and in another pan a thick
tomato sauce, highly seasoned, colored with cochineal if need be,
and as thick as a good cream.

Lay the fillets when cooked one each on a plate, put some of the
white sauce round it, and along the top put the tomato sauce which
must not run down. A sprig of chervil is to be placed at each end
of the fillet.

[_Seulette._]

SKATE STEW
Put the fins, skin, trimmings of skate into water enough to cook
them, with pepper and salt and simmer for half an hour. Strain
it through a fine sieve. Make a brown sauce of butter and flour,
pepper, salt, adding a little milk, about a teacupful for a pound
of skate, then squeeze in the juice of half a lemon, and if you
have it, a glass of white wine.
Take the skate, cut it in pieces, simmer it in salted water; when
cooked, strain away the water, dish the fish, pouring over it the
above sauce.
Decorate with strips of lemon peel laid in a lattice-work down the
center.

[_Une epiciere_.]

TO DRESS COARSE FISH
Any fish is good if dressed in this way.

Make a brown sauce, well flouring it with salt, pepper, and dried
herbs. Mince and fry a shallot and add it, then a large glass of red
wine, a few drops of lemon juice.
Cook some fish roe, sieve it, and stir it into the sauce. Take your
fish and simmer it in milk and water till cooked, then heat it up
quickly in the sauce to serve.

[_F. R._]

FLEMISH SALAD
This is fillets of herring, laid in a bowl with slices of
apple, beetroot, cold potatoes, and cold cooked sprouts, covered
with the ordinary salad dressing.

If the fish is salted, let it soak first of all in milk to take away
the greater part of the salt. This is a winter dish, but the same
sort of thing is prepared in summer, substituting cold cooked
peas, cauliflower, artichokes, beans, with the fish.

[_Amie reconnaissante._]

FLEMISH SAUCE
This popular sauce is composed of melted butter thickened
with yolk of egg and flavored with mustard; it is used greatly for
fish.

BEEF SQUARES
If you have a small piece of very good beef, such as rump steak or
fillet of beef, it is more economical to cut it into squares,
and grill it lightly at a clear fire. Have ready some squares of
toast, buttered and hot, lay these on a hot dish with a bit of
steak on the top, and on the top of that a slice of tomato much
peppered and salted and a small pile of horse-radish.

This makes a pretty dish and can be varied by using capers or chopped
gherkins instead of horse-radish. It is a great saving to cut meat,
bread, etc., in squares instead of rounds.

[_Une amie au convent._]

IMITATION CUTLETS
A dish that I have done for those who like curry flavoring is the
following. Take any cold cooked vegetables, and cutting them in
small pieces, roll them in a thick white sauce which you have
strongly flavored with curry. Put it aside to get firm. If you are
in a hurry you can bind with the yolk of an egg in the flour and
make a thick batter in that way.
Form into cutlets and fry as you would a real cutlet. The same thing
can be done with macaroni or spaghetti that is already cooked, with
cold fish or anything that is insipid to the taste.
[_Une amie au convent_.] 

KIDNEYS WITH MADEIRA
Use either sheep or pigs' kidneys. Cut them longways, so as to be
able to take out the threads from the inside of them. Put some
butter on to fry over a brisk fire and when it is browned, but not
burnt, put in the kidneys for three or four minutes. Take them out
and keep them hot for a minute while you add to the butter they
were cooked in a soupspoonful of Madeira wine, a good dust of chopped
parsley, a little cayenne pepper and salt. Mix it well, and if too
thick add a little gravy.The people knew that between them and
the enemy there were strong and heavily armed forts; and in these
they placed their trust. They did not, however, reflect that these
forts, without proper garrisons, were only so many inert masses,
incapable of resisting for one hour the vigorous assault of an
enemy. But it was very different with the military authorities. As
the rattle of small arms and the booming of cannon increased during
Monday evening and night, they knew that the city was in peril, and
their anxiety for its safety increased. They knew that the forts
were not properly garrisoned. They knew that communication with the
North was cut off, that no reinforcements from that quarter could be
relied on. Further, that although reinforcements from General
Grant's army had been ordered up from the James River, they had not
had time to arrive.

Such was our situation on that memorable Monday night. Yes, my son,
such was the feeble condition of the defenses when General Early and
his rebel army came in sight of the dome of the Capitol. We all
looked confidently for an attack in force on Tuesday morning. Had it
been made by a column of ten thousand men, led by a bold and
determined commander, capable of infusing his own impulse into their
movements, they might, feebly garrisoned as the forts were at that
moment (with no support between or behind them), have treated our
defenses with contempt, and marched into the city.

Yes, my son, they could have marched almost unmolested between any
two of the forts, entered the city, seized the Arsenal, the Capitol,
the Treasury, and other public buildings, and enjoyed a bounteous
breakfast at the expense of our citizens. And when they had done
this, they might have enforced a legitimate surrender of the city,
together with the defenses on both sides of the river.

But General Jubal A. Early was not the man for such an enterprise.
Washington was at his mercy, but fortunately for us he did not know
it, and let the opportunity slip. Even had he known it, I am of
opinion that he lacked the nerve to grasp the advantages of the
opportunity. On that Tuesday morning, Early was at Silver Springs,
enjoying the luxuries of a spacious headquarters, and within sight
of the grand old dome of the Capitol. What strange emotions the
sight of this dome must have excited in his bosom, what
reminiscences of happier days passed under its shadow must have
seared his thoughts as they passed in review, he alone can describe.
Perhaps it was the contemplation of those happier days that stayed
his hand and made him hesitate to grasp the prize at his feet.

No, my son, Jubal A. Early was of too phlegmatic a temperament for
such an undertaking. He was slow in every thing but name. Look at the
two different kinds of 'U's.'"
"He's used two different kinds of pens," said Inspector Chippenfield.

"Look at the difference in the thickness of the letters."
"The sooner he writes again the better," said Rolfe. "I am curious
to know what he'll say next."How sad it is for us, to-day, to contemplate that the safety of
Washington, the capital of this great country, should have depended
on the temperament of a general. Let the future historian do this
subject justice and elaborate it as it deserves. And let him
portray, if he can, the consequences of the rebel flag greeting the
rays of the rising sun on that morning victoriously from the dome of
the Capitol.


CHAPTER XIV.

HOW THE REBEL GENERALS DEPORTED THEMSELVES.


THIS history would not be complete, my son, without a portrait of
General John C. Breckinridge. This general accompanied General
Early, in command of a division, and was extremely useful as a
subordinate, since he knew Washington and all its surroundings, and
had many friends in the city, whose respect and hospitality he had
enjoyed. What curious emotions must have excited his breast when he
saw the dome of that building where he had sat as a Senator, and by
his talents and deportment secured the respect and confidence of the
nation, I will leave the reader to imagine. Who but himself can
describe his thoughts when he recurred to that scene in the Senate
Chamber, when he raised the voice of prophecy and foreshadowed the
traitor's reward? Was there a pang in the thought that he was
himself reaping the bitterest fruit of that reward?

Never forget, my son, how terrible is the penalty that attaches to
treason. But now I must ask you to reaccompany me to another part of
the field, that we may see what is going on there. The attack made
on our defenses by the rebels was of the feeblest kind. Why this
was, some of our officers could not understand. It was evidently
made in doubt of the result, and indicated forcibly enough that
something was wrong at the rebel headquarters. We want now to see
what that was.

While the booming of cannon and the rattle of small arms was going
on in the vicinity of Fort Stevens, without any very serious damage
to either side (for I may mention here that the rebels kept at a
respectful distance from the forts), Generals Early, Ewell, and
Breckinridge were enjoying themselves on the sumptuous fare found at
Silver Springs and other neighboring plantations. In short, it is
asserted that these generals had been short of rations for some
days, and were very hungry when they reached the outskirts of
Washington. It is also asserted that they took themselves to
feasting and making merry with their friends; so much so that they
had all the cellars and larders of the houses round about examined
for bounties to supply their table. And to such an extent was this
feasting and merrymaking carried, that General Early quite forgot
that he was sent to capture Washington, and indeed set such a bad
example to his subordinates as to destroy all discipline.

There were two great events in this remarkable siege, my son, and I
must tell you what they were. If I do not, you will not get a clear
idea of how the siege was carried on by the rebels. The generals
(rebel) had not tasted fresh beef for several days, and had a sharp
appetite which their commissaries were inclined to gratify. Now,
there was on the plantation of Mr. George Riggs, near where these
generals had their headquarters, a celebrated Alderney bull, much
valued by its owner. Here was a temptation not to be resisted by
these commissaries, who had the animal led to slaughter and served
up for their masters. Yes, my son, these generals and their staffs
banqueted on Mr. Riggs's bull, and were honest enough to confess
that they had rarely fared so sumptuously. This is one of the great
events. Now to the other. A number of general officers (choice
spirits), imitating the example set by their bold superiors, went
out on a forage of their own, and coming to the house of the Hon.
Montgomery Blair, put it under a close examination, especially the
cellar and larder, which was supposed to be well stored with the
choicest. They were disappointed, however, to find that the cellar
contained little wine, and were about setting the honorable owner
down for a disciple of temperance, when they came upon a barrel of
rare old Bourbon whisky.

Then make a brown sauce with any veal or kidney gravy that you have,
and cook some mushrooms in it with pepper and salt; the sauce is to
be served with the grenadine.

HOCHE POT
Slice an onion and fry it in butter till it is brown; add pieces of
pork and of mutton freed from fat and skin; cover them with water
and throw into it any kinds of vegetables that you may have; but
particularly sliced carrots and turnips and green cabbages; put it
in the oven to cook. In another saucepan boil some white haricot
beans, salt, and pepper, until they are tender, when they must
be added to the stew with a small quantity of the liquor that they
have been boiled in.

PIGEON AND CABBAGE ROLLS
Take two pigeons, two cabbages, four slices of fried bacon, an
ounce of butter, a large wineglassful of sherry, and some gravy.
Truss your pigeons and cook them in butter for ten minutes in a
fireproof dish. Then take them out, cut them into neat pieces.

Meanwhile have the cabbages boiled in salted water. Drain them. Cut
them in small pieces and roll some up in each slice of bacon; lay
the pigeons on top, pouring over them the liquor they were
cooked in and half the wine. Put all in the oven for ten minutes--pour
in the rest of the wine and leave for another ten minutes before
serving. If you have stock to add to this it is an improvement,
or put half a teaspoonful of meat extract to half a pint of
water.

[_Une refugiee_.]

REMAINS OF SAUSAGE
If you have a few inches of a big sausage cut it into as thick
slices as you can--fry them and lay them in a circle on a dish
with a poached egg on each.

Little dinner breads are good when soaked in milk, stuffed with
sausage meat, and fried. It can be used to stuff cucumber, or
eggplants, but you should then crumble up the meat and bind it with
the yolk of a raw egg.

[_Mme. Georgette._]

SHOULDER OF LAMB A LA BEIGE
Braise your shoulder of lamb; that is, put it in a closely covered
stewpan, in a good brown sauce or gravy with the vegetables, to
be served with it. It is the lid being closed that makes the
meat take some flavor from the vegetables. To do it in the Belgian
way, take some good white turnips, wash them and scrape them, put
small ones in whole, large ones cut in half.

Take some small cabbages, trim off without leaves, cut them in half,
remove the stalk, make a hollow in the center and fill it with
forcemeat of any kind; but sausage meat is good. Place the stuffed
cabbages round the meat to cook gently at the same time.

[_Madame Vershagen._]

FILLET OF BEEF À LA BRABANCONNE
Take a whole fillet of beef, trim it neatly and set it in a braising
pan to cook very slowly in some good brown sauce to which you have
added a pint of stock. Put in neatly shaped carrots and turnips
and some balls made of mashed potato already fried. Keep hot in
two sauceboats a puree of Brussels sprouts and a puree of onions.

These are prepared by cooking the vegetables in water, then chopping
fine, and rubbing through a sieve with cream, or with a little good
milk, pepper, and salt.

To serve the fillet, lay it on a dish with the carrots and turnip,
potato cakes round; pour over it the rest of the brown sauce from
the pan; then add in heaps the onion puree and the sprouts
puree.

[_Madame Vershagen._] 

STEWED BEEF
An inferior part of beef may be made to taste excellent if it is
braised; that is, simmered with the cover on slowly, in company
with onions (already fried) and well washed pieces of carrots and
whole turnips. Put on also some small cabbages cut in halves, and
if you can give it, a glass of good red wine.
[_Une refugiee._] 

BEEF AND APRICOTS
Stew your beef, say three pounds of steak, in some gravy, adding
to a pint of liquor a level teaspoonful of white sugar. Throw in a
handful of the dried apricots, but be sure you wash them well first.
This dish is generally accompanied by leeks, first blanched for a
few moments, and then put in the stew. Flavor with salt, pepper,
and the rind of half a lemon which remove before you serve the stew.
For English taste the sugar could be omitted.

[_Seulette._]
FOR AN INVALID
This must be begun at least three hours before it will be required.
Take two ounces of pearl barley, wash it well, and put it in cold
water enough to cover it, for an hour.It has been said by several of
his friends, who have access to the newspapers, that he went into
this war not only very reluctantly, but with green spectacles on.
Willing as I am to deal generously with him, and to forgive him each
and every one of his sins, and to send him out into the world to
seek atonement for them, I cannot share this opinion. And for the
reason that I happened to know Mr. Davis in the summer of 1850, when
he was the moving spirit of a convention of "Fire-Eaters," that
assembled together at Nashville, Tenn. And I have a slight
recollection of a speech he made on that occasion, in which
separation by arms was urged, and no love for the Union advanced. I
remember also that that speech was rewarded with hisses,
notwithstanding the strong dis-union element of the convention. His
dislike of the Union and plan for separating the nation, it is well
known, had been the besetting sin of his brain for twenty years.
How, then, he could have engaged in this gigantic rebellion with
green spectacles on, I cannot just exactly see. It was the ignorant,
unreasoning masses of the South who were led into the rebellion with
green spectacles on, not men like Mr. Davis. But, my son, never
strike a man when he is down; that is the work of cowards. Let us
give Mr. Davis credit for such virtues as he had, and for the manner
in which he exerted them in keeping life and strength in the
government he attempted to set up. In connection with the rebellion,
we had to deal with Mr. Davis more in his character as a soldier
than a statesman. Mr. Davis was undoubtedly an able soldier. He was
the head and front, the very life and soul of the men in the South.
Born to those qualities of pride, self-esteem, and self-will, all
of which produce confidence in the possessor, he grew up feeling
himself superior, as he was, to the ordinary men of his age. He
inherited at the same time great fixedness of purpose and
determination; and so prominent were these traits of his character,
that they impressed every one who came in contact with him.

These, my son, were the attributes that gave wings to the man's
ambition and found him aspiring to one of the high places in the
temple of fame. The nation gave him a thorough military education at
West Point, and he afterwards learned the practical duties of a
soldier in the Black Hawk war. On the return of peace, he resigned
and sought distinction in political life. He had succeeded in
reaching the House of Representatives when the war with Mexico broke
out, and he resigned and again went to the field. And,
notwithstanding what has been said to the contrary, he won great
distinction in this war. Military men everywhere did him justice.
The "Mississippi Rifles" will be remembered as long as the battle of
Buena Vista.

Mix a little rice flour in a cup of cold water, stirring well.
Drop in the juice of half a lemon and the beaten yolk of an egg,
which stir round quickly. Put in the meat again for a moment and
serve it with boiled potatoes.He afterwards served four years as Secretary of War,
and then returned to the Senate, where the rebellion found him
elevated to the chairmanship of the Committee of Military Affairs.
His education, his services in the army, his position as Secretary
of War, and in the Senate, enabled him to become thoroughly
acquainted with our army, with its customs, its laws, its material,
its wants, and, above all, the character of its officers. He was,
perhaps, better acquainted with these things than any other man in
the United States. Nor was he deficient in knowledge of the
character of leading, public men at the North and West. What he had
not studied well, however, was the character and the patriotism of
the people of those sections of our country.

It was the ripe fruit of this knowledge, then, that Mr. Davis
applied in each department of the rebel government; and it was this
that made him of such incalculable value to the rebellion. Pick over
some fine cherries and strawberries, stoning the cherries, and
taking out the little center piece of each strawberry that
is attached to the stalk. Lay your fruit in a shallow dish and cover
it with the liquor and serve with the long sponge biscuits known
as "langues de chat" (Savoy fingers).

[_Amitie aux Anglais._]

CHOCOLATE CUSTARD
To make a nice sweet in a few minutes can be easily managed if you
follow this recipe. Make a custard of rich milk and yolks of eggs,
sweeten it with sugar, flavored with vanilla, and if you have a
little cream add that also. Then grate down some of the best
chocolate, as finely as you can, rub it through coarse muslin so
that it is a fine powder. Stir this with your custard, always
stirring one way so that no bubbles of air get in.With his grasp of mind, and
his iron will, he would have so wielded the great resources of the
North and West, that the rebellion would have been crushed in a year
from its birth. And this was the man our authorities at Washington
supposed would not, or could not, attack the capital after it had
been stripped of its proper garrison. Let the truth be told: Davis
was not the man to let such a blunder go unnoticed.