It would be difficult to say, whether this letter gave De Vallance more
pain or pleasure. Hope seldom deserts the lover who knows he is beloved.
But why did he feel delight at hearing Isabel acknowledge her heart
would ever be devoted to him? Could affection burst the cinctures of the
grave, and re-animate the corpse which his father had prematurely sent
to that dark mansion? Should he not rather have wished her to determine
to tear his image from her heart, and be happy in a second choice? I aim
to recommend practical and praise-worthy self-denial, not that romantic
strain of extravagant sentiment which enjoins impossibilities and
commends absurdities. Arthur's reflections told him that in treasuring
the remembrance of Isabel, even in his heart-of-heart, he invaded no
one's right, and broke no divine precept. He measured the feelings of
his mistress by his own. "Whatever," said he, "may betide me in life, of
good or ill fortune, the idea of this virtuous, this heroical maid,
shall restrain the arrogance of prosperity, or prevent my sinking under
the weight of calamity. I will bring her to my mind's eye, restraining
her tears for her murdered brother; supporting her wretched father,
imbecile alike in mind and body; consoling the friend of her youth,
widowed in her virgin love; and let me add, following her plighted
Arthur with pious prayers and devoted affection. If I have now no motive
to action in the hope of possessing virtue personified in my Isabel, I
still have the incentive of proving myself worthy of her constant
attachment."

Determined never more to return to his parents, the sight of whom would
have been almost as terrible to him as to the unhappy family with whom
he had so long sojourned, if the remorseless Countess and usurping Earl
had dared to invade the privacy of their sorrows, De Vallance resolved
to leave England, and engage in the service of his exiled King. Should
prudential motives cause the King to decline making use of his sword,
the war which had for twenty years subsisted between France and Spain
would furnish him with employment, and he resolved rather to end his
days as a mercenary soldier than to remain in England a rebel to his
Prince, and the acknowledged heir of usurped greatness.

Avoiding all expostulation, or indeed all chance of further intercourse
with his parents, he removed from Ribblesdale with the utmost privacy.
Changing his clothes and assuming a disguise which altered his
appearance, he shaped his course toward Liverpool, from whence he hoped
to procure a passage to France. He had not proceeded far before he
overtook Jobson, who, unable to support the sight of Colonel Evellin's
distress, had determined to go back to Pembroke, and gain from Dr. Lloyd
a more minute account of the death of Eustace. De Vallance agreed to
accompany him and take ship at Milford Haven. Jobson was proud of again
serving a loyal gentleman, and Arthur was resolved, for his late
master's sake, to assist and protect the brave trooper. "I'll do any
thing to serve your honour," said Jobson; "but I hope you will not be
offended. My tongue is a little unruly, and apt to slip out now and
then. So if, when I don't intend it, I should say harsh things of the
cursed rogue who murdered Mr. Eustace, forgetting that he passes for
your honour's father, I hope you will not think me less dutifully
disposed to you. For Mrs. Isabel long ago told me you was come over to
the right side, and would rather fight for a King without a coat to his
back, than such upstarts as Old Noll and the Parliament, though all over
gold fringe and black velvet. I tell you what, Master Sedley, My Lord
Sedley I believe I ought to say----"

"My name is Arthur de Vallance," replied he; "I have no right to any
title."

"Bless your honourable nature," said Jobson. "Poor Mr. Eustace, I find,
ought to have been My Lord, but as that traitor shot him to get him out
of the way, I don't see why you should not be Lord Sedley rather than
one of Old Noll's tinkers should, who are sure to catch up all the good
things they can lay hold of."

Arthur smote his breast, and with agony reflected, that however his soul
abhorred the foul crime, he must (as his father was created a peer by
the late King) reap the advantage of it. The horror of this
consideration was alleviated by considering that on the death of
Bellingham he should have power to rescue Evellin from the protracted
misery of a life of concealment, and Isabel from terror, poverty, and a
renunciation of even common comforts. While he was engrossed by
meditating plans for their immediate relief, Jobson went on, unobserved,
raving against the degradation of serving upstarts, and resolving to
stand by true gentlemen while he had a drop of blood in his veins.

The remittances which De Vallance had received from his tenants, enabled
him to purchase horses and other necessaries for himself and Jobson.
Assuming the name of Herbert, he gave himself out to be a gentleman
travelling with his servant on a tour of pleasure. They reached Pembroke
in safety, but the pious intentions of Jobson were frustrated; he could
neither pluck a tuft of grass from his master's grave, nor recover Fido
to console Constantia. Dr. Lloyd had left the town, and no one knew
where the remains of Eustace were deposited. The graves of his
fellow-victims were pointed out by the attentive piety of the young
maidens, who adorned them with garlands of flowers, which (according to
the custom of the country) were renewed every Sabbath. On that day they
duly knelt beside the spot, and with awful veneration kept alive their
own attachment to the cause for which these officers suffered, by
repeating the Lord's prayer.

It was a matter of the deepest concern to Jobson that the grave of
Eustace was not pointed out and adorned with similar honours. He began
to conceive an implacable aversion to Dr. Lloyd for not having given him
a public interment. "Is it not enough," said he to De Vallance, "to make
poor Mr. Eustace walk? One of these gentlemen, to be sure, was a fine
corny-faced cavalier, who paid for many a jug of Welsh ale that I drank
to His Majesty's health, and the other was a stout desperate lieutenant,
that would fight and swear with any body; but not one of them was half
so handsome, sweet-speaking, well-born a gentleman as Mr. Eustace."

De Vallance did not apprehend that posthumous honours soothed the
separated spirit; and had he not been standing on the awful spot which
consummated his father's crimes, he would have smiled at the retention
of these old pagan ideas respecting the state of the departed. He
questioned the by-standers whether any thing was known respecting the
interment of young Evellin. Some said there was a private funeral
huddled up in a strange way; but an old woman whispered that it was
suspected the Doctor had made him into a skeleton, and being troubled in
conscience afterwards for the wicked act had fled the country. Absurd as
this suggestion was, it suited the pre-conceived prejudices of Jobson,
and in future afforded De Vallance some relief, by diverting part of his
companion's curses to another object than Lord Bellingham; for in
Jobson's estimation there was little difference between the General who
condemned, and the surgeon who dissected his master. Nor was he
satisfied about Fido's safety, when he found Dr. Lloyd had been
particularly careful to take the spaniel with him. "Ah, the bloody
knave," said he, "I know he will cut the poor dog up in his experiments,
as he calls them, and then sell his skin. That Doctor is a Jew to the
back-bone. If I had gone to him with my lame knee, he would have had my
leg off directly to put in pickle, and have made me wear a wooden one
instead of it. But sweet Isabel fomented it till it was well, and now I
can ride on horseback as well as ever. Bless her kind heart! I do hope
she and Your Honour will come together at last. Aye, and I know she
wishes so too. 'Jobson,' said she, as she bade me farewel, 'if ever you
can serve the worthy son of a wicked father, do it for my sake.'"

The reflections of De Vallance on the mysterious circumstances of
Eustace's interment took a different train from those of Jobson; but as
his thoughts never could pursue any other subject when the magic name of
Isabel spell-bound them to the secret chamber, where filial piety tended
its uncomplaining captive, we will follow their course, and return to
the Beaumont family.

The pious Isabel with unwearied magnanimity persevered in the duties
which her painful situation required. Her nights were uniformly spent in
the chamber where her father was concealed, and her days were divided
between him and the sad Constantia, who, ever pining for her Eustace,
seemed to have no wish but to share his grave. Isabel tried to divert
her thoughts to the consoling reflection that his honour was restored,
his reputation cleared from the foul charge of treason and the
accusations of Monthault; his name inscribed on the roll of England's
loyal worthies, and the consecrating seal of death fixed on his memory.
Dr. Beaumont endeavoured to make her wishes aspire to that happier world
where she would rejoin him. He talked of the "order, nature, number, and
obedience of angels[1];" and of her dear Eustace as now joined to their
blessed society. He told her, that her lover and herself were still
members of the same family, she suffering, he glorified. He pointed out
to her those texts of Scripture which imply recognition in Heaven, and
in particular mentioned the hope expressed by St. Paul, of presenting
his Colossian converts to his Lord, and the Apostles sitting on thrones
to judge the tribes of Israel, who therefore must be respectively known
as disciples and countrymen. Sometimes he would try to excite emulation,
by pointing out the conduct of Isabel, who endured a similar affliction
in the destruction of her fondest hopes, but whose spirits were
supported by constant bodily exertion, while her mental faculties were
no less exercised by fresh contrivances, at once to amuse her father,
and to add to the security of his retreat. These efforts, he said, gave
such an energy to her mind, that she was able to give instead of
requiring consolation. Dr. Beaumont attempted to revive his daughter's
taste for the beauties of nature; shewed her the rich variety of
mountains, dales, woods, lakes, and rivers, which embellished the
vicinity of her native village, and especially that most exhilarating of
terrestrial objects, the sun rising to enlighten a world which bursts at
his approach into splendid beauty.

Constantia listened, reproved her own weakness, and wept. Yet the pious
admonitions of her father, and the example of her cousin, assisted by
the meliorating influence of time, had a gradual though slow effect, in
changing grief into meek resignation. Her lute, long endeared by the
remembrance of Eustace, was now attuned to deplore the death of him who
had restored her the treasure. When sorrow can flow in poesy, it becomes
more plaintive than agonizing; and possibly the reader will be pleased
to see that the long-protracted years of Constantia's anguish were
soothed by those alleviations, which, in mercy to man, are permitted
imperceptibly to soften the ravages of death.

It is thus that afflicted survivors, in talking and meditating on those
who are gone before them to the unseen world, derive an enjoyment from
musing on the past, and from anticipating in the future what the present
is not able to afford.

CONSTANTIA TO ISABEL.

    And dost thou mourn the sad estate
      Of widow'd love? then silent be;
    And hark! while for my murder'd mate
      I wake the lute's soft melody.

    How dear to me the midnight moon,
      As through the clouds she sails along,
    For then with spirits I commune,
      And Eustace listens to my song.

    Oh, not to her who wildly mourns
      Her noble lover basely slain--
    Oh, not to her the morn returns
      With pleasure laughing in her train.

    So look'd it once, when Eustace sung
      Of plighted love's perennial joys,
    Now silent is that tuneful tongue,
      That graceful form the worm destroys.

    In vain the feather'd warblers soar,
      Mid floods of many colour'd light;
    I hear them not, but still deplore
      The eye of Beauty quench'd in night.

    How in the battle flam'd his crest,
      Refulgent as the morning star:
    But ruthless murder pierc'd that breast,
      Which met unhurt the storm of war.

    My Love, "how beautiful, how brave;"
      Still, still, her oaths thy Constance keeps;
    The laurel decks the victor's grave,
      O'er thine the faithful willow weeps.

The disturbed state of England at this time permitted no long indulgence
of domestic sorrow. "Griefs of an hour's age did hiss the speaker," and
pity and sympathy often claimed the falling tear, which had been wrung
forth by "own distress." Ribblesdale was again disturbed by the march of
hostile troops. The young King had yielded to the solicitations of his
Scottish subjects, and transported himself to that country. Less
scrupulous than his father, he swore to observe the conditions of their
covenant; and in return, they promised to give him their crown, and
assist him to recover the English diadem. No sooner was the Royal
standard displayed on the hills of Caledonia, than the welcome signal
revived the hopes and unsheathed the swords of the southern Loyalists.
The brave Earl of Derby left his retreat in the isle of Man, to spend
the remains of his noble fortune in his Master's cause; and, as the
event proved, to sacrifice his life. He returned eagerly to Lancashire,
and collecting what forces the fallen interests of his family could
supply, waited the commands of his Sovereign.

In the mean time the indefatigable Cromwell hastened from Ireland; and
assuming the command which Fairfax had refused to accept, marched the
English forces into Scotland, and defeated the covenanters, who, under
pretence of restoring the young King, actually held him prisoner,
compelling him to act in such subservience to their designs as to
sacrifice those, who, without any sinister views, risked their lives in
his support. The humiliation of these pretended friends by the victory
of Cromwell enabled the King to burst the fetters of Argyle, and throw
himself into the arms of the true Loyalists, with whom he concerted
measures and recruited his army, while Cromwell refreshed his fatigued
and harassed troops at Edinburgh. Determined to appeal to the loyalty of
a nation, now known to be weary of an unsettled government, the King
suddenly executed the brave design of passing by Cromwell's army, and
marched into England. He was joined in Lancashire by the Earl of Deby:
rash counsels were hastily adopted; and, instead of concentrating the
force they possessed, and pointing it at one great object, the Earl was
required to secure the north-western provinces with a power unequal to
the duty; while the King, weakened by his division, marched rapidly
towards London, hoping to reach it before he could be overtaken by
Cromwell.

The report of an enterprising able young Prince, (for so at this time
the second Charles was reputed to be) coming to reclaim by the sword his
right to the crown, which had been torn from the lifeless trunk of his
father, on whose grave a hecatomb of regicides was expected to be
offered, alarmed all those who had participated in the crimes of treason
and murder. The forces of the King were, as usual, exaggerated by
report, the hopes of the Loyalist turned possibilities into certainties,
a general rising was expected, and it was confidently said had already
taken place. Rumours were circulated that in subduing Scotland Cromwell
had so weakened himself, that it was impossible for him to pursue the
King; and while the less criminal entertained hopes of being able to
make terms with their Sovereign, the immediate partizans of the Usurper
saw no safety, but in supporting the power of one who they knew must
(like themselves) be excepted out of every amnesty.

Among those whom guilt had made desperate, we must include Lord and Lady
Bellingham. We have seen that the former sacrificed his nephew to avoid
being accused as a secret favourer of the royal cause, a charge he knew
Cromwell had determined to urge against him, as a safe way of removing a
staunch republican, who would oppose the ultimate views of his now ripe
ambition. Eustace however drew the lot of death to no other purpose than
to increase the remorse which occasionally tortured the bosom of
Bellingham. A mutiny broke out the moment after the volley was fired,
that sent the brave cavaliers to join in the grave the royal martyr whom
they had served and deplored; for the rebel General, had awakened too
many suspicions, and had too much offended his soldiers by his
temporizing conduct, for this sacrifice to expiate his faults. It was
remarked, that he never dealt in invective against his opponents, from
whence it was inferred, that he wished to treat with them. He neglected
the praying agitators, and therefore they called him Agag, the
Amalekite, commanding the host of Israel. He abridged the liberty of the
soldiers, and of course straitened the arm of the Lord. He disapproved
of plunder and military contribution, consequently endeavoured to make
the presbyterians popular at the expence of the godly. At this time
these opponents hated each other still more than they did episcopacy;
and a presbyterian general, commanding an army who claimed unbounded
licence in judgment and conduct, must be condemned for a traitor by that
unerring rule, the voice of the majority. Lord Bellingham was therefore
arrested by the agitators, and sent prisoner to London at the instant
when Eustace fell.

Imprisonment and the scaffold were frequently in those times synonymous.
The fallen criminal saw his danger in its full horrors; and, while
maintaining an inordinate attachment to this world, he dreaded the
future consequence of his unrepented crimes. He had not numbed the early
feelings of religion by the cold torpor of Atheism; nor could he
persuade himself to indulge in those reveries of election and
impeccability, which had now saturated his Lady's mind. He felt himself
to be an accountable being, not a collection of animated atoms
associated by chance, which, when the vital spark was extinguished,
would crumble into dust without record or responsibility. He knew he was
a sinner by choice, who had abused his free-will; not a passive vessel
of wrath, pre-destined to destruction. No inflating ebullition of
enthusiasm told him he was become one of those favourites of Heaven who
cannot forfeit salvation. He therefore clung to this wretched life, as
to the edge of a precipice that beetled over the gulph of perdition.
Despair was with him the substitute of repentance. He looked back on his
offences to his King and his friend, convinced that they had exceeded
the bounds of mercy. Often did he deplore the utter impossibility of his
regaining that state of contented innocence, when he and Allan Neville
shared each other's hearts, before the superior qualities and nobler
expectations of his friend excited his envy and ambition. He adverted to
that time when his love for the beautiful Lady Eleanor was pure and
generous, before she had wrought upon him to become the instrument and
participator of her criminal ambition and insatiable rapacity. He had
not the audacity to think a life stained by perfidy and injustice, made
him fitter for the reception of extraordinary grace. The external
propriety of his manners, and the patronage he liberally afforded to the
divines of the Rump-party, had gained him the reputation of a man of
extraordinary piety; but the austerities he practised, and the devotions
in which he joined, afforded no balsam to his woes. He had been early
taught that restitution to the wronged was one of the evidences of real
penitence. His title and fortune were the right-hand; he could not cut
off the pride of life to which he was wedded. Had he never known
greatness, he would now have been happy as Walter de Vallance, living in
a state of respectable competence. He fell into the common fault of
incorrigible offenders; lamenting that he had not subdued the first
cravings of desire, and wishing to recall the irremediable past, while
to reform the present was too vast a labour.

Sometimes he had persuaded himself, that if he knew Allan Neville were
alive, he would purchase peace of conscience by relinquishing his
usurped possessions; but no sooner was he certified of that fact, and
beheld in Eustace the noble heir he had so basely injured, than his base
spirit shrunk into its narrow cell, and at that moment he would have
given worlds to have had the father and son cut off by any hand but his
own. Equally affected by the fear of death and of adversity, he yielded
Eustace to a fate which some faint remains of humanity made him deplore,
while a consciousness that this slaughter tended to confirm his own
title, reminded him that, by reaping the advantage of a cruel unjust
sentence which he had power to remit, he was virtually his murderer.
Such he knew the world would esteem him, if ever the story transpired;
and could it be long concealed? His influence with the ruling powers was
evidently on the wane; the star, which was now Lord of the ascendant,
shed on him a malign influence. Abjured by those whom he had served,
hated by the royalists, and despised by all parties; could a more
pitiable object be found, than a timorous, susceptible, falling villain;
conscious of guilt, aware of danger, convinced of the necessity of
repentance; but too much attached to temporal enjoyments to set about
it.

Lord Bellingham's distresses were not alleviated by domestic comfort. I
have before observed, that his Lady had embraced the party of Cromwell,
and had taken her religious creed from the fanatics, as best calculated
to compose her fears, and leave her conduct under the mis-rule of her
irregular passions. She had long hated and despised her husband, on whom
she threw the whole blame of the crimes she had excited him to commit,
at the same time that she took pains to stifle in him all the better
feelings of remorse, by telling him that it was his want of faith, which
excluded him from reaping the benefit of the promise, that the saints
should inherit the earth. When she spoke of worldly riches, of honour,
or of pleasure, she called them, "dust in the balance," carnal delights,
and Satan's bird-lime, which kept the soul from flying to heaven; yet no
miser ever clung to his gold with more tenacity than she to every
earthly good, that could in any wise contribute to her own advantage.
From a vain dissipated coquette, proud of making conquests, and wedded
to a life of frivolity, she was changed to a rapturous enthusiast,
certain of divine favour upon grounds equally inconsistent with reason
and Scripture. With a still carnalized fancy, she adorned the heaven
which she felt sure of eternally inhabiting, with the splendor and
luxury she had enjoyed on earth, and thus tricked out a Mahommedan
paradise rather than the pure and spiritual enjoyments of glorified
beings. With all the zeal and animosity of a new convert, she tried to
make her son and husband adopt these notions; and failing of success,
she thought herself at liberty to renounce them both; and could she have
secured a perpetual residence in this world, or transported her beloved
wealth and greatness to the other, the death of Lord Sedley would have
given her no more concern than that of the Earl of Bellingham; but
looking upon the former as the medium through which her name must be
conveyed to posterity, she felt an interest in his preservation, totally
distinct from maternal affection; and to this his fine qualities served
rather as an alloy, than an incentive. A youth weak enough to be really
a convert, or sufficiently base to have affected being one to her
opinions, a flatterer of her faults, and the tool of her designs, would
have been invested by her erroneous judgment with those high deservings
which actually adorned her noble offspring, though she wanted
penetration to discern them.

When the agitators arrested Lord Bellingham, he knew that his son had
been sent with Cromwell's detachment against the Duke of Hamilton, and
that the victorious General returned to London in triumph, while no sure
tidings of the illustrious youth's safety cheered the prison-hours of
the wretched father. Important events succeeded each other with such
rapidity, that there was no time to bring forward the charge against an
imprisoned General, whose rank only made him an object of curiosity,
while his conduct exposed him to contempt. New modelling the House of
Commons; expediting the vote of non-addresses; the trial and execution
of the King; the annihilation of the House of Peers; the sacrifice of
many illustrious and noble Loyalists, and the complete establishment of
military tyranny under the name of a republic, engaged the attention of
Cromwell, till a little time previous to his undertaking the reduction
of Ireland to the same yoke that England bore with silent but sullen
indignation, when he judged it expedient to endeavour to prevent his
enemies from taking advantage of his being at a distance from the chief
seat of political intrigue. He knew that Lord Bellingham was intrusted
with the secrets of the Commonwealth's-men, and determined to pay him a
conciliatory visit in prison. He met the captive Earl with mock
humility, and sycophantic friendship; talked largely of his talents and
deserts; lamented that he should fall into the displeasure of the
nation, and spoke of the lenity he was accused of showing to the
Loyalists, as a frailty he could pity, having himself fallen into a
similar temptation, when he was moved in the spirit to spare Charles
Stewart, till the Lord, whom he sought in prayer, showed him it was not
to be.

A measured smile smoothed the features of the stern conspirator while he
spoke, and his eye seemed with meek simplicity to tell all the secrets
of his own soul, while in reality it read that of his observer. Lord
Bellingham thought this change from hatred to esteem wonderful; yet the
love of life made him a ready dupe, and he fell into the snare which he
suspected. He could easily justify himself from the charge of secret
attachment to royalty, and Cromwell seemed to require no other test to
admit him to his confidence. He told the Earl that he would open to him
his whole heart; he deplored the licence of evil tongues, and the
endeavours of the malignants to disunite the godly. His own views, he
said, had been grossly misrepresented. It was reported, that he wished
to make himself King; but he abhorred the name, as anti-christian, and
prayed that whenever the heathenish sound was uttered, a Samuel might
arise among the prophets, and call down lightning and rain even in
wheat-harvest. The Parliament, whose humble instrument he was, had
forced honours upon him, and had commanded him to go to Ireland, and
extirpate the bloody Papists, as Joshua had done the idolatrous
Canaanites. On his return, he trusted he should lay the sword on the
mercy-seat, that is, beside the mace of the Speaker, to whom he would on
his knees give up all his employments, and apply himself to the care of
his own soul, which was a burthen great enough for any man. And he
trusted the Lord would give peace to Israel, and build up the desolate
places of Zion, to which purpose he would put up a prayer, wherein he
required Lord Bellingham to join.

After their devotions, Bellingham assured Cromwell that the wishes of
his party went but little further than what he proposed to do.
Considering the established forms of Geneva and Scotland as the most
scriptural, it was their intention to adopt the same discipline in
spiritual affairs. As to temporal rule, they thought a body of wise men,
elected by a free people, the likeliest way of rendering England
respectable among foreign nations, and happy in itself. He quoted the
examples of Greece and Rome in ancient times, and of the Italian
republic in modern, to illustrate his sentiments. Cromwell listened with
apparent conviction, professed that he had not studied these things,
being only in himself an ignorant sinful man, though chosen by
Providence to be a mighty instrument to level thrones and pull down the
ungodly. He then lamented that so able a counsellor as Bellingham should
hang like a bucket upon a peg, instead of being employed to draw water
from a cistern; and, promising to endeavour to set him again high among
the people, he took his leave. This interview having sufficiently
apprized him of the designs of the Rump-party, he resolved to keep Lord
Bellingham in safe custody, to remove their adherents from every office
of trust, and to prevent all attempts to appeal to the people by calling
a free Parliament. And as he intended that his campaign in Ireland
should not be protracted by any compunctious visitings of mercy, but
that it should more resemble the sweeping hurricane that devastates a
province, than the purifying wind that renovates a corrupted atmosphere,
he trusted that his habitual celerity, and the vigilance and fidelity of
the host of spies he so liberally paid, would enable him to return to
England before any measures could be taken to sap the dominion whose
foundations were laid in treachery and treason.

The progress of his bloody standard in Ireland was interrupted by the
young King's appearance in Scotland. Cromwell transported himself to
that kingdom with incredible dispatch, and assumed the command of that
division of the army which had been nominally retained by Fairfax, who,
tired of his guilty employment, had, since the murder of the King, been
evidently indisposed to the service, and now peremptorily refused to
continue to act as general. With these forces Cromwell met the army of
Scotch enthusiasts at Dunbar. There was indeed equal fanaticism in both
armies; but the difference was, the English were soldiers as well as
preachers, and their General used fanaticism as an engine to move
others, not as the rule of his own actions. He wore piety as a mask; he
used it to sharpen his sword, but he never converted it into a pilot.
Supreme power was the port at which he aimed, and profound worldly
wisdom, and the most acute penetration into the character and designs of
others, assisted him to steer his vessel with astonishing security
through the rocks and quicksands that opposed his course.

From the retrospective view which the narrative required, I now turn to
speak of the alarm caused by the young King's march into England. Though
Cromwell was personally in Scotland, he continued to govern in London
through his agents, and they urged the approach of the Royalists as a
pretence for resorting to severer measures with all who were hostile to
their employer. They suggested, that since the King was now openly
supported by the Presbyterians, it would be expedient that party should
defray the expences of the war. Lord Bellingham, they said, had long
been suspected of loyal propensities; and at this moment the
sequestration of his effects might answer a twofold purpose--to confirm
the fidelity of the army by discharging their arrears--and to punish the
Presbyterians through one of their leaders. Advice, sanctioned by the
approbation of the General, took the form of a command. The Parliament
readily complied with a suggestion that wore in its aspect the pretence
of relieving the well-disposed. The estates were immediately voted to
belong to the Commonwealth; the Earl was ordered into closer
confinement; and sequestrators were sent down to take possession of
Bellingham-Castle.

It was by this event that the feelings of the Countess were roused from
the long apathy of self-enjoyment. Forgetting that she had herself
furnished Cromwell with the information which first excited her
suspicions against her Lord, she loudly complained that, not content
with keeping him in prison on a charge which could not be proved, they
were now injuring his innocent family by seizing their inheritance. The
sequestrators were not sent to listen to remonstrances, but to act with
speed and decision; and Lady Bellingham now found banishment from her
home, and confiscation of all her property, were serious evils, though,
when inflicted on others, she had always viewed them with great
philosophy, considering them either as judgments on the ungodly, or
correctives of carnal appetites, to complain of which showed a want of
grace.

Her natural inconsiderateness and self-conceit did not permit her to
penetrate into the motives, or to discover the character of, Cromwell.
He had plied her with the species of flattery most agreeable to her
present turn of thought, pretending to ask her opinion on dark texts,
and to be influenced by her judgment of gifted preachers. She never
suspected that he had converted her into one of the steps which formed
his ascent to greatness; but, believing him her fast friend, ascribed
the order of sequestration to their common enemies. He was still in
Scotland; but she determined to fly to him, state her wrongs, and
implore redress. The danger of the journey less alarmed her than the
risk of poverty and disgrace in remaining inactive. A rumour of the
King's having arrived in London expedited her resolves. Ever impressed
with the idea of her own importance, she even fancied that avowing her
fidelity to Cromwell at such a period would give her a claim on his
gratitude, and thus insure success to her suit.

She had proceeded in her journey as far as Ribblesdale, when her coach
was stopt by an infuriated populace, who, hearing she was a partizan of
Cromwell, avowedly, seeking his protection, surrounded her carriage with
every mark of derision and insult, and even took off her horses to
prevent her proceeding. The cruel depredations which the republicans had
committed in their march to Scotland the preceding year, gave a private
stimulus to the hatred they felt for the murderer of a King, now justly
dear to their recovered reason. Mortified that the dignity of her aspect
and the splendour of her suite had not overawed these rustics; alarmed
for the safety of her person, and exposed to the certain inconvenience
of passing the night, unhoused, in a mountainous country, even if she
were permitted to proceed next day, Lady Bellingham sat trembling in her
carriage, in which were her waiting-gentlewoman, chaplain, and
gentleman-usher, all highly useful to her in their separate departments
and joint occupations of submissive flatterers, but all incompetent to
advise what was to be done, and incapable of assisting her in this
extremity.

Nothing affecting the welfare or the moral character of Ribblesdale was
uninteresting to Dr. Beaumont, who, though restrained from receiving the
emoluments, was punctual in fulfilling the duties of his pastoral care.
At the first intelligence of a riot in the parish, he hastened to
Morgan, and endeavoured to make him sensible that it was his duty to
protect a helpless woman. Morgan was extremely doubtful how to act; for,
not being endowed with the power of looking into futurity, he knew not
which party would finally prevail. The magnified reports which he had
heard of the King's successes would have made him turn Loyalist, had he
not known that Cromwell, with a victorious army, was hastening from the
North, and that therefore it would be impolitic to offend him. He
thought the best way would be not to interfere; and, secretly cursing
the lady for exposing him to this dilemma, he observed the mountain-air
for once would brace her nerves, and furnish her with an adventure to
talk of as long as she lived. Davies was unwilling to open his doors to
a stranger till he knew if she would pay for her accommodations. Dr.
Beaumont therefore was left to perform the service of knight-errant all
alone.

He arrived on the common where the carriage was stopped in the dusk of
the evening, just at the time when Lady Bellingham's fears had so far
subdued her haughtiness as to change her threats into tears and
intreaties. The Doctor's admonitions soon prevailed on the villagers to
repent their conduct. They were ready to restore the horses, and refrain
from further molestation; but it was now too dark for her to proceed in
safety, and not a creature seemed willing to afford a lodging to one
whom they supposed to be no better than a mistress to Old Noll, the good
King's murderer.

Dr. Beaumont's finances were now in such a state as compelled him to
huswife his hospitality. The money which young De Vallance had insisted
on advancing to supply his probable necessities, had been appropriated
to the actual wants of the King's army, as it marched through
Lancashire; yet the good man's native courtesy still inclined him to
assist the perplexities of the affluent, while his benevolence prompted
him to relieve the distresses of the poor. He accosted Lady Bellingham
with an air of dignified modesty. His means, he said, were scanty, and
his humble dwelling was now the abode of care and affliction, yet he
thought it would afford her comforts superior to passing the night in
her carriage; and he requested, if she condescended to allow him to be
her host, she would overlook the homeliness of her fare in his sincere
wish to obviate the inconveniences which the rude treatment of his
parishioners had brought upon her.

It was not Lady Bellingham's method to look further than to her own
comforts. A man whose air and language bespoke a gentleman, but whose
coarse thread-bare garb indicated poverty, could not have gained her
attention if he spoke with the tongue of an angel, except so far as he
ministered to her accommodation. Turning her eyes to the ruins, which he
pointed out as his residence, she uttered an exclamation of contempt and
surprise, to convince him that she had been accustomed to such
magnificence, that it would be an infinite condescension in one of her
refinement to stoop to his society. Meantime her retinue, finding the
contents of the travelling chest would furnish a sufcient repast, urged
her to accept the shelter of a roof however humble; and Lady Bellingham,
with a slight inclination of her head, significant of her condescension,
ordered the horses to be put to, to draw her to the door. Dr. Beaumont
observed that the road would not be practicable for her carriage, on
which Her Ladyship required her gentleman-usher to hand her out. "How
dreadfully inconvenient," said she, "to walk so far! I wonder, Friend,
you did not take care to have a carriage-road." Dr. Beaumont smiled, and
replied that public events had pared off all his superfluities; but Lady
Bellingham asserted that a drive to your own door was one of the
necessaries of life, and her three attendants immediately and
unanimously confirmed her opinion.

Mrs. Mellicent had been informed that her brother was bringing a lady of
great quality, who was running away from the King to join Oliver
Cromwell, to spend the night under his roof; and though nothing could
exceed the superlative contempt she entertained for disloyal nobility,
the honour of the Beaumont blood, and respect for her brother,
determined her to give his guest the best reception in her power. Her
banquets, like Eve's, consisted of little beside fruits and herbs, and
the only ornaments she could arrange in the apartments were flowers; but
she had preserved the damask table-suit of her own spinning; and the
gold brocade gown, received as an heir-loom from her mother, was in high
preservation. She thought an exhibition of these would convince the
rebel lady, that though the King's friends now wore sad-coloured camlet,
they had once been people of consequence. She received Lady Bellingham
with one of her stiffest courtesies at the door of their best apartment,
and motioned with her hand for her to sit down with an air that spoke
conscious equality, and a determination not to be disconcerted by one
who required her hospitality. Constantia stood behind her aunt, pale,
dejected, clad in the deepest weeds of woe. Isabel did not appear. Her
beloved father had long required her constant attendance. With infinite
gratitude to Heaven, she acknowledged its goodness in again restoring to
him the use of that reason which enabled him to appreciate her filial
excellence. To come to details which are more specific, let us consider
the case of some diseases which are definitely caused by floating matter
in the air.
First, let us take one which is apparently attributable to pollen.

HAY FEVER.

Among diseases which are undoubtedly caused by floating matter in the
air must be reckoned the well-known malady "hay fever," which is a
veritable scourge during the summer months to a certain percentage of
persons, who have, probably, a peculiarly sensitive organization to
begin with, and are, in a scientific sense, "irritable."
This disease has been most thoroughly and laboriously investigated by
Mr.
Charles Blackley, of Manchester, who, being himself a martyr to hay
fever, spent ten years in investigating the subject, and published the
result in 1873, in a small work entitled "Experimental Researches on
the Causes and Nature of _Catarrhus aestivus_ (hay fever or hay asthma)."

Mr. Blackley had little difficulty in determining that the cause of his
trouble was the pollen of grasses and flowers, and his investigations
showed that the pollen of some plants was far more irritating than
the pollen of others. The pollen of rye, for example, produced very severe
symptoms of catarrh and asthma, when inhaled by the nose or mouth. Mr.
Blackley came to the conclusion that the action of the pollen
was partly chemical and partly mechanical, and that the full effect
was not produced until the outer envelope burst and allowed of the escape
of the granular contents.

Having satisfied himself that pollen was capable of producing all the
symptoms of hay fever, Mr. Blackley next sought to determine, by a
series of experiments, the quantity of pollen found floating in the
atmosphere during the prevalence of hay fever, and its relation to
the intensity of the symptoms. The amount of pollen was determined
by exposing slips of glass, each having an area of a square centimeter,
and coated with a sticky mixture of glycerine, water, proof spirit,
and a little carbolic acid. Mr. Blackley gives two tables, showing the
average number of pollen grains collected in twenty-four hours on one
square of glass, between May 28 and August 21, in both a rural
and an urban position. The maximum both in town and country was reached
on June 28, when in the town 105 pollen grains were deposited, and in
the country 880 grains. The number of grains deposited was found to
vary much, falling almost to zero during heavy rain and rising to a
maximum if the rain were followed by bright sunshine. Mr. Blackley
found that the severity of his own symptoms closely corresponded to
the number of pollen grains deposited on his glasses. Mr. Blackley
devised some very ingenious experiments to determine the number of
grains floating in the air at different altitudes. The experiments
were conducted by means of a kite, to which the slips of glass were
attached, fixed in an ingenious apparatus, by means of which the
surface of the glass was kept covered until a considerable altitude
had been reached.

Mr. Blackley's first experiment gave as a result that 104 pollen
grains were deposited in the glass attached to the kite, while only 10
were deposited on a glass near the ground. This experiment was
repeated. Again and again, and always with the same result, there was
more pollen in the upper strata of the air than in the lower.

A very interesting experiment was performed at Filey, in June, 1870.
A breeze was blowing from the sea, and had been blowing for 12 or 15
hours. Mr. Blackley flew his kite to an elevation of 1,000 feet. The glass
attached to the kite was exposed for three hours, and on it there
were 80 grains of pollen, whereas a similar glass, exposed at the
margin of the water, showed no pollen nor any organic form. Whence
came this pollen collected on the upper glass? Probably from Holland
or Denmark.
Possibly from some point nearer the center of Europe.

POTATO DISEASE.

A study of the terrible disease which so often attacks the potato
crop in this country will serve, I think, to bring forcibly before you
certain untoward conditions which may be called climatic, and which
are attributable to fungoid spores in the air.

With the potato disease you are all, probably, more or less practically
acquainted. When summer is at its height, and when the gardeners and
farmers are all looking anxiously to the progress of their crops, how
often have we heard the congratulatory remark of "How well and
strong those potatoes look!"

    Such a remark is most common at the
      end of July or the beginning of
    August, when the green part, or
      haulm, of the plant is looking its best, and when the rows of
potatoes, with their elegant rich foliage and bunches of blossom,
have an appearance which would almost merit their admission to the
flower border.

    The same evening, it may be, there
      comes a prolonged thunder storm,
    followed by a period of hot, close,
      moist, muggy weather.

    Four-and-twenty hours later, the
      hapless gardener notices that certain
    of his potato plants have dark spots
      upon some of their leaves.

    This, he knows too well, is the "plague
      spot," and if he examine his plants
    carefully, he will perhaps find
      that there is scarcely a plant which is not spotted.

    If the thunder shower which we have
      imagined be followed by a long period
    of drought, the plague may
      be stayed and the potatoes saved; but if the damp weather continue,
the number of spotted leaves among the potatoes increases day by
day, until the spotted leaves are the majority; and then the haulm
dies, gets slimy, and emits a characteristic odor; and it will be
found that the tubers beneath the soil are but half developed, and
impregnated with the disease to an extent which destroys their
value.

    Now, the essential cause of the
      potato disease is perfectly well
    understood. It is parasitical,
      the parasite being a fungus, the _Peronospora infestans_, which
grows at the expense of the leaves, stems, and tubers of the plant
until it destroys their vitality.

    If a diseased potato leaf be
      examined with the naked eye, it will
    be seen that, on the upper
      surface, there is an irregular brownish black spot, and if the
under surface of the leaf be looked at carefully, the brown spot
is also visible, but it will be seen to be covered with a very faint
white bloom, due to the growth of the fungus from the microscopic
openings or "stomata," which exist in large numbers on the under
surface of most green leaves.

    The microscope shows this "bloom"
      to be due to the protrusion of the
    fungus in the manner stated, and
      on the free ends of the minute branches are developed tiny egg
shaped vessels, called "conidia," in which are developed countless
"spores," each one of which is theoretically capable of infecting
neighboring plants.

Now, it is right to say that, with respect to the mode of spread of
the disease, scientific men are not quite agreed. All admit that
it may be conveyed by contact, that one leaf may infect its neighbors,
and that birds, flies, rabbits, and other ground game may carry the
disease from one plant to another and from one crop to another. This
is insufficient to account for the sudden onset and the wide extent of
potato "epidemics," which usually attack whole districts at "one fell
swoop." Some of those best qualified to judge believe that the spores
are carried through the air, and I am myself inclined to trust in the
opinion expressed by Mr. William Carruthers, F.R.S., before the select
committee on the potato crop, in 1880. Mr. Carruthers' great scientific
attainments, and his position as the head of the botanical department
of the British Museum, and as the consulting naturalist of the Royal
Agricultural Society, at least demand that his opinion should be
received with the greatest respect and consideration.

Mr. Carruthers said (report on the potato crop, presented to the House
of Commons, July 9, 1880, question 143 _et seq._): "The disease, I
believe, did not exist at all in Europe before 1844.... Many diseases
had been observed; many injuries to potatoes had been observed
and carefully described before 1844; but this particular disease had
not. It is due to a species of plant, and although that species is
small, it is as easily separated from allied plants as species of
flowering plants can be separated from each other. This plant was
known in South America before it made its appearance in this country.

It has been traced from South America to North America, and to Australia,
and it made its first appearance in Europe in Belgium, in 1844, and
within a very few days after it appeared in Belgium, it was noticed in
the Isle of Wight, and then within almost a few hours after that
it spread over the whole of the south of England and over Scotland....
When the disease begins to make its appearance, the fungus produces
these large oblong bodies (_conidia_), and the question is how these
bodies are spread, and the disease scattered.... I believe that these
bodies, which are produced in immense quantities, and very speedily,
within a few hours after the disease attacks the potato, are floating
in the atmosphere, and are easily transplanted by the wind all over
the country.

I believe this is the explanation of the spread of the disease in 1844,
when it made its appearance in Belgium. The spores produced in myriads
were brought over in the wind, and first attacked the potato crops in
the Isle of Wight, and then spread over the south of England. The course
of the disease is clearly traced from the south of England toward the
midland counties, and all over the island, and into Scotland and
Ireland. It was a progress northward.... This plant, the _Peronospora
infestans_, will only grow on the _Solanum tuberosum_, that is,
the cultivated potato.... Just as plants of higher organization
choose their soils, some growing in the water and some on land, so the
_Peronospora infestans_ chooses its host plant; and its soil is
this species, the _Solatium tuberosum_. It will not grow if it falls on
the leaves of the oak or the beech, or on grass, because that
is not its soil, so to speak. Now, the process of growth is
simply this: When the conidia fall on the leaf, they remain there
perfectly innocent and harmless unless they get a supply of water to
enable them to germinate.... The disease makes its appearance in the end
of July or the beginning of August, when we have, generally, very hot
weather. The temperature of the atmosphere is very high, and we have heavy
showers of rain."
The warmth and moisture are, in fact, the conditions necessary for
the germination of the conidia. Their contents (zoospores) are liberated,
and quickly grow in the leaf, and soon permeate every tissue of
the plant.

    It was clearly established before the committee that not all potatoes
    were equally liable to the disease.

The liability depends upon strength of constitution.

    It is well known that potatoes are usually,
    almost invariably, propagated by "sets," that is,
    by planting tubers, or portions of tubers, and
    this method of propagation is analogous to the propagation of other
forms of plants by means of "cuttings."

                                                 When potatoes are raised from seed, it is found that some of the
"seedlings" present a strength of constitution which enables them
to resist the disease for some years, even though the subsequent
propagation of the seedling is entirely from "sets."

The raising of seedling potatoes is a tedious process, but the patience
of the grower is often rewarded by success, and I may allude to the
fact that the so-called "Champion potato," raised from seed in the first
instance by Mr. Nicoll, in Forfarshire, and since propagated all over the
country, has enjoyed, deservedly as it would appear, a great reputation
as a disease-resisting potato; but all who have a practical
knowledge of potato growing seem agreed that we cannot expect its
disease-resisting quality to last at most more than twenty years
from its first introduction (in 1877), and that in time the
constitution of the "Champion" will deteriorate, and it will become a
prey to disease.

There is some evidence to show, also, that the constitution of the potato
may be materially influenced by good or bad culture. Damp soils,
insufficient or badly selected manures, the selection of ill
developed potatoes for seed, and the overcrowding of the "sets" in the
soil, all seem to act as causes which predispose the potatoes to the
attacks of the parasite. Strong potatoes resist disease, just as strong
children will; while weak potatoes, equally with weak children, are liable
to succumb to epidemic influences.

The following account of some exact experiments carried out by Mr.
George Murray, of the Botanical Department of the British Museum, seems
to show that Mr. Carruthers' theory as to the diffusion of conidia through
the air is something more than a speculation:

"In the middle of August, 1876," says Mr. Murray, "I instituted the
following experiments, with the object of determining the mode of
diffusion of the conidia of _Peronospora infestans_.

"The method of procedure was to expose on the lee side of a field of
potatoes, of which only about two per cent, were diseased, ordinary
microscopic slides, measuring two inches long by one inch broad, coated
on the exposed surface with a thin layer of glycerine, to which objects
alighting would adhere, and in which, if of the nature of conidia,
they would be preserved. These slides were placed on the projecting
stones of a dry stone wall which surrounded the field, and was at least
five yards from the nearest potato plant. During the five days and
nights of the experiment, a gentle wind blew, and the weather was, on
the whole, dry and clear. Every morning, about nine o'clock, I placed
fourteen slides on the lee side of the field, and every evening, about
seven o'clock, I removed them, and placed others till the following
morning at nine o'clock. The fourteen slides exposed during the day,
when examined in the evening, showed (among other objects):

On the first day. 15 conidia.
" second day. 17 " " third day. 27 " " fourth day. 4 " " fifth day. 9 "

"On none of the five nights did a single conidium alight on the
slides.
This seemed to me to prove that during the day the conidia, through
the dryness of the atmosphere and the shaking of the leaves, became
detatched and wafted by the air; while during the night the
moisture (in the form of dew, and on one occasion of a slight and
gently falling shower) prevented the drying of the conidia, and thus
rendered them less easy of detachment.

"I determined the nature of the conidia (1) by comparing them with authentic
conidia directly removed from diseased plants; (2) by there being
attached to some of them portions of the characteristic conidiaphores;
and (3) by cultivating them in a moist chamber, the result of which
was, that five conidia, not having been immersed in the glycerine,
retained their vitality, which they showed by bursting and producing
zoospores in the manner characteristic of _Peronospora infestans_."

INFLUENZA.

Let us look at another disease by the light of recent knowledge, viz.,
the epidemic influenza, concerning which I remember hearing much talk,
as a child, in 1847-48. There has been no epidemic of this
disease in the British Isles since 1847, but we may judge of its
serious nature from the computation of Peacock that in London alone
250,000 persons were stricken down with it in the space of a few
days. It is characteristic of this disease that it invades a whole
city, or even a whole country, at "one fell swoop," resembling in
its sudden onset and its extent the potato disease which we have been
considering.

The mode of its spreading forbids us to attribute it, at least in any
material degree, although it may be partially so, to contagion in the
ordinary sense, i.e., contagion passing from person to person along
the lines of human intercourse. It forbids us also to look at community
of water supply or food, or the peculiarities of soil, for the
source of the disease virus. We look, naturally, to some atmospheric
condition for the explanation. That the atmosphere is the source
of the virus is made more likely from the fact that the disease has
broken out on board ship in a remarkable way. In 1782, there was an
epidemic, and on May 2 in that year, says Sir Thomas Watson--
"Admiral Kempenfelt sailed from Spithead with a squadron, of which
the Goliah was one. The crew of that vessel were attacked
with influenza on May 29, and the rest were at different times affected;
and so many of the men were rendered incapable of duty by this prevailing
sickness, that the whole squadron was obliged to return into port
about the second week in June, not having had communication with any
port, but having cruised solely between Brest and the Lizard. In
the beginning of the same month another large squadron sailed, all in
perfect health, under Lord Howe's command, for the Dutch coast. Toward
the end of the month, just at the time, therefore, when the Goliah became
full of the disease, it appeared in the Rippon, the Princess Amelia, and
other ships of the last mentioned fleet, although there had been no
intercourse with the land."
Similar events were noticed during the epidemic of 1833:

"On April 3, 1833, the very day on which I saw the first two cases that
I did see of influenza--all London being smitten with it on that and
the following day--the Stag was coming up the Channel, and arrived at
two o'clock off Berry Head on the coast of Devonshire, all on board
being at that time well. In half an hour afterward, the breeze being
easterly and blowing off the land, 40 men were down with the influenza,
by six o'clock the number was increased to 60, and by two o'clock
the next day to 160.
On the self-same evening a regiment on duty at Portsmouth was in a
perfectly healthy state, but by the next morning so many of the soldiers
of the regiment were affected by the influenza that the garrison duty
could not be performed by it."
After reviewing the various hypotheses which had been put forward
to account for the disease, sudden thaws, fogs, particular winds, swarms
of insects, electrical conditions, ozone, Sir Thomas Watson goes on to
say:

"Another hypothesis, more fanciful perhaps at first sight than these,
yet quite as easily accommodated to the known facts of the distemper,
attributes it to the presence of innumerable minute substances,
endowed with vegetable or with animal life, and developed in unusual
abundance under specific states of the atmosphere in which they
float, and by which they are carried hither and thither."

This hypothesis has certainly more facts in support of it now than it
had when Sir Thomas Watson gave utterance to it in 1837. And
when another epidemic of influenza occurs, we may look with some
confidence to having the hypothesis either refuted or confirmed by
those engaged in the systematic study of atmospheric bacteria. Among
curious facts in connection with influenza, quoted by Watson, is the
following: "During the raging of one epidemic, 300 women engaged in
coal dredging at Newcastle, and wading all day in the sea, escaped
the complaint." Reading this, the mind naturally turns to Dr. Blackley's
glass slide exposed on the shore at Filey, and upon which no pollen was
deposited, while eighty pollen grains were deposited on a glass
at a higher elevation.

SMALL-POX.
Let us next inquire into the evidence regarding the conveyence of
small-pox through the air. In the supplement to the Tenth Report
of the Local Government Board for 1880-81 (c. 3,290) is a report
by Mr. W.H.
Power on the influence of the Fulham, Hospital (for small-pox) on
the neighborhood surrounding it.How greatly soever Cromwell subdued and oppressed England by his
domestic management, like all other able tyrants, he made the nation he
enslaved great and formidable by his foreign policy, using the energies
with which despotism had furnished him, to extend her commerce, and
support her naval superiority.--Had no peculiar family-circumstances
compelled De Vallance to renounce his home, doubtless he would have
imitated the vise conduct of Agricola, who is justly celebrated "for not
being in that class of patriots, who conceive they gain immortal glory,
when by rashness they provoke their fate; but showed that, even in the
worst of times, and under the most despotic ruler, it is possible for
the man of heroic fortitude to be great and good with moderation." But
De Vallance felt he could not compound for an estate to which he had no
just title, nor reconcile himself to parents, who were stained with
every crime. Could he forget the wrongs and woes of Allan Neville; the
death of Eustace; the mournful seclusion and daily anguish of
Isabel!--Submission to Cromwell must be combined with a sacrifice of
every honest principle, every cherished affection of his heart. England
therefore afforded no rest to the sole of his foot, and if he sought the
continent, it should be as a military hireling, not as a dependent
mendicant; as one who could earn his bread, not as a supplicant, who had
no other claim to support than loyalty and indigence.

There were many gentlemen who had emigrated to Virginia, when
hostilities terminated in 1646, who were now comfortably established as
planters; and he felt he might trust his desire of obtaining a similar
situation to his mental resources, and the energy and perseverance of
his natural character. The new world was unstained by the contaminating
vices of the old. In a society, chiefly composed of Loyalists, he would
not be aggrieved by the sight of low-born insolence, trampling on
hereditary greatness, nor offended by the perversions of sophists, the
cant of hypocrites, and the exaltation of villains. He could there only
endure bodily inflictions. What prevented him from thus exonerating
himself from the severest visitations of adversity, and immediately
transporting himself across the Atlantic? The consideration of that vast
world of waters separating him from Isabel Evellin; for though he might
no more hope to bind her to him by the tie of marriage, or even to share
her dear society, the bond of love was indissoluble. He could not remove
to such a distance from her, as would make it impossible to render her
any assistance. He might not be able to defend or console her; but, by
remaining in England, he could suffer or die for her sake.

Irresolution increased the depression of De Vallance; his bodily
complaints gained ground, and Jobson too, though still an affectionate,
was no longer a cheerful, companion. His spirits sunk while he was with
the King in Worcester; he predicted the loss of that battle, and the
evening before his master acknowledged himself unable to proceed, he
gave him to understand that he had seen a warning of his approaching
death. Instead of rejoicing over their casual comforts, and anticipating
better days as he used to do, he was ever prognosticating evils, and
lessening their humble comforts, by prophesying their impending loss.
Even the full-frothed can and savoury luncheon lost their usual relish;
it was always the last good Welsh-ale, or dried salmon, he should have
in this world; and if he repeated his farewel libation, till he grew
intoxicated, every draught added to his sadness. Instead of roaring out
a joyous song, he fell to crying, and talked of the slaughter incident
to storming a city, instead of the brave sallies of a garrison.

De Vallance repeatedly asked the reason of this change, and as the
increase of his indisposition confirmed Jobson in his opinion of the
truth of his conclusions, the latter thought (since his master must die
soon) he might as well own how he knew that his recovery was impossible.
He then reminded him of his predictions, that the King would lose the
battle, and confessed he had received a supernatural intimation that
England was ruined, and the poor Loyalists quite undone.--"I would not
tell Your Honour," said he, "at the time, because I know you don't
credit such things; but I met Fido in the streets of Worcester the night
before it was taken by Old Noll--Mr. Eustace's own poor Fido, and I then
said the King would be beat."

"I never knew," replied De Vallance, "that the appearance of a dog was
oracular."

"Well, laugh on," said Jobson, "and I wish it may do you good. But I
say, I saw him again, the night before you was taken ill, and I know by
that it is all over with you."

The affectionate Jobson burst into tears as he spoke, while De Vallance
was extremely struck at the re-appearance of the animal. He reminded
Jobson that dogs were often extremely alike, and inquired how he knew
that this actually belonged to Eustace.

"How do I know," replied he, "that I am Ralph Jobson? Why it knew me,
and seemed to wag its tail; nay, made as though it would lick my hand."

"And did you not permit him?" said De Vallance.

The terrified trooper turned pale, and his teeth chattered with horror.
"I did not say that it was Fido's living self," exclaimed he; "and what
would have become of me, had I been touched by a ghost? why my arm would
have withered directly. I knew a man in village that had his nose beat
flat to his face, only for peeping into the belfry, while a ghost was
dancing among the bell-ropes.--No, to be sure, I flung a stone at it,
and it ran away setting up a howl."

De Vallance now laboured to convince Jobson, that admitting the reality
of spectral appearances in the human form, animals were not endowed with
a vital principle, capable of existing distinct from their bodies.
Jobson was shocked at his master's presumptuous neglect of warnings, and
he vehemently urged the impossibility of a living dog being at Worcester
in September, and in Wales at Christmas. He stated the privilege of
spirits to take any shape; and not nicely attending to the question of
identity, shewed from oral testimony, that they sometimes appeared as a
glazed pipkin, and sometimes as the skeleton of a horse's head. The
exertion of endeavouring to enlighten wilful absurdity increased the
debility of De Vallance. Jobson's forebodings were turned into
certainties, and he walked into the church-yard to see in what spot he
should bury his master, and hoping to hear the death-watch, as a sign
that he should rest beside him.

The landlady at the little inn, where the forlorn Arthur languished,
pitying the sufferings of her interesting guest, and the inactive grief
of his attendant, requested she might be permitted to send for an
excellent gentleman, who was come to live in the neighbourhood, and had
done many extraordinary cures.--"You need not," said she, "fear
troubling him, he takes no pay but the blessings of those he heals; and
he is said to be as useful to a wounded spirit, as he is to a diseased
body." De Vallance was weary of life; but the soldier must not quit his
post, till his discharge be duly signed by his Commander; he yielded
therefore to the proposal. Jobson had a rooted dislike to all doctors;
but reluctance to his master's employing one was changed into
consternation, when he saw in the benevolent volunteer-Esculapius, the
Doctor Lloyd against whom he had conceived an inveterate antipathy,
verily believing him capable of poisoning a patient for the sake of
converting him into an anatomy. He rushed into his master's chamber to
announce his identity, and when he found the intelligence only increased
his eagerness to see him, he resolved however to prevent his taking any
of his medicines.

The diseases brought on by fatigue and distress are seldom obstinate,
when resisted by youth, a good constitution, a clear conscience, and a
calm judgment. Dr. Lloyd dealt in potent cordials. He possessed the
essential qualities of a true friend; and the behaviour of De Vallance
soon induced him to exert his talents in that capacity. He had hardly
felt his pulse, before he pronounced that little was necessary besides
tranquillity and generous support. Arthur's heart panted with impatience
to commence a confidential intimacy; but he recollected he must inspire
confidence, before he could venture to require it. A sick stranger,
languishing at a village-inn, was as likely to be the enemy as the
friend of a cause it was now dangerous to espouse. Strongly
pre-possessed in favour of a man, who courageously ventured among a
multitude of hostile and infuriated soldiers, avowed his attachment to
the victim they had just slaughtered, and bestowed on his corpse the
decent sepulture they meant to deny, De Vallance felt no apprehension at
trusting his own life ta such tried fidelity. He spoke of himself as
friendless, distressed, and in the utmost need of advice and protection.
He declared himself to be a Loyalist, who, having engaged in the King's
last attempt, would be excepted from the expected amnesty. By this means
he drew Dr. Lloyd into a guarded communication of his former residence
at Pembroke, and his acquaintance with Eustace Evellin. De Vallance
owned himself to be a friend to that family. He even used the word
brother. Dr. Lloyd turned on him a significant glance, when, to justify
the claim, De Vallance drew from his bosom the letter of Isabel, and
explained the hopes that had been defeated by the death of Eustace. "You
will not wonder," added he, "that I have a painful eagerness to know
every circumstance of that lamentable event."

Dr. Lloyd regarded his patient with scrutinizing attention. "You know,"
said he, "that the resolute defence of Pembroke-Castle provoked the
parliamentary General to adopt measures that were intended to strike
terror into the King's party; and from the particular manner in which
you apply to me, you possibly also know that, influenced by compassion,
I removed the body of Eustace, and performed those offices which
friendship required."

The undefined, unacknowledged hopes which had floated in the mind of
Arthur vanished at this reply, and as they disappeared, convinced him,
that he had cherished a vain romantic illusion. A long pause ensued; De
Vallance heaved a deep sigh, and asked if the noble youth was resigned
to his fate.

"Life was very dear to him," answered Dr. Lloyd, "and no
wonder.--Talent, personal beauty, lively and generous feelings, the
purest sense of honour, and the noblest aspirings after fame, were
combined in his character. He loved too, and he knew himself beloved.
You seem, Sir, about his age; my sensibility has been blunted by time;
but I will appeal to your own susceptibility, to conceive the sensations
of his impassioned heart, when he found himself suddenly arrested in the
bloom of manhood, by a summons to an ignominious death. This, too, at a
distance from all his kindred, and after having sustained for many
months the most severe warfare, and the cruellest privations. But if you
ask me if he discovered any unmanly weakness at this awful moment--I
answer none. He looked and moved like a hero going to mount the car of
triumph. The lustre of his dauntless eye appalled the musketeers, who
were drawn up in the court. 'Take sure aim,' said he; 'Your commander
spares not youth and loyalty; therefore be like him, pitiless.'"

"Detestable act, infernal massacre!" exclaimed De Vallance.--"Retributive
Heaven, I own thy justice! That murderous volley, Bellingham, slew thy
son!" Dr. Lloyd clasped the clenched hands with which he seemed prepared
to beat his own bosom, and requested an explanation.

"Do not, do not," said the tortured Arthur, "believe me capable of
repaying your kind commiseration with ingratitude, if I own myself
descended from the most cruel and treacherous of men. The murdered
Eustace was rightful heir to the title and fortunes which, as the son of
Bellingham, I might claim. Shall I own, though my heart recoils at the
confession, that I strongly fear a base private motive urged my father
to select this victim, as a sacrifice to what he called public
expedience.--Oh! Dr. Lloyd, had I never been born, had my ambitious
parents laid no base projects for my aggrandizement, the noble Eustace
had still lived."

"My good Sir," returned the kind physician, "we must debate this point a
little. In the first place, let me assure you the lots were fairly cast.
I do not justify, indeed I severely reprobate the cruel policy which
required the sacrifice of three victims; but it was resolved on in full
council, the blame therefore is divided among all the officers. I also
know that Lord Bellingham committed his own safety by endeavouring to
preserve the life of Eustace."

An overwhelming load of infamy seemed, at this assurance, removed from
the oppressed De Vallance. "Speak it again, dear worthy man, again
repeat that my father would have saved him. You know he would? You can
swear to the fact? But soft--was not he supreme commander? What, then,
prevented him from signing his pardon?"

Dr. Lloyd replied--"The limited power which a general possesses over
troops, who, in obeying him, have cancelled the previous obligations of
duty and conscience. He who accepts the command of a revolutionary army
is ever fearful of being sacrificed by his own soldiers. His office
makes him the ostensible champion of liberty; but his army claim a
greater licence than consists with the requisite exercise of discipline
and authority. His subordinate officers envy his supremacy; for the
chain of prescriptive gradation is dissolved by the pretext of
preferring merit; and what soldier of fortune is there who does not
think himself equal to the highest posts which his machinations and
enterprize can procure. We Loyalists (for such, Sir, I now in confidence
own myself to be) have often said that Lord Bellingham was only half
wicked. He retained too much of the gentleman to practise extortion, or
to connive at the rapacity by which his subalterns tried to make the
most of their brief authority. He enforced discipline without
condescending to that familiarity and occasional indulgence which make
severity palatable. He was an agent of the new system, trying to
introduce the manners of the old. He saw his own danger when it was too
late. He discovered that he served villains who, despising honest
praise, renounced every honourable bond of amity, to whom treachery and
cruelty were become habitual; and that he commanded desperadoes, who,
setting no value on their own lives, kept his in their power. Such, Sir,
was the state of your father's army, and such the secret hostility of
those for whom he fought. You may condemn his embarking in their cause,
his timidity, his irresolution, his fluctuating variableness, but not
his deliberate cruelty or private malice. After Eustace had drawn the
lot of death, the power of the general could not save him from an army
lost to every generous feeling, and thirsting for revenge."

To know that his father had rather been guilty of the transgressions of
frail man than of the horrible enormities of a demon, was an invaluable
consolation to De Vallance. But still Eustace had fallen under the
sentence of Bellingham, and himself consequently been banished from
Isabel. Dr. Lloyd interrupted his mournful reverie by inquiring what
were his future views.

"When you described Eustace going to execution," returned he, "you
appealed to the sympathy of a heart eternally separated from the object
of a pure, cherished affection. Read that letter. Conceive it written by
a woman whose beauty is her smallest praise, and then advise me how to
bestow the unvalued remnant of a life which must be spent in exile from
her."

Dr. Lloyd perused Isabel's farewel, and inquired if her brother's death
was the only obstacle to their union.

"Yes," replied De Vallance. "I had renounced the principles in which I
was educated, abjured the aggrandizement and affluence which my parents'
crimes had purchased; I had her promise, sanctioned by her father's full
consent, as a reward for services I was so fortunate as to render them.
We were to have fled to Holland, rich in the possession of domestic
happiness and decent competence, when that fatal intelligence----"

"Come, young gentleman," interrupted Dr. Lloyd, "you meditate too
deeply. I see you want society. The hardships you have undergone have
overwhelmed you. I must remove you to my own cottage. I keep a cordial
there which I never trust out of my own custody. I see your disease, and
know my remedy will complete your cure."

"Sir," returned De Vallance, "we are talking of something infinitely
more important than life. I know my disease is at present trifling, the
effect of anxiety acting too forcibly on a fatigued body. I could say it
consoles me, as a proof that my constitution will not be always
invincible to the attacks of these mental agonies; and you answer the
communications which your sympathy has extorted from me on the
soul-piercing subjects of my honour and my love, by telling me you have
a nostrum that will relieve my head-aches, and ease my frame of this
debilitating languor."

Dr. Lloyd rose, and examined the apartment to see that there were no
witnesses; he then drew his chair close to De Vallance, and gazed on his
emotion with the delight of a healing angel commissioned to alleviate
the woes of virtue, and, grasping his hand, told him "he should see
Eustace--the living Eustace," continued he. Seeing Arthur look
incredulous, "Eustace Evellin is alive, and resides with me. Hush!
suppress that burst of ecstacy; all our lives are at stake. Not even
honest Jobson must know he lives, lest his intemperate rapture should
betray him."

De Vallance was rapt in pious exultation. Exonerated from such a load of
paternal guilt, he seemed to pray with more assured confidence of Divine
protection. His gratitude to the worthy physician exceeded the powers of
language. Enfeebled by indisposition, he sunk upon his bosom, called him
a second father, and thanked him for a renewed and valuable existence.

Dr. Lloyd then briefly related the circumstances of Eustace's
preservation. Either his magnanimity intimidated the executioners, or
his gallantry and beauty inspired compassion. He refused to have his
face covered, saying he feared not to look on death. The power of the
human eye, in such circumstances, has been owned to be invincible. The
volley was fired with unsteady aim. His fellow-sufferers fell dead. He
stood unwounded; but a momentary impulse induced him to drop beside
them, and to lie apparently lifeless, bathed in their blood. At the same
instant his faithful spaniel rushed forward, licked his extended hand,
and, with dreadful howlings, seemed to guard his remains; and the
mutiny, excited by the agitators, broke out among the soldiers, who were
drawn up to witness the horrid spectacle. While they clamorously accused
the General of depriving them of their lawful right, the plunder of the
town of Pembroke, and attempting to save the cavaliers, Lloyd heroically
and adroitly took advantage of the tumult; and, though he had no other
design than giving his corse decent internment, he had the transport to
be instrumental in preserving the life of his friend. He took every wise
precaution that his miraculous escape should be a profound secret.
Endeared to each other by these extraordinary circumstances, they agreed
never to separate; and Dr. Lloyd removed to a spot where he was unknown,
supported by the income of a small inheritance, and declining the
practice of medicine, except gratuitously among the indigent. Eustace
cut off his redundant hair, stained his complexion, and otherwise
disguised his appearance; and he passed as the son of a gentleman, who,
being afflicted with mental derangement, was obliged to be kept in close
retirement. Dr. Lloyd rented a neat secluded cottage; and the friends
lived in decent privacy, waiting for happier times.

De Vallance now required an explanation of Fido's being seen at
Worcester; and Dr. Lloyd owned that, finding it impossible to restrain
the loyal impetuosity of Eustace, he went to that city to learn the
situation of the King, since, if there were any hopes of a prosperous
issue, he had consented that they should both join the royal standard.
The Doctor further added, that he feared their present comforts could
not long continue. The surrender of the Earl of Derby's Castles had
introduced the rebel troops into the neighbourhood; and he dreaded lest
Eustace should be discovered and recognized. They therefore meditated a
voyage to Virginia; and the plan was now suspended by the anxiety of
Eustace to hear some tidings from his kindred, and to acquaint them with
his situation. The impossibility of sending intelligence of such
importance by a public conveyance, in times when the letters and actions
of royalists were subjected to the most vigilant scrutiny; and the
hazard and difficulty of forwarding it by a private hand had long
prevented him from having any correspondence with his family; nor did he
know the anguish his supposed murder had cost them. In those times of
civil contention the dearest relatives were often long ignorant of each
other's fate. So numerous were the instances of cruelty, so multiplied
the tales of wo, that they wearied and confused the reciter. Many
parents believed their sons safe in a foreign country, who, at last they
found, had long since perished in some obscure skirmish, where valour
bled unshaded by its deserved laurels. Others, who had lamented the
death of their dearest relations, received them back at the King's
restoration, as if they had risen from their tombs. The necessity of
extreme caution, the frequency of assumed names and personal disguises,
and the insecurity and infrequency of written communications,
obliterated the traces of identity. Among the less evils of civil war,
dividing the ties and preventing the connecting intercourse of social
life must be enumerated; and what opinion must those who rejoice in the
conversation of a present friend, or open, with trembling delight, a
letter from an absent one, form of a nation convulsed by furious
discord, when the privation of these blessings is ranked only among its
smaller calamities!

De Vallance had, that evening, the infinite transport of folding Eustace
to his heart, in the comfortable asylum where the worthy Doctor Lloyd
concealed the hope of an illustrious house, the noble victim of adverse
fortune. The generous youths pledged the vows of mutual and perpetual
friendship. Conversing with all the confidence of brothers, Arthur
acquainted Eustace with the early history of their family, and his own
determination never to reap the fruits of his parents' misdeeds. He told
him how Isabel had preserved his life; related the gradual change of his
political principles--their mutual attachment--her heroical devotedness
to her proscribed father--the meek magnanimity and active piety of Dr.
Beaumont--the arrival of Jobson--the agony of Colonel Evellin--and the
deep anguish of Constantia; concluding with his own banishment from
Ribblesdale, and the apparent extinction of his dearest hopes. To know
that his youthful errors were not only pardoned, but that he was so dear
and constant an object of regret to those he fondly adored, gave the
heart of Eustace those alternations of exquisite delight and painful
anxiety which distinguish generous and exalted minds from the cold
equanimity of selfish apathy. Misery had often made him wish to be
forgotten by all he loved; but no sooner did his misfortunes wear a less
sombre hue, than his expanding heart cherished the hope that others
beside himself rejoiced in the suspension of his misfortunes. He could
not endure the thought of suffering these beloved objects to languish in
despair on his account; and he determined to trust to his disguise, and
immediately pay a visit to Lancashire. But Dr. Lloyd was too chary of
the treasure he had so faithfully preserved, to intrust him to his own
keeping. De Vallance and Eustace were both obnoxious to the ruling
powers by having borne arms for the King; and he insisted on their
continuing concealed in his Welsh cottage, while himself went to consult
Dr. Beaumont upon their future measures. Emigration to America was a
favourite project with all. It was hoped means might be found to remove
Colonel Evellin; and the lovers allowed their imagination to form a
transatlantic paradise, where, with their Constantia and Isabel, they
might enjoy the halcyon blessings of domestic happiness, after having
been so cruelly harassed by the storms of war. De Vallance did not now
think it impossible to be reconciled to his father, or unlawful to use
his mother's interest with Cromwell to procure a pardon for Colonel
Evellin, whose incurable infirmities prevented his being an object of
terror. Sometimes, with the sanguine confidence of a mind raised from
absolute despair, he fancied a family-reconciliation might be effected;
but he submitted to the prudence of Dr. Lloyd's advice, that every step
must be taken with extreme caution, and dispositions sounded before
discoveries should be hazarded.

The affectionate heart of Eustace would not allow that any one should
suffer the misery of suspense on his account; and he pleaded so
earnestly that Jobson might be allowed to see him, that Dr. Lloyd
yielded, on the condition that the honest trooper should go with him to
Lancashire, knowing that his exuberant transport might not be trusted in
the neighbourhood where Eustace was concealed. The terror of Jobson at
De Vallance's removing to the house of the supposed indefatigable
anatomist was hardly relieved by seeing him return, next morning,
looking well and happy. But an invitation from the Doctor to visit his
cottage and see his curiosities absolutely petrified him; and he vowed
he had rather see Old Noll charge at the head of Hazlerig's lobsters
than dead men rattling their own bones, or poor innocent children
swimming in pickle like witches in a pond. Winking on De Vallance with a
look of significance, he said, "You do not know so much of this Doctor
as I do; for though the whole country talks of his cures, they own he
shuts himself up as if he dealt with the devil, and walks about with a
melancholy gentleman who is haunted with a familiar spirit." Arthur
engaged him in conversation till they imperceptibly approached the
Doctor's cottage, when he first assured him of the actual existence of
Fido, whom he was to be permitted to take to Constantia; and then
changed incredulous astonishment to frantic joy, by pointing out the
living Eustace advancing to embrace him. Jobson screamed, capered,
tossed his cap into the air, clung round his former master's neck, then
dropped on his knees, prayed, sobbed, and laughed, almost in the same
instant. His gratitude and affection for Dr. Lloyd was somewhat allayed
by his envying him the happiness of preserving Eustace, whom, he
acknowledged, he loved the best of all his masters, begging De Vallance
to pardon him for saying so. Yet his regard for the amiable physician
was mingled with some degree of terror; and it was not till he was
assured that he did not travel with any stuffed monsters, or relics from
a gibbet, that he could heartily rejoice at the prospect of telling Mrs.
Isabel that her lover and brother were sworn friends, of drying the
tears of pretty Mrs. Constance, and of seeing the old Colonel without
being hated as the bearer of ill news. But on carefully examining the
wallet which Dr. Lloyd prepared for the journey, and ascertaining that,
instead of astrological calculations and scalping knives, it contained
only comforts and necessaries, Jobson, with renewed courage and joyous
expectations, set out to accompany him on a delightful errand to
Ribblesdale.


CHAP. XXII.

    Those that would serve God sincerely in affluence have infinitely
    greater advantages and opportunities for it in adverse fortune;
    therefore let us set vigorously to the task that lies before us,
    supplying in the abundance of inward beauty what is wanting to the
    outward lustre of the church; and we shall not fail to find that
    the grots and caves lie as open to the celestial influences as the
    fairest and most beautiful temples.

                                       Dr. Henry Hammond's Letters.


A painter, who is solicitous to give just representations of nature,
must blend his lights and shades, and contrast vivid colours with sombre
hues. The correct imitator of human life must also alternately introduce
joys and sorrows. Is it the langour of unwarrantable depression, the
indulged caprice of fastidious sensibility, or a more intimate
acquaintance with the dark colourings of disappointment than with the
sunshine of prosperity, which induces the conclusion, that the likeness
to reality will be more faithfully preserved if a sombre tinge
predominates in the fictitious narrative that paints the trials of
highly honourable and susceptible minds? The refinement which inspires
liberal desires and generous motives exposes its possessor to a more
lively feeling of the injuries inflicted by envy, selfishness, and
duplicity. The golden dreams of ingenuous candour and conscious ability
are rarely realized, and acute perception and high-minded integrity,
though most propitious to the growth of every virtue, seem to be the
choice fruits of heaven which, in the austere climate of this lower
world, require shelter and protection.

It is not murmuring against the wisdom or justice of Providence to
admit, that in a probationary state the most perfect characters are they
who have been purified by "much tribulation, and through faith and
patience inherit the promises." The instrument used in this ordeal is
generally our brother-man. Yet, while with hope and confidence, we look
forward to a glorious issue of temporal affliction in eternal glory, let
us beware of unfitting ourselves for the future recompence by extreme
resentment against those who are the agents that Almighty Wisdom uses to
improve us. Let us not attribute to malice and cruelty what may be
referred to less criminal motives. Do we not often afflict others
undesignedly, and, from mere carelessness, neglect to relieve distress?
Our own concerns, interests, and wishes engross our thoughts. Nothing is
so important to us as forwarding our own aims; and our fellow-creatures
are too often but inconvenient lumber if they stand in our way, or
merely useful implements if they forward our designs. It is from a want
of attention to the feelings of others, from a neglect of the golden
rule of putting ourselves in their place, and not from innate malice or
a diabolical delight in giving pain, that the sorrows caused by domestic
tyrants and puny oppressors chiefly proceed. Were self-love reduced
within proper bounds, earth would resemble heaven. Let those, then, who
deeply feel those "wrongs which patient merit of the unworthy takes,"
temper their aspirations after a state where universal good-will is the
source and cement of bliss, by cultivating that excellent preparative
for its fruition, a spirit of active, enlarged, and considerate
benevolence.

These reflections will not unaptly precede the return of Lady Bellingham
from her northern expedition. It never was the practice of Cromwell to
render any one disrespect while his services could be useful, or till he
was prepared to prevent the effects of his enmity. While the success of
the King remained doubtful, he wished not to make himself any more
enemies; and at the same time that he restrained and mulcted the
Presbyterians, he endeavoured to persuade them to make common cause with
the fanatics. He received Lady Bellingham (who was the avowed patroness
of the latter) with much apparent respect, and at the same time he wrote
kindly to her Lord, promising that his party should be admitted to a
share in the government as soon as he could let the dove out of the ark
to fetch the olive branch, which could not be the case as long as the
floods of ungodliness covered the earth. He styled himself the servant
of the Commonwealth, and the assured friend of Lord Bellingham; but
nothing was further from Cromwell's heart than an intention of realizing
these promises. His only aim was to pacify and amuse his opponents till
he gained leisure to play his own game. He loaded Lady Bellingham with
flattering expressions, selected her to stand by his side, when, as he
called it, he rose in the congregation of the saints to give the word of
exhortation, and appealed to her as the judge and expounder of his
spiritual gifts. These, he observed, were all the refreshing attentions
which the necessity of pursuing the host of Sisera allowed him to pay to
the Deborah of the English Israel, except permitting her to reside in
Bellingham-Castle, and to plead his friendship and protection.

The victory at Worcester was of that decided nature, which enabled
Cromwell to throw off the mask, to dissolve that pantomime of a
Parliament in whose name he had hitherto governed, and to assume the
title of "Protector of the liberties of England." He now exercised a
more despotic tyranny than this nation suffered either from her Danish
or Norman conquerors. He confined the elective franchise to himself,
creating what he called Parliaments for the sole purpose of making them
ridiculous, and then turning out his mock-legislators with contempt. He
alternately punished and provoked every party; even his own agents and
creatures could not escape his apprehensive suspicions, which, by
indulgence, engendered an insatiable thirst of blood. Yet, combining
great qualities with the meanest vices--the policy of an Augustus and
the enterprize of a Trajan with the dissimulation of Tiberius and the
cruelty of Domitian, he at once awed and dazzled surrounding nations,
and while he subjugated, exalted his own. Never was England more
respected than when unlimited power, undaunted courage, and persevering
activity placed all her resources in the hands of a man who, scarcely
ranked by birth in the patrician order, could make every European
sovereign tremble on his throne. Yet still, like the mystical sun in the
Apocalypse, tormenting others while he was himself tormented, the era of
his assuming power was the consummation of his extreme misery. He waded
through seas of blood; he broke every divine and human obligation; he
made the name of liberty a terror, and that of religion contemptible, to
become himself a more pitiable object than the veriest wretches whom he
inhumed in his prisons. They had some who sympathized in their
sufferings, some who wished them God speed; but though the civilized
world trembled at the name of Cromwell, he knew he had spies, creatures,
and parasites, but not one friend.

Yet amidst this secret wretchedness and universal odium, the distant
reflex of his name and authority was respected by all. Lady Bellingham
found her reception very different, as the Protector's friend, in her
return through England, than when she fled to Scotland an alarmed
fugitive. Conscious of former remissness, Morgan met her at Lancaster,
and earnestly entreated she would repose some days at Saint's-Rest after
the fatigue of her journey. The alarm and mortification she had endured
in that neighbourhood made her recollect the village with disgust; but
there were some mysteries which she wished him to explain. Nursery tales
affirm, that Puss, when converted into a fine lady, retained her old
propensity of catching mice; and though Lady Bellingham was transformed
from a fine lady into a devotee, the renovating spirit of true religion
had not altered her temper or inclinations; there was the same
waywardness in the former, the same cold selfishness in the latter.
While she raved at formal and legal Christians, she was herself the true
formalist, presuming on superior merit from the length of her devotional
exercises, her rigid austerities, and the sums she expended in spreading
her peculiar notions. But she came out of her closet to make her inmates
and dependants wretched; her fasting-days were unsanctified through
moroseness, and beside that, her gifts were too much confined to
party-purposes to be entitled to the praise of charity; ostentation blew
the trumpet before her alms, and she had the reward she sought, in the
praise of men.

To return from the description to the illustration of this not uncommon
character. It happened one evening, as the Countess was anticipating
the joys of Heaven, by an analogy drawn from the delights which
Bellingham-Castle afforded, and which she supposed would there be
increased in an infinite ratio, that her humble companion ventured to
recall her imagination to this world, by producing what she thought a
very pretty poem on the subject of love, which she found in their chamber
at the miserable old delinquent's at Ribblesdale. Lady Bellingham shook
her head at the name of love, commanded Mrs. Abigail to avoid the sinful
subject, and to expiate the offence by reading fifty pages of "a popular
fanatical treatise."

As the waiting-gentlewoman retired to perform the penance, Lady
Bellingham commanded her to leave the paper that she might destroy it.
But though the word Love was dangerous to a tyro in Antinomianism, the
situation of the initiated is very different; to the former all things
are sinful, but the latter being free from the law, and above ordinances,
have a large licence. Valuing herself now only on her spiritual graces,
Lady Bellingham opened the profane legend, which, she expected, described
personal attractions; and to her astonishment recognized the writing of
her son, of whom she had heard no certain tidings since the battle of
Preston, but who was supposed, both by Cromwell and herself, to be in the
north of Ireland, where an officer of the same name had gained celebrity.
The date proved that he had been a resident in Dr. Beaumont's family; no
name was prefixed, but the lines breathed a permanent attachment, to
which, after some resistance, he had entirely surrendered his heart.

    O place thy breast against a turbid stream,
      Beat with strong arm the flood, and tread the wave,
    Or toil incessant 'neath the burning beam,
    When, like a giant woke from wassail-dream,
      Sol rushes furious from the lion's cave:

    Then mayst thou know how hard to stem the tide
      Of chaste desire, and love's o'erwhelming storm,
    When by entranc'd affection first descry'd,
    Beauty and truth, such as in Heaven reside,
      Appear on earth in woman's lovely form.

    Is there a charm in wisdom? Is there power
      In blushing modesty's retiring air?
    Looks patience lovely in affliction's hour?
    Is not humility a priceless flower?
      And filial piety divinely fair?

    And bloom such graces in this narrow dell,
      Bosom'd in hills, from civil discord far;
    Then, courts and camps, glory and wealth farewell!
    All-powerful love hath broke ambition's spell,
      And freed a captive from his iron car.

Ruminating on these lines, and recollecting the mild dutiful behaviour
of Constantia, she could not help supposing that melancholy beauty to be
the object of her son's attachment. She had sufficiently interested her
to inquire the reason of her mournful appearance, and learned that she
had lost her lover in the civil wars. Could that lover have been her
son? Could the figures she had seen sitting among the ruins, and which
she was persuaded were not human, be sent as supernatural omens to
indicate Sedley's death. It was happy for her unsettling reason, that at
the moment when this terrific thought shot across her brain, she
recollected, whatever her early misdemeanors might have been, she was
now in a safe state, and had wiped off all offences to her brother, even
supposing any had been committed. Yet she grew uneasy to hear of her
son, and wished she had been more particular in her inquiries as to the
certainty of his being in Ireland. I have already stated that maternal
affection had no part in her character. The manner in which she treated
Arthur prevented frequent intercourse. Hearing that a Colonel Sedley was
distinguished by his cruelty to the Catholics at the taking of Fredagh
and Drogheda, she had trusted that it was her son now become warm in the
good cause to which she had devoted him. The date of this poem shewed
that he was in Lancashire, indulging very different sentiments at the
time of those bloody victories, and it was her perplexity on this point
which made her give Morgan an affable reception.

She soon discovered, that though he had lately forborn persecuting the
Beaumonts, he retained the most inveterate enmity to the whole family.
She drew from him all the information it was in his power to give
respecting her son's residence at Ribblesdale; the assistance he
received from the Beaumonts when at the point of death, and his sudden
disappearance. Morgan was unacquainted with his change of sentiments and
attachment to Isabel, who, having been long secreted with her father,
was believed to be dead, and had been too insignificant and humble to
draw the attention of so important a personage as Morgan. His
communications confirmed Lady Bellingham in the belief that she had seen
an apparition of her brother, indicative of her son's death, and that
Constantia, who mourned a widowed love, had been the object of his
ill-placed affections.

Full of apprehension, destitute alike of delicacy, gratitude, and
candour, and disposed, from her political feelings, to ascribe every bad
passion and action to the royalists, a thought struck her that poverty
might have tempted the old delinquent to murder her son; and the
suspicion grew to certainty, when the most minute inquiries could give
no information of him subsequent to his receiving a large remittance
from his tenants the week before he was last seen at Ribblesdale. Her
humble attendants, on hearing her opinion, protested that nothing was
ever more probable. The chaplain expatiated on the vices of the
episcopal clergy, and cited the words of that-then-popular writer,
Martin Mar-prelate, to prove them guilty of the greatest offences, not
excepting even theft and murder. The gentleman-usher found damning
proofs of extreme poverty in all the arrangements of the Beaumonts, and
the waiting-gentlewoman could no otherwise account for the deep
melancholy of Constantia, than by supposing her lover had been murdered
by her father, whose pale care-worn features bore, in her opinion, the
character of an assassin.

Having wrought her mind to this conclusion, Lady Bellingham sent again
for her confidant Morgan, who, beside his aversion to one whom he had
long felt to be a troublesome neighbour, had now particular reasons for
appearing zealously inclined to serve the Protector and his friends. He
advised Lady Bellingham to state the loss of her son to His Highness,
and procure his order for the Doctor's arrest, adding, that even if
innocent of this accusation, the imprisonment of one, who as an
irreclaimable royalist, deserved punishment, was no breach of justice.
He assured Her Ladyship, that her son's long residence in a disaffected
family, had not occasioned the smallest change in his opinions, but that
he showed his zeal for the good old cause, by informing him of all the
proceedings and councils of the delinquents that came to his knowledge;
and he feared, as he was missing a little time before Charles Stewart's
attempt on Scotland, his having penetrated into that design precipitated
their bloody purposes. His communications shaped the fluctuating
purposes of Lady Bellingham into a most determinate and diabolical
resolve, and she returned to London with the heart of an "Atè hot from
hell," and the aspect of a Niobe.

She now presented herself before the Protector and his council, as a
distracted mother, ignorant of the fate of her only son, and praying for
a minute investigation of the mysterious business. A request from the
patroness of the fanatics imperatively demanded attention. Several of
their leaders were her devoted friends, and the fine qualities of young
Sedley had really attracted Cromwell's notice, who, though he was
incapable of loving virtue and honour, ever wished to engage them in his
service. It is but justice to the Usurper's administration to say, that,
except when his government or personal security were concerned, he was
an impartial and vigorous administrator of the criminal laws, never
sparing rank, or shielding greatness. But though justice thus beamed on
those who had not made themselves conspicuous by their principles, a
known royalist could not expect her smiles, a warrant was therefore
dispatched to apprehend Dr. Beaumont, and Morgan was charged with its
execution.

About this time that unhappy family were reduced to the last stage of
pecuniary distress. Their good friend Barton was still in confinement,
persecuted with the most inveterate hatred by Lady Bellingham's party,
and as his revenue was sequestered, no remittances could come from that
quarter. At the death of Farmer Humphreys, the church-land he had
occupied was taken from his widow, who was now fallen into decay, and
unable to assist the necessitous pastor she so truly revered. The
provision which the revolutionary government pretended to make to the
ejected ministers, was at best irregularly supplied, and often totally
withheld. The infirmities of Colonel Evellin engrossing the whole time
of Isabel, no fund could be raised from her industry, and with prompt
though perhaps imprudent loyalty Dr. Beaumont had sent the sum left by
De Vallance to the King's assistance when he made the last unsuccessful
effort to obtain his crown. Want, therefore, appeared before their eyes
in all its horrors; the produce of their cow and their garden, added to
the kind attentions of the villagers, were their sole support.

It was impossible to conceal their difficulties from Evellin, who now
earnestly prayed that death would relieve his generous friend from the
burden of his support. The firm and patient Isabel could no longer
divert him from these sad exclamations. She could not modulate her voice
to a song, nor attempt to engage his attention by reciting a tale of
other times. She threw her eyes upon the ground in silence, as if
wishing to measure out his grave, and one where she might sleep in peace
beside him.

They were roused from the passive depression of poverty by the awakening
call of imminent danger to the person of him who, in all their former
trials, had acted as their guardian angel to avert or mitigate calamity.
Morgan delivered, without any ceremony, to Dr. Beaumont an order to
attend the council of state in London, as a prisoner. The Doctor
declared himself ready to pay a quick obedience to the existing
government in all lawful cases, but stated his extreme penury and the
utter destitution of his family. The rigid frugality of their habits was
known; and Morgan, now assuming an inquisitorial air, demanded what
became of the moiety of the fifth allowed to the expelled ministers,
which he had last received. Dr. Beaumont was taken by surprize, and
before he could parry the impertinence of the question, was charged by
Morgan with sending pecuniary aid to Charles Stewart. This was now a
crime against the state, for which many suffered. Dr. Beaumont asked if
this was the business on which he was summoned to London, and Morgan,
knowing that it was determined to take him by surprize respecting the
charge of assassinating De Vallance, answered sternly, that for this and
various other misdemeanors he must be examined before the council.

No heart that had not been steeled by malevolence against all the better
feelings of humanity, could have resisted the cries and supplications of
Constantia, intreating that she might accompany her father; but Morgan,
recollecting that she in the pride of beauty had disdainfully rejected
his offer of marriage, took a savage pleasure in witnessing her
affliction. To see the sorrows of his darling child excite derision
instead of pity and respect, consummated Dr. Beaumont's anguish. Taking
Constantia aside, he gave her his parting blessing, with a fervour that
recalled his own firmness, and imparted consolation to her. He reminded
her how much her aunt, Evellin, and Isabel, must now depend upon her
exertions. He doubted not but commiseration for his misfortunes would
increase the benevolence of the villagers, and he intreated her to
recollect, that as her lamentations were unavailing, fortitude and
patient endurance were the only means to subdue the malice of their
enemies. He recurred to his favourite argument, that an oppressor is
merely an instrument of chastisement in the hand of Almighty goodness,
whose ultimate purposes are all mercy and wisdom. A tyrant's wrath
cannot pass its prescribed bounds; no earthly power can take us out of
the omnipotent hands of our Creator; nor will He ever fail those who
firmly trust in His care, and sincerely obey His precepts. "Courage, my
child," said he, as he kissed her pale cold cheek, "I have committed no
crimes either against the state or any individual: I shall soon be
allowed to return. This affliction is the trial of your faith, not the
punishment of my guilt."

Dr. Beaumont did not venture to visit his concealed friend, but the
lamentations of the villagers, who surrounded their departing pastor
with tears and blessings, added to the distress of Isabel, soon informed
Colonel Evellin that his revered protector was seized by the strong
gripe of power. He insisted on accompanying him to London as a
fellow-prisoner, protesting he was ready to defy Cromwell, accuse
Bellingham, and die. Isabel had sufficient strength to prevent the
immediate execution of this rash purpose. "O think," said she, "that by
so doing, you will not only sacrifice yourself, but also my uncle. The
very act of having concealed you is punishable with death. For the sake
of our best and kindest friend, a little longer exercise that fortitude
and patience which have been my support through years of apprehension
and calamity. Let not my long services within this narrow recess lose at
last the desired reward of saving a parent, more dear and precious from
his undeserved calamities."

"Shall I perish for want, immured in this gloomy tenement?" said
Evellin, wildly. "When my friend is gone, who will provide a covering
for this wretched body, or food to sustain it?--Have I not told thee,
girl, that De Vallance basks in luxurious state at Bellingham-Castle;
and I would sooner perish in a lazar-house than beg my bread of him?
Dost thou not know his blood-hounds yet surround these ruins, and that
it is Beaumont only who has kept them from my war-worn trunk."

"Dearest father," resumed Isabel, "I can keep off the blood-hounds, and
will daily lead you forth to enjoy the warm sun-beams. Fear not; but
trust in that Providence who feeds the young ravens. How wonderful was
its preservation of our King when hunted from forest to forest by his
merciless foes! The wants of nature are few and small. See how your
despair makes me weep. Oh, for the sake of my mother's memory, dry the
tears of your orphan girl."

In this manner did Isabel try to console the man of many sorrows, but he
had taken his resolution, and even when most composed, would not be
diverted from his purpose of following Dr. Beaumont to London, that he
might be ready to confront his enemies, or to share his fate. Mrs.
Mellicent was consulted on the subject, and she thought this
determination should not be opposed. It had been already agreed upon,
that Constantia should follow her father, and attend him in confinement;
and it was now settled, that Isabel and Evellin should privately
accompany her. Disguised as beggars, they were removed out of the
village, and being joined by Williams and Constantia, proceeded towards
London as fast as their destitute condition admitted.

They had left Waverly-Hall some weeks, when Dr. Lloyd and Jobson arrived
to communicate tidings which they thought would change the house of
mourning to the abode of happiness. But no sound or sight indicated that
these lonely ruins now afforded shelter to man. No trace of inhabitants
was visible.--No monarch of the feathered brood was heard aloud to crow;
no smoke rising from the chimney announced the preparation of the
homely, but social meal. Jobson entered at the unresisting door; the
furniture, like the family, had disappeared. He ventured into the secret
chamber, that too was vacant; nothing remained but the couch on which
the noble veteran had stretched his palsied frame, and, magnanimously
enduring his own anguish, descanted on the arduous duties of a soldier.

"Ah, worthy Doctor," said the dismayed Jobson, "those confounded
Roundheads have caught him at last. Here are some of the tatters of his
poor old roque-laure, and the woollen cap Mrs. Isabel used to draw over
his head so carefully. Here she used to kneel by his side, say her
prayers, and sometimes sing in such a sweet low voice; and then the
Colonel would kiss her, and tell her she would kill herself with
watching him. But when she crept through that little arch to go away, he
would look at her as if his soul was parting from his body. And then she
would come back again, and say she had not shaken hands with the honest
trooper, (meaning me,) and would whisper me, to keep up his spirits; and
so they would trifle away half the night."--"'Serjeant,' the Colonel used
to say to me, bless his good heart! though I never was more than a
corporal, 'that girl has the courage of a lion.' 'Aye, and as cunning as
a fox too,' I used to answer. 'She is beautiful as an angel,' he went
on; 'Did you ever see such eyes?'--'Never but my first sweetheart's,
Sally Malkins,' said I. But then he turned gruff, and would say,
'Pshaw!' for he never could be pleased with any body praising Mrs.
Isabel, but himself and that make-believe good young Lord with a wicked
father."

While Dr. Lloyd deliberated how to proceed, an aged woman appeared in
sight, with a basket on her arm, seemingly employed in gathering herbs.
"St. George be my speed!" exclaimed Jobson; "Can that be Madam
Mellicent? Ah, sure enough it is her sharp wrinkled face: I never
thought she would bend her stiff joints, or walk in the dirt without her
riding-hood." Dr. Lloyd offered to go and accost her. "Not for your
life," replied Jobson; "she never would forgive me for letting you catch
her thus out of sorts. Stop behind that buttress, and I'll go and tell
her there is some company coming, and when she has put on her pinners
and facings, she will be very glad to see you."

Mrs. Mellicent's appearance was too indicative of profound dejection for
Dr. Lloyd to believe she would require any introductory ceremonials. He
ventured to salute her with an abrupt assurance, that he was a warm
friend of her family, intrusted with a welcome and important
communication. Mrs. Mellicent fixed her eyes upon him with that look of
inquisitorial diffidence which those who have long been familiarized
with distress and injustice, bestow on the dawn of better days. "I can
hardly suspect," said she, "that you are one of those who find amusement
in sporting with the feelings of the unhappy. You see in me the forlorn
relic of a respectable family, now supported by those who were fed at
its gates in the days of my prosperity. Yet as far as I can, I try to be
independent; and my knowledge in medicine allows me to alleviate the
pains of those who shelter my grey hairs.--My brother, his daughter, and
the sole surviving child of a beloved sister, now in Heaven, are at this
moment exposed to the dreadful trial of Republican persecution. Poverty
chains me to this spot, where I drew my first breath, and where, if
those I love are sacrificed, I hope soon to close my eyes on sorrow."
"You have," said Dr. Lloyd, "omitted to name another strong tie which
should bind you to life. You have a brave and gallant nephew, who loves
and honours the maternal aunt, who checked his extravagancies and
fostered his virtues."

"Eustace Evellin!" returned the good Lady, while her eyes filled with
tears, "Did you know him, Sir?--The murderous insurgents cut him off at
Pembroke in cold blood. That is their usual method; they only spare
useless logs like myself--a withered blasted tree, stripped of all its
branches, fit only to sustain the trophies of their accursed triumph.
How long, Lord, how long!" continued she, wringing her hands and looking
up to Heaven.

Dr. Lloyd now cautiously informed her of the almost miraculous escape of
Eustace, and the lively interest he took in his preservation. He added
an account of the dangers of De Vallance, and assured her, that he had
left them both in his cottage, as safe and happy as English Loyalists
could be, while their country groaned under the yoke of Cromwell. The
fortitude, nay even the corporeal strength of Mrs. Mellicent, revived at
the recital; her own necessities were forgotten, and she scarcely
lamented that she had not now a house to welcome, or even the widow's
barley-cake to bestow on, the kind protector of the generous youths whom
she so fondly loved. Every regret was lost in the prospect of better
times, in the future happiness of Constantia and Isabel, in the
restoration of the Neville line, and the adoption of the amiable De
Vallance into its unpolluted branch. Only one life appeared to stand in
the way of their felicity:--Remove the stern Usurper, a penitent nation,
weary of oppression, would joyfully welcome back its exiled Sovereign.
What might not the Beaumonts and the Nevilles hope from the justice of a
Prince for whom they had bled and suffered! Such agreeable reveries as
these supported Mrs. Mellicent's spirits during that long period of
suspense, in which (for fiction must not anticipate the slow progress of
history) she expected their realization. And if hope invested the
enlivening phantom of royal gratitude in too gorgeous colours, may we
not bless, rather than censure, the fortunate delusion? We are to
consider, that the venerable spinster having passed her days in privacy,
was ignorant of the chicanery of courts, and disposed to believe, that
honour, gratitude, and sincerity, are the inseparable concomitants of
illustrious birth. She herself never forgot either her benefactors or
her enemies; and she knew not how early Princes are taught to consider
the sacrifice of life and fortune as positive debts due to them from
their subjects. She was not aware how often expediency compels them to
smile on a potent enemy, and to overlook an inefficient friend; how
necessary it is for them to employ, as instruments, the able and
enterprising, rather than the amiable; and in fine, how much more apt
the great are to shower their favours on those whom they oblige by
unexpected munificence, than to discharge the claims of justice; to seek
praise for liberality, instead of being contented with the merit
resulting from a mere performance of duty.

To return; the account which Mrs. Mellicent gave of the persecution
raised by the Oliverian government, determined Dr. Lloyd to prevent
either of his young friends from becoming its victim. They both
recollected the anxiety of the late King to remove his heir beyond the
power of his rebel subjects, as soon as he found it was impossible for
himself to escape; and that he even considered the preservation of the
Prince as a security for his own life. The event refuted that
conclusion; but it was owing to this forecast that the prayers and hopes
of Englishmen could still follow the princely fugitive. Whether he was
shrouded in the oak at Boscobel-wood, or coldly frowned on by the courts
of France and Spain, England saw, in the lineal heir of her monarchy, a
pledge of the future restoration of her civil and ecclesiastical
constitution, and a guarantee to individuals against sequestrators and
informers. The same judicious measures which had preserved the Royal
sapling when the parent-tree was felled, should be resorted to for the
safety of an illustrious private family; and Dr. Lloyd agreed to hurry
back to North Wales, and remove his precious charge to some more
auspicious clime, before they heard of the imprisonment of Dr. Beaumont.
Virginia was objected to on account of its distance from the scene of
action. The power of Cromwell, so resistless in the centre of his
government, was somewhat relaxed in its more remote dependencies; and
the island of Jersey was pointed out as a spot where Eustace and De
Vallance ran less hazard of being recognized by Cromwell's officers.

Loyalty was at this time a bond of endearment which united apparent
strangers; Mrs. Mellicent had an intimacy, in her early days, with a
lady who was now wife to one of the most respectable merchants at St.
Helier. He was one who, though faithful to the King, had preserved such
an ostensible moderation in his conduct as to avoid offending his
enemies; consequently, he had it in his power to assist those braver
spirits that had withstood the storm, and now required shelter. A
friendly intimation of remembrance, and an offer of aid had been
transmitted by this Lady to Mrs. Mellicent, and she advised Dr. Lloyd to
fix his abode in that island, under the character of a medical
gentleman, travelling with two pupils, who were to study physic at
Leyden, but were required, by their infirm constitutions, to establish
their health in a salubrious climate, before they encountered the
morasses and fogs of Holland.

Dr. Lloyd was not a friend by halves; he was willing to devote the
remainder of his life and fortune to the service of these interesting
and deserving young men. He wrote a brief account of the preservation of
Eustace and the safety of De Vallance, and Jobson was sent with the
welcome communication to London, to lighten the woes of their
affectionate and unhappy friends. Dr. Lloyd returned to Wales with the
utmost celerity. He avoided explaining the distressed state of the
family, contenting himself with assuring Eustace and De Vallance that
Colonel Evellin was alive, and that Isabel and Constance were faithful
to their vows. The plan of emigration to America must, he said, be
abandoned, as it was impossible for the family to remove; but as the
preservation of their lives, in some degree depended on the concealment
of Eustace, it became necessary they should avoid the rigid scrutiny
which Cromwell was now making after obnoxious Loyalists, by removing to
a retreat where, though the royal banner was not permitted to fly, the
inhabitants were allowed to remain in a sort of peaceable neutrality.


CHAP. XXIII.

    When the sword is drawn, and the power of the strongest is to
    decide, you talk in vain of equity and moderation; those virtues
    always belong to the conquerors. Thus it has happened to the
    Cheruscans: they were formerly called just and upright; at present
    they are called fools and knaves. Victory has transferred every
    virtue to their masters; and oppression takes the name of wisdom.

                                                 Murphy's Tacitus.


It was not the practice of Cromwell to bring to a speedy trial those
state-prisoners against whom he could produce no positive proof of the
offence with which they were charged. Though the palaces of the degraded
bishops and exiled nobility were, during this reign of terror in
England, converted into places of confinement, the prisons continued
crowded with victims. Judges and juries were too slow and uncertain in
their proceedings to be permitted to decide on the fate of those whom
the Protector of the liberties of England had pre-ordained to death or
captivity. High courts of justice were occasionally erected, and summary
modes of trial resorted to, which the ancient laws of the realm
reprobated or disavowed. By these the Tyrant freed himself from those
more obnoxious enemies who had taken arms against his authority; but the
objects of his suspicious fear, whose enmity he knew, and whose ability
he dreaded, still remained in close confinement. The crime of some was
having concealed Loyalists; many were shut up for sending remittances to
the King abroad, or for having shown him some mark of respect and
allegiance while he was in England. The presbyterians suffered for
lamenting the fall of the Long-parliament, and inveighing against the
present tyranny; the Fifth-Monarchy-men, for expecting the reign of King
Jesus; the Levellers, for requiring Agrarian laws and the equalization
of property. The conduct of Cromwell had disgusted the whole body of
sectaries as well as the stanch Republicans. "Anabaptists, Independents,
and Quakers conceived an implacable hatred against him; and, whilst they
contrived how to raise a power to contend with him, they likewise
entered into plots for his assassination." These plots, and the
libellous writings by which they excited insurrection, continually
agitated the mind of Cromwell; for as his new enemies were not
restrained by those principles which prevented most of his old ones from
resorting to indirect modes of warfare, cutting off one daring villain
added nothing to his security, but rather stimulated that faction to
vengeance. He had now humbled and disappointed all parties, and could no
longer play one against another. No one was attached to him; even those
who had gone equal lengths in guilt only clung to him as a pledge for
their own security. Mercy and lenity had no effect on those with whom he
now contended. Lilburn, who may be considered as an epitome of the
fanatical opponents of Cromwell, "had wrought himself to a marvellous
inclination and appetite to suffer in the defence, or for the
vindication of any oppressed truth." To men who courted persecution, who
gloried in personal suffering, and to whom, connecting their cause with
that of the Almighty, all measures seemed allowable which their humours
suggested--the axe and the gallows displayed no terrors; and it was as
impossible to oblige as it was to intimidate them. They despised
temporal possessions, and braced their iron-nerves with misapplications
of the texts and examples of Scripture, believing that, in performing
the actions of banditti, they were proving themselves to be chosen
captains of the host of the Lord.

As the labours of the itinerant preachers already described had
converted thousands of the lower orders into ignorant and desperate,
and, it might be added, insane, enthusiasts, a mind less indefatigable
than Cromwell's would have been wholly engrossed in securing his person
and government from their violence and hostile machinations; but his
fear of his new enemies did not make him forget his hatred of his old
ones. The fanatical conspirators and insurgents being more inimical to
the general good sense of the nation, he often submitted them to the
ordinary courts of justice, contenting himself (as in the case of
Lilburn) with making acquittal issue in more rigorous imprisonment, when
a jury had the presumption to decide in favour of a prisoner whom the
Protector had resolved to punish. Desirous of conciliating the good
opinion of well-informed people, he preserved the fountain of justice
uncontaminated. The judges who presided in the several courts were in
general an honour to their country; and many of them (especially the
immortal Hale) accepted the office, in order to be better able to
restrain oppression, "knowing that in every form of government justice
must be administered between man and man, and offenders against the
universal laws of society punished." By such judges, a Gerrard, a Hewet,
a Hyde, and other illustrious Loyalists, would not have been condemned.
Against such persons, therefore, Cromwell was compelled to rearrange his
pantomimic High Court of Justice, that contemptible but bloody engine,
by which he had destroyed the King and the nobles, and to whose
authority, as anomalous to the constitution, his victims generally
refused to submit, and were thus condemned without any public
discussion.

Had Cromwell determined to try Dr. Beaumont for sending pecuniary
assistance to the King (an offence which he had the means of proving),
he would have immediately collected his creatures and erected one of
these executive courts; but if the suspicion of assassinating an
officer, who bore a parliamentary commission, could be supported by
stronger proofs than the accusation of Lady Bellingham, and the
probabilities suggested by Morgan, he need not fear permitting justice
to mount her regular seat, and hold her balance in the public eye. No
charge of cruelty or persecution could then be brought against him; and
the public odium would be transferred to the episcopalians and
Loyalists. He attended the first examination of the Doctor before the
Council of State, on the ostensible accusation of assisting the King,
and saw, in his behaviour, an enlightened opposer of tyranny, and a
conscientious adherent to the old government. Such a man, he resolved,
should either be cut off, or prevented from doing him any injury. The
best policy, therefore, was to defer his trial, and to send down some
active emissaries to Ribblesdale to examine minutely into his past
conversation, and discover whether any ground of accusation existed
against him. At least to ascertain that Sedley had really been cut off,
and that Dr. Beaumont had no evidence to disprove his being concerned in
the transaction.

Dr. Beaumont was therefore remanded into close confinement. His family
had gathered round him, and were supported by the generous contributions
of those Loyalists who had hitherto escaped persecution, but made a
common cause with their suffering brethren, and liberally ministered to
their distresses. Colonel Evellin was concealed in an obscure lodging
near the Marshalsea, where Dr. Beaumont was imprisoned. Constantia and
Isabel, with patient fortitude, ministered to their respective fathers,
while Williams carried on a confidential intercourse with the noble and
worthy friends by whom they were supported. Some of these were in the
confidence of Lord Falconberg, the accepted lover of one of Cromwell's
daughters, and who was thought by many to have sought that alliance with
the view of mediating for the persecuted victims to a cause which
himself and his family had ever decidedly espoused.

Affairs were in this situation when Jobson arrived in London, and
produced Dr. Lloyd's letter, which, confirmed by his own testimony,
fully verified the existence of Eustace, the safety of De Vallance, and
their welfare and comparative happiness. What a weight of anguish was
removed from these amiable victims of tyranny by the intelligence!
Imprisonment, poverty, dependence, personal infirmity, were all
supportable evils. But for a complete exemplification of the extreme
limit of human misery, we must look to the oppressor, not to the
oppressed; to Cromwell, galled by the armour worn under his robes of
state to defend his person from the expected dagger of a murderer, and
not to Dr. Beaumont, languishing for want of the common blessings which
freedom bestows, or to Evellin, an aged cripple in the lonely confined
chamber of poverty. Cromwell had no daughter who revered his virtues,
and cheered his pensive contemplations with the assurance that the
righteous sufferer was under the peculiar protection of Heaven. Most of
_his_ daughters were strongly attached to the royal cause. The wife of
Fleetwood (his eldest) was a furious Republican; Desborough, his
brother-in-law, was a Leveller; and his eldest son was incompetent to
receive that weight of usurped greatness which he wished to bequeath
him. Such was the domestic situation of the man at whose frown Europe
trembled. Ever in dread of assassins and conspirators, vexed by
family-broils, his nearest connexions hostile to his views, without
solace from public care, or sympathy in private distress.

The preservation of his son seemed to bestow on Colonel Evellin a new
existence. He was never weary of listening to the particulars of his
escape. Again and again he required Jobson to repeat the assurance, that
he had actually held in his arms the living Eustace; the determined
martyr to loyalty and truth; the brave, conspicuous, honourable soldier;
his own dear son, not a traitor to his King or his love, but all that he
could wish a true Neville to be, except in his misfortunes. It seemed a
double resurrection to life, and to unclouded fame. And was it possible
he might again see him at his feet craving his blessing? Should his hand
rest upon his head, while, with a prophetic ardour, he predicted a race
of worthies that should spring from him--future heroes, patriots, and
faithful subjects, alike tenacious of their Sovereign's rights and of
the claims of their countrymen. What were privations, infirmities, and
restraints to a mind animated with these glorious hopes? He limped on
his staff round his narrow room, lest his limbs should grow too
contracted to visit every apartment in Bellingham-Castle. The reason for
this is on account of this very property of mobility. Tyndall says:
"The prong of the fork in its swift advancement condenses the air." Thomson
says: "If I move my hand vehemently through the air, I produce a
condensation." Helmholtz says:
"The pendulum swings from right to left with a uniform motion. Near to
either end of its path it moves slowly, and in the middle fast. Among
sonorous bodies which move in the same way, only very much faster, we
may mention tuning forks." Tyndall says again: "When a common
pendulum oscillates, it tends to form a condensation in front and a
rarefaction behind. But it is only a tendency; the motion is so
slow, and the air so elastic, that it moves away in front before
it is sensibly condensed, and fills the space behind before it can
become sensibly dilated.The First
Edward, great in council and in arms, found his people alike invincible
in the field, whether they followed his banner under an Asian or a
Northern sky, or opposed his violation of their chartered rights! Could
a nation, which would only pay a constitutional obedience to a Beauclerk
or a Coeur de Lion, which served, not submitted to, the heroes of Cressy
and of Agincourt, long writhe under the scorpion-lash of despotism
wielded by a low Usurper, whose manners and sentiments were inimical to
the general tone of the English character--a man pre-eminent in fraud
and hypocrisy, and ignorant of the lively yearnings of humanity.

"My girl," Evellin would often say to Isabel, "the King must be
re-instated on his throne, or England will fall from her rank among the
nations. The standard of public morals must be reduced, the mode of
thinking be changed, the very aspect of Englishmen undergo a revolution
before the race of this upstart Despot can take root in this island. We
have been accustomed to look up to our governors as great and good; at
least they were surrounded by a blaze of ancestry and dignity of manners
congenial to our feelings of the prescriptive claims of hereditary
rights. We must be all mercenary soldiers, wild fanatics, pensioned
informers, or feudal serfs toiling for daily bread, ere we can patiently
endure this revolting system of jealousy and suspicion--this cold,
selfish scheme of trick and expedient. Astonishment and terror may
awhile paralyze the national spirit; the remembered miseries of civil
war may render the phantom of peace so alluring as to induce many to
call a deleterious intoxication felicity. But unless Cromwell can
obliterate every record of what Englishmen were in past ages--unless he
can make us forget the education, opinions, and hopes of our youth--the
labours, sorrows, and wrongs of our riper years--his meanness and his
crimes;--never--never can the British lion crouch at an Usurper's form,
or the red-cross banner wave graceful over a traitor's head."

Colonel Evellin was roused from these agreeable reveries by a painful
communication from Williams. The means of access which the royalists now
had to Cromwell's councils enabled them to discover that the vigilance
of Morgan had brought together so many charges against Dr. Beaumont,
that there seeming no chance of his escaping condemnation, it was
resolved to bring him to trial. Williams could not distinctly make out
the crimes with which he was charged, except that he assisted the late
and present King with money; that he used the Liturgy and Church
ceremonies with such slight alterations as did not prevent their
continuing to be that "form of words" and "will-worship" which were
forbidden to saints; added to this, he prayed for Charles Stewart; and
further, there were secret counsels and mysterious contrivances in the
family. A private chamber had also been found, which, it was evident,
had been used for the purpose of concealing malignants. The safety of
the state required that these practices should be searched into, and
that Dr. Beaumont should be tried for contumacy to the government.

This was all Williams could discover; but beside this open attack, there
was a mine ready to be sprung for the Doctor's destruction. Lord
Bellingham had now lain several years in confinement. His party was
believed to be subdued, and his own reputation was so tarnished that he
was become quite innoxious. Overtures were now made to him, that he
should be restored to liberty, and to a part of his possessions; but it
was hinted at the same time that it would show his acquiescence with the
existing government if he would take an active part against an atrocious
royalist. The sudden and mysterious disappearance of his son (of whom he
had heard no tidings since the battle of Preston) was mentioned; and it
was soon understood that it was expected he should bring the charge of
assassination against Dr. Beaumont, and thus remove all odium from
Cromwell. Solitude and confinement had wrought no salutary change on
this wretched man's disposition. His prison-hours were occupied by
regrets for the past, distaste at the present, and fears for the future.
His affections clung fondly to the wealth and title he had lost; nor
could his guilty soul disrobe itself "of those lendings" which vitiated
its spiritual essence. This time the wind was on her starboard quarter,
or still more nearly aft. The boat went literally as fast as
the wind, and on deck it was nearly calm. The light smoke from the
funnels, no longer beaten down by wind, leaped up high into the air.
Looking over the side, it was difficult to imagine that the boat
was passing through water at all. The enormous velocity gave the
surface of the river the appearance of a sheet of steel for 1 ft. or
more outside the boat. Standing right aft, the sight was yet more
remarkable.No angel whispered,
"Begin the mighty labour now;" no renovating change took place in his
desires. The hour of contrition and repentance was deferred with
procrastinating insincerity. Can we then wonder that the man who, in his
youth, sacrificed honour and friendship to purchase worldly grandeur,
should, in his age, again impawn his conscience for liberty and ease? or
that, though he had indeed often deplored the supposed necessity of
murdering Eustace Evellin, he should basely yield to become a Tyrant's
instrument to cut off that Eustace's uncle on a charge, which, from what
he knew of the Doctor's conduct, bore improbability and ingratitude in
its aspect. Let those who condemn Lord Bellingham beware how they yield
to the first temptations of guilt. The emulation of an aspiring mind,
unchecked by principle, degenerated into envy, hatred, malice,
injustice, falsehood, and cruelty. Love for a beautiful woman was
polluted by an insatiable craving to rise to the same sphere of life in
which she moved; and as it was her exterior loveliness, not her inward
graces, that inflamed his desires, he scrupled not to become the
instrument of her bad passion; that "love might revel on the couch of
state," he performed actions which stamped ignominy on his name, and
destroyed his peace for ever; and now, in the decline of life, though
satiety had taught him the little value of all temporal enjoyments, his
imagination clung to the dispersing shadows which even experience would
not convince him were only phantoms of happiness. Even while he wept the
offences he had committed, he yielded to the first temptation to repeat
his crimes.

On the morning fixed for his trial, Dr. Beaumont exhibited an
illustration of the scriptural precept, by combining the wisdom of the
serpent with the innocence of the dove. Serene, mild, thoughtful, acute,
and penetrating, he was capable of using every fair occasion to elude
his enemies, and was able also to submit to the will of Heaven, provided
their malice should be permitted to triumph. He prepared Constantia for
the worst, by assuring her that so many had unjustly suffered in these
perturbed times that condemnation was no longer considered as an
evidence of guilt. All the disgrace of a public death was removed by the
justice of the cause to which he was ready to fall a martyr; and the
mere circumstance of his dying as a malefactor ought not to distress
her, since, in the article of pain, he should endure much less; and the
awakening trial of imprisonment had afforded him leisure to re-consider
his ways, and make his peace with God. This singular blessing had
supplied the best uses of sickness, without its frequent attendant,
bodily incapacity. He reminded her of his declining years. "My enemies,"
said he, "can only rob me of the dregs of life. Death hath sent many of
his forerunners by the hand of time to inform me that my days are
drawing to a close. It was my wish to be useful as long as I lived. The
new government have done me the honour to think me dangerous. When they
immured me in a prison, I considered the loss of liberty as a quietus
from my heavenly King, dismissing me from active employments; and I have
since endeavoured to improve myself in the practice of those passive
virtues which are never enough prized by the world, and which are often
painful rather than pleasant. I have endeavoured after the perfection of
patience, humility, and submission; but, my Constantia, I have only
endeavoured, and have discovered so many unsubdued weaknesses, such a
lingering fondness for what I must renounce, that I fear nothing but the
cold chill of death will benumb those ardent affections which have often
led me to lament (but, I trust, not to repine) that I was born in these
unhappy times. To the last I must bemoan the degradation, and crimes of
my country, that beloved England, whom, in the humble sphere of a
village-rector, I laboured to serve, by making all whom my counsels and
example could influence, faithful servants of their God and their King.
I feel too the destitution of my family (here he faultered and turned
aside his face)--principally thee, poor mourner, tenderly fostered in
thine infancy, and, since then, the child of sorrow. Encourage me by thy
firmness, now I am on the eve of the most awful occurence of my life.
Imitate the cheerful magnanimity of Isabel. Let me not shudder at the
thought of leaving thee a weak, heart-broken burden on those who can
only pity thy distress; but let me have the comfort of hoping that thou
wilt behave like a resigned Christian, who, art not so depressed by a
sense of thy own grief, as to be incapable of ministering to the woes of
others. Allow me to think of thee as one whose views are not bounded by
the grave, and then I shall have no overwhelming terrors to distract my
attention, or unfit me for improving every fair opportunity for my
deliverance. But, should the worst happen, remember, Constantia, I shall
continue to exist. Putting on the garment of immortality does not
destroy identity. We shall still continue members of that large family
of whom God is the head, the angels being his more exalted servants, and
the infernal spirits potent rebels, who in vain labour to defeat his
purposes. No event can remove us from the superintendance of Providence;
no distance of time or country, no difference of station or fortune, can
hinder the glorified spirits of the faithful from meeting in the same
paradise, and hearing the same joyful sentence of eternal beatitude.
Whether the disembodied souls left their bodies in the north or in the
south, they will all rejoice in the society of each other. The spirits
of the patriarchs of old, as well as of those who die to-day in the
Lord, will meet in one large community. Console thyself, therefore, with
the thought of a future, joyful, and eternal re-union; and let that
consolation be also an active precept, teaching thee so to order thy
daily conversation as to complete thy fitness for that re-union."

He then entreated her to remember the inestimable consolation she
possessed, in knowing that Eustace lived and was worthy of her
affections, faithful to his vows, to his King, and his God. He advised
her, if possible, to remove with her aunt, Isabel, and Colonel Evellin,
and to place themselves under his protection. If his situation
permitted, he advised her to marry him as the best way of being safe and
respectable, to endeavour to procure an honest livelihood by following
some humble occupation, and to forget the station to which their birth
entitled them to aspire. He was almost hopeless of a speedy change of
times. He feared the spirit of the nation was so broken that it would
submit to the establishment of the usurping family. Policy would teach
Cromwell to soften the terrors of his administration as soon as he could
found his government on the safer principles of expedience and
prescription. He had already adopted many popular measures; and, in
making the power of England formidable abroad, he had gratified the
public-feeling. Though the persecution of individuals, and actions of
glaring oppression and injustice, soon excited discord in peaceable
times, and under the government of a legitimate King, they were so
congenial to the nature of tyranny, that people were more apt to rejoice
in their own escape than to animadvert on the sufferings of their
neighbours. Nor would an accumulation of such deeds rouse to arms a
nation, that had recently bled so copiously from the multiplied wounds
of civil war. Second, by taking the instrument up to some such elevation
as that to which Langley took his bolometer at Mount Whitney, and
so to leave the densest part of the atmosphere below us.

[Illustration: FIG. 2.--RELATIVE LUMINOSITIES.]
Now, I have adopted both these plans. For more than a year I have taken
measurements of sunlight in my laboratory at South Kensington, and
I have also taken the instrument up to 8,000 feet high in the
Alps, and made observations _there_, and with a result which is
satisfactory in that both sets of observations show that the law which
holds with artificially turbid media is under ordinary circumstances
obeyed by sunlight in passing through our air: which is, you
will remember, that more of the red is transmitted than of the violet,
the amount of each depending on the wave length. The luminosity of the
spectrum observed at the Riffel I have used as my standard luminosity,
and compared all others with it. The result for four days you see in the
diagram.

I have diagrammatically shown the amount of different colors which
penetrated on the same days, taking the Riffel as ten. It will be
seen that on December 23 we have really very little violet and less
than half the green, although we have four fifths of the red.
The next diagram before you shows the minimum loss of light which
I have observed for different air thicknesses. On the top we have
the calculated intensities of the different rays outside our
atmosphere. Thus we have that through one atmosphere, and two,
three, and four.He could not put up
a more salutary prayer for his country, than that each future Prince
(especially in times of great political turbulence) would remember that
he is set like a city upon a hill, and that his whole conduct is
canvassed by a free, inquisitive, and, generally speaking, an
intelligent and high-minded nation, attached to hereditary rule, but
indignant at the contamination of the blood-royal. It was impossible for
persons eminent for birth to sin in secret; and one bad action of
theirs, divulged to the public, did more injury than the machinations of
the most subtile traitor. Woe would it be to England, if her liberties
were thus made to depend on the mercy and prudence of those who grasped
her sceptre in despite of law, while its rightful owner discovered such
base propensities as made it safer even in an Usurper's hands than in
his, who less prized the inheritance of three kingdoms than the praise
of debauchees and the indulgence of depraved appetites.

Thus fortifying his daughter's mind with the best principles, and then
gradually withdrawing it from the agonizing present to circumstances
connected with her future fortunes, Dr. Beaumont consoled and instructed
Constantia. "I am firm and patient, my dearest father," said she. "Your
voice, like that of the angel to Hagar, has pointed out springs of
comfort in a frightful desert. One request I must make. Let me stand by
your side at your trial. Perhaps my appearance may influence your
judges. Men who seem to have renounced every feeling of humanity have
been induced to pity orphan wretchedness. Some circumstances may escape
your observation that my quick-sighted fears will seize on; at least I
may serve as your notary. These times of woe have often witnessed female
heroism claiming its affinity to the proscribed victims of injustice,
and glorying in partaking their dangers. Thus let me triumph, and, to
the last, exult in having such a father." Dr. Beaumont gazed on her with
affection, and acceded to her desires. Like his royal Master, he had at
first resolved to object to the legality of these high courts of
justice; but further consideration made him doubt if the plea was
admissible by a Christian, who was required to submit to the powers that
are; and its inexpediency was apparent, by the immediate condemnation of
all who urged it, since, whatever degree of proof their offences
admitted, they were infallibly condemned for contumacy. Being asked,
therefore, if he acknowledged the authority of the court, he lifted up
the cap which covered his thin silvered locks, and declared that he
submitted to be tried by the laws of God and his country, though, as he
had not been furnished with a copy of the charges brought against him,
he came with no other means of defence than a general consciousness of
inoffensive behaviour.

As Dr. Beaumont spoke he withdrew his arm from the feeble support of his
trembling daughter. A sun-beam fell upon his pale countenance, and
irradiated its expression of piety and resignation, while his clasped
hands, and eyes elevated to heaven, bespoke him engrossed by the fervour
of mental devotion. Constantia, silent, trembling, and almost fearing to
breathe, contrasted, by her apprehensiveness, beauty, and elegance, the
awful solemnity of her father's aspect. He was invested with the
insignia of his academical honours, and attired in his sacerdotal habit,
which, in its decay, seemed emblematical of the ruined Church for whom
he was a confessor. Meek but dignified, patient but courageous, he
looked like one of the pillars of episcopacy, who, though the beauty of
holiness was defaced, and the visible cherubim removed from the
sanctuary, continued to support the tottering edifice, deeming the ruins
of Zion a better station than the gorgeous temple of Baal. Nor did the
celebrated classical example of Antigone more forcibly illustrate the
persevering fortitude of passive heroism and enduring love in woman's
gentle bosom, than did the interesting, lovely Constantia. Like the
renowned daughter of Sir Thomas More, "she seemed to have forgotten
herself, being ravished with the entire love of her dear father," and
fearful of danger only as it pointed at him. She turned her eyes upon
the court with a boldness unusual to their general expression, to see if
in any of their faces she could trace the lineaments of justice or
compassion; but they were soon arrested by recognising, in the
president, the well-remembered face of Major Monthault. The brims of his
hat were of more than ordinary dimensions; his hair was notched into the
exact shape prescribed by the highest standard of puritanical orthodoxy;
his band was crimped, and his robes folded with prim decorum; while his
hands demurely rested on the cushion before him, holding a small edition
of the sacred volume, on which he seemed to be meditating in the
intervals between the exercise of his professional duties. But neither
the starched sobriety of his aspect, nor his newly assumed name of
Mephibosheth could obliterate her recollection of the daring libertine
who had seduced her Eustace, and attempted her honour. She pointed him
out to her father, inquiring if he might not be challenged as a personal
enemy; but Dr. Beaumont wisely thought it more prudent to avoid a
recognition, which would only confirm his enmity by exposing his former
conduct; and, reminding Constantia that as no exceptions of theirs would
be attended to, they must know Monthault only in his present character,
he entreated, as her alarm was so visible, that she would retire, and
leave him to the care of Williams.

Dissembling his knowledge of the prisoner, the President showed, by his
address to the Court, that he had adopted the language as well as the
habit of a fanatic. He observed that the malignants could hardly be
bound by any specific terms, being full of evasions and subtleties of
expression, by which they ensnared the simplicity of the faithful. He
then called on Eusebius Beaumont to say, unequivocally, whether he did
so truly and _bona fide_ submit to the authority of this Court, as to
acknowledge it was legally assembled by the supreme power in the
Commonwealth, namely, His Highness Oliver Cromwell, Protector of the
liberties, and General of the armies of England, Scotland, and Ireland.

Dr. Beaumont answered, that he did acknowledge the supreme power was now
lodged in the Protector; and that, according to the ordinances made by
him, the present High Court of Justice possessed a right to try him. He
was then asked if he meant to deny his sending assistance to Charles
Stewart, and praying for a restoration of the ancient system; to which
he answered, he admitted the truth of these accusations; and being in
his heart convinced that the former government of church and state was
not only most consonant to the constitution, but also to the prosperity
of the kingdom, he must ever wish and pray that it might be restored.
But yet, abhorring all conspiracies and plots, the only acts of
contumacy of which he had been guilty to the existing powers, were the
supplications he offered at the Throne of Grace, and the scanty
contributions, which the purse of penury could ill spare, given to the
necessities of those who espoused the same cause, and whose wants
exceeded his own.

The indictment was then read, in which the charges already noticed were
dressed out in vituperative language; but the crimes principally
insisted on were, that he had secreted several desperate and proscribed
delinquents in a ruinous mansion which he inhabited for the purpose; and
that by their assistance he had clandestinely conveyed away, destroyed,
and murdered, divers good and faithful citizens. Among these was a godly
officer of the commonwealth, Arthur De Vallance, commonly called Lord
Sedley, son and heir to the Earl of Bellingham, whom he was known to
have kept in custody, and who had never been heard of since. To give a
tragical effect to this accusation, the Earl and his Countess, attired
in deep mourning, presented themselves in a conspicuous gallery, and, as
if overpowered by the sudden emotions of parental anguish, wrung their
hands and with loud lamentations besought the court to grant them
justice.

Dr. Beaumont's astonishment for some moments precluded the possibility
of reply, but as his native integrity never deserted him, he soon
recovered sufficient presence of mind to determine rather to fall a
victim to the malice of his foes, than to make any discovery which
should endanger the life of Arthur De Vallance, who having borne arms
against Cromwell was become amenable to the penal ordinances, and would
be marked by the Usurper's personal hatred as a confidential friend
changed into a renegado. He soon answered in a firm tone, that, being
unable to divine that such a charge could be brought against him, he
must crave a few days grace to form his reply, and produce evidence
which should disprove it. He would, however, observe, that at the time
of the supposed murder, and his concealment of desperadoes, he was a
suspected persecuted man in distressed circumstances, and all his
actions were watched with insidious vigilance. To impute to him a power
of restraining a man of Lord Sedley's rank was a futile charge,
disproved by its impossibility. There was a person in court (looking at
Morgan) who knew the hospitality and kindness he had shown to that
nobleman; but he was certain the being did not exist, who could fasten
on him the slightest suspicion of his having subsequently practised
against his life.

The counsel for the prosecution answered, that his long confinement had
given him sufficient opportunity of recollecting his misdeeds, and
therefore no accusation could take him by surprise. There could be no
occasion to adjourn the court, or longer suspend justice, which thirsted
to seize the sanguinary old hypocrite. The feelings of the bereaved
parent should be regarded (here a loud sobbing was heard from Lady
Bellingham), and as the culprit had declared that there was a person in
court who could prove his innocence, they would yield him the advantage
of inverting the general order of the trial, and permit him to call and
examine his evidence, before they discovered the dark machination, by
which an illustrious pair lost the son of their hopes, the only heir to
their magnificent fortune.

Dr. Beaumont's strong confidence in his own innocence prevented him from
discovering that the proposal was a snare, intended to give indubitable
authority to the evidence of Morgan, who now pressed forward, stretched
out his hand with an air of friendship to the prisoner, and seemed to
rejoice in the opportunity of befriending him. He took the oath, and
answered the questions put to him, by giving a minute and (as far as his
coarse mind would permit) a pathetic description of the care and
attention which the Beaumont family showed to the young nobleman, and of
his voluntary continuance with them after his wounds were healed.

When Morgan's examination was over, the counsel for the prosecution
addressed the court. "My Lord President Monthault, and you other My
Lords Judges of this honourable tribunal; we all know that the butcher
fatteneth the lamb before he leadeth it to the slaughter-house, and
therefore the care and hospitality pretended to have been shown to the
noble person, whose loss we deplore, establishes nothing positively in
the prisoner's favour. I shall prove to you, that Lord Sedley liberally
rewarded him for his entertainment, and that notwithstanding all the
peaceable professions he has this day made, he took great pains to
change that Lord's principles, to make him false to the Commonwealth,
and also to engage him in an alliance with his family; failing of which,
and also suspecting that he gave information to His Highness of the
plots then carrying on for restoring tyranny and superstition; he the
prisoner was consenting unto, if not aiding and abetting, the murdering
and secreting the aforesaid godly Lord. The time chosen for this
business was immediately after his receiving a large remittance. To
these facts, together with that of the prisoner's concealing a band of
desperate malignants, armed with instruments of destruction, I shall,
with leave of the court, proceed to call my evidence."

The payment of several sums of money to Lord Sedley, during his
residence at Ribblesdale, and the cessation of all demand for
remittances from the period of his quitting it, were proved by his
tenants; one of whom particularly specified his having sent him a very
considerable sum, raised by mortgage of his principal farm, a few days
previous to that fixed on for his disappearance. Morgan was now
re-examined, who acted the part of a reluctant witness, with too marked
partiality for Dr. Beaumont to deceive any who had not been accustomed
to the grossest deceptions of fulsome hypocrisy. Much as he said of his
hopes that his good old friend and neighbour would meet with favour, he
took care to confirm every circumstance to his prejudice. He dwelt on
the steadiness of Lord Sedley's principles; the regular communication he
had with him, respecting the views of the royalists; the beauty and
allurements of Constantia Beaumont, and the evident consternation of the
family, together with her extreme grief at the time of Sedley's
disappearing. He now hesitated and begged he might be dismissed; but a
few threats of imprisonment restored his volubility, and he anticipated
the questions of the counsel by stating, that at the command of His
Highness he had minutely searched the late residence of the Beaumonts,
and at length found a sliding pannel concealing an arched passage,
through an extraordinarily thick wall, which, being excavated in one
part, formed a small secret chamber or closet, concealed among the
buttresses, so as not to be visible on the out-side, and lighted by a
small window in the roof; he found, he said, certain proof of its having
been recently inhabited, and on removing the floor he discovered, with
several arms and implements, the dress of a parliamentary officer; the
same which he had seen Lord Sedley wear. Nor was this the only
corroborative proof of his having been assassinated in that dark recess,
for, on digging lower, they found several bones, which he feared were
part of the remains of that unfortunate gentleman.

The incongruity of finding the dress sufficiently perfect to discover
its identity, while the body of Sedley was so dismembered by time, that
only a few disjointed bones could be discovered, might have convinced
the court, that they could not, without incurring great odium, find Dr.
Beaumont guilty of murder. But, indeed, they had not time to reflect on
the inadmissibility of such vague circumstances in a criminal charge.
Lady Bellingham renewed her screams, to give effect, it was presumed, to
the workings of compassion for a fond mother, wounded to agony by such a
horrid narration. But her screams continued too long, and were too
piercing, to proceed from feigned distress, and the intermingled cries
of "He is coming again! Save me!" directed the eyes of all to a figure,
who was now perceived slowly making his way through the crowd below the
bar. It was the aged Evellin advancing with feeble steps; his majestic
form clad in a loose, black, serge gown, and his iron-grey hair and
beard waving neglected over his breast and shoulders; his arched brows
were still more elevated by disdain, while, glancing his eyes from his
screaming sister and her trembling husband, he fixed their
unextinguished lustre on the President. "I am an evidence for Eusebius
Beaumont," said he; "tender me the oath. My name is Allan Neville, and I
require to be confronted with Walter De Vallance, calling himself Earl
of Bellingham. Let him not escape," continued he, lifting his staff as
it were an ensign of authority. "I accuse him of perfidy, calumny,
fraud, usurpation, and murder."

Bellingham had more self-command than his guilty consort. His long
acquaintance with the terrors of guilt made him ever on his guard. He
knew of the preservation of Allan Neville during the civil wars, but he
hoped the death of his son might have terminated his days, or
irrecoverably clouded his reason; yet he was ever in apprehension of
having his title to greatness disproved by a living claimant, though he
knew all written documents to confirm his treachery had been destroyed.
He had resolved, if ever this man of many woes should burst upon him, to
abide by the criminal's last resource, denial of his identity, and
solemn protestations of his own innocence: and though the abode of
Neville had been so carefully concealed, that no trace of his residence
in London had been discovered, even by the vigilance of Oliverian spies,
the terrors to which the wretched Bellingham was a constant prey gave
him a degree of adroitness in a moment of surprise. Though a coward,
when only in the presence of God and his own conscience, the adhesive
habits of a practised courtier, gave him effrontery and address when
endeavouring to propitiate mankind in his favour.

"My Lord President," said he, "I must request that this unhappy maniac
may be taken into custody. The sight is too dreadful to the weakened
spirits of Lady Bellingham. Being a distant kinsman, we long supported
him by our bounty; but his disordered imagination has persuaded him that
he is the brother of my countess--that unfortunate and guilty man has
been long since numbered with the dead."

Neville answered with stern composure, "Stand forth, David Williams;
identify thy true Lord, the son of thy old master, to whom thou hast
adhered in all his calamities." Williams instantly complied with the
requisition, and Neville, then turning his indignant eyes on the
horror-struct Bellingham, exclaimed--"I trusted thee with my life, my
fortune, and my honour--I supplicated thy aid--I depended on thy
integrity, on our alliance in blood, on a friendship formed in our
boy-hood, on a thousand instances of kindness which I have shown
thee.--Thou stolest from me a pearl, rich as an empire, threwest at me
the worthless shell, and then badest thy plundered brother be grateful
for thy mercy. Mine, Walter, is not the voice of a raving mendicant, it
sounds not in thine ears as the ingratitude of an eleemosynary
pensioner, but as the groan of a perturbed spirit, risen from the grave
to demand vengeance."

"Hear me," continued he, as Bellingham hid his face with his cloak. "Am
not I the friend of thy youth, the brother of thy wife, the owner of thy
lands, castles, of all that thou hast, except that wretched body.--Where
is my son? My Eustace; condemned by thee in cold blood at Pembroke, for
being faithful to the King who ennobled thee, and was then betrayed by
thy treasons! Mark, traitor; at the time that thou unpitying sawest the
heir of the greatness thou hast long usurped walk to execution, this
innocent man, whom thou art now persecuting, preserved the life of thy
only child. This speed is found to produce a current sufficiently
rapid for practical purposes, and twenty-four pulls or beats per minute
correspond to a length of suspending cord of fifty inches.

* * * * *

HOW TO MAKE A KITE WITHOUT A TAIL.

The following is the method of making a kite without a tail: All
the calculations necessary in order to obtain the different proportions
are based upon the length of the stick, A'A, employed.

Such length being found, we divide it by ten, and thus obtain
what is called the unit of length. With such unit it is very easy to
obtain all the proportions. The bow, K'K, consists of two pieces of
osier each 5½ units in length, that form, through their union, a total
length of 7 units.

[Illustration: KITE WITHOUT A TAIL.]
After the bow has been constructed according to these measurements, it
only remains to fix it to the stick in such a way that it shall be two
units distant from the upper end of the stick. The balance, CC', whose
accuracy contributes much to the stability of the whole in the
air, consists of a string fixed at one end to the junction,
D, of the bow and stick, and at the other to the stick itself at a
distance of three units from the lower extremity. Next, a cord, B,
is passed around the frame, and the whole is covered with thin
paper.

Before raising the kite, the string, which hangs from K', is made
fast at K in such a way as to cause the bow to curve backward. This
curvature is increased or diminished according to the force of the
wind.

Nothing remains to be done but to attach the cord to the balance,
and raise the kite.--_La Nature_.

* * * * *

APPARATUS FOR DRYING FLOUR.

The accompanying drawing represents a simple but effective apparatus for
drying flour and ascertaining the quantity of water contained therein.
It consists of four pieces, the whole being made of block tin.

A is a simple saucepan for containing the water. B is the lid, which only
partially covers the top of the pan, to which it is fixed by two slots,
a hole being left in the middle for the placing of the vessel which
contains the flour to be operated upon, and is dropped in in the same
way as the pan containing the glue is let into an ordinary glue pot. C
is the spout, which serves as an outlet for the steam arising from the
boiling water. D is the vessel in which the flour is placed to be
experimented upon; and EE are the funnels of the lid which covers the
said vessel, and which serve as escapes for the steam arising from
the moisture contained in the flour.
[Illustration: APPARATUS FOR DRYING FLOUR]
_Directions for use_.--Partially fill the pan with water and allow
it to boil. Place a given quantity of flour in the inner vessel,
D, taking care first to weigh it. Subject it to the action of the
boiling water until it is perfectly dry, which will be indicated
by the steam ceasing to issue from the funnels. Then weigh again,
and the difference in the weight will represent the quantity of
moisture contained in it, dried at a temperature of 212 degrees
Fahr., that of boiling water.--_The Miller_.

* * * * *
APPARATUS FOR MANUFACTURING BOUQUETS.
For some years past, the sale of flowers has been gradually
increasing.
Into the larger cities, such as Paris for example, they are introduced
by the car load, and along about the first of January the consumption
of them is extraordinary.He suggested the impossibility of convicting Dr. Beaumont
of murder; and though his concealing a royalist was now proved, the age,
debility, and affinity of Neville, would make a strict execution of the
penal ordinances, cruelty instead of justice; and throw an odium on His
Highness's administration. Dr. Beaumont appeared to be an inoffensive,
quiet character; as to Neville, though a furious, desperate delinquent,
his infirmities made him insignificant, and death would probably soon
relieve the state from his machinations.

At this time Cromwell courted popularity; he wished to engage honourable
and eminent persons to support his government, and he thought an
indisputable reputation for liberality and impartiality would expedite
his ultimate projects. He had engaged some respectable characters in his
service; and the description his emissaries gave him of Neville and
Beaumont, showed him the impolicy of publickly sacrificing such victims
for state-offences. He affected to think it was possible he might attach
them to his interests, and declared he never could fear a disabled
soldier and sequestered parson, but that he was even ready to vindicate
the rights of a Loyalist, who had been injured by the partiality of the
late tyrant, and thus prove his own impartial justice, while he
transferred deserved odium on the memory of him who was called the Royal
martyr. Monthault pleaded warmly for the Beaumonts, but not with
disinterested earnestness. The appearance of Constantia in court revived
the recollection of his former designs on her person, and as the
acknowledged death of Eustace had removed what he supposed the chief
barrier to his wishes, he deemed his suit might not be unsuccessfully
urged, especially if he assumed the character of a mediator between her
father and the government. He willingly obeyed Cromwell's order to
adjourn the court to an indefinite time, till it could be ascertained if
the prisoners would purchase prosperity by a change of principle, and he
resolved to employ the interim in prosecuting his own designs.


CHAP. XXIV.

    None but the guilty are long and completely miserable.

                                                 Goldsmith.


The convulsions which seized Lady Bellingham, at again beholding what
she still supposed was the apparition of her brother, had a speedy and
fatal termination. The apparent reconciliation between herself and her
lord had been effected for the purpose of revenge. Their enmity was the
interminable feud of co-partners in iniquity, the hatred which ever
exists between the contriver and the executor of horrible enormities.
Their mutual recriminations and accusations were suspended; their
aversion was made to look like grief, and they walked together into the
court, as affectionate parents to prosecute the supposed murderer of
their only child. But the sympathy which softens affliction, and even
soothes despair, was here unknown. Lady Bellingham's false views of
religion had, indeed, so far skinned over the wounds of her ulcerated
conscience, as to produce a stupefaction, which might last as long as
health and prosperity continued. But when, what she conceived to be a
supernatural visitation, had terrified her into a dangerous
indisposition; the anchor of absolute election trembled in her grasp,
and her bodily weakness was rapidly increased by the wild agonies a soul
roused to a sense of its danger, when the bridegroom called and the lamp
of faith, unsupplied with good works, was extinguished. Her troubled
spirit saw nothing but darkness in its future prospects, while, with a
dying voice, she continued imploring her physicians to save her life,
and wondering why this judgment was fallen upon her.

In addition to this, there was another reason, which was quite sufficient
in itself to account for the extra substantiality of the dam. This
reservoir is for supplying water to the cloth factories of Verviers, on
the Belgian-German frontier. It is curved in plan to a radius of 1,640
ft., with a length of 771 ft., and the additional strength of the structure
due to so flat a curve is probably slight.

It is built of rubble masonry, with ashlar facework, laid in hydraulic
mortar. The total amount of masonry is 325,000 cubic yards. There
are two weirs, at a level of 6 ft. below the crest, each 82 ft.
wide. The total height, including the foundations, which are carried
down from 3 ft. to 5 ft. into the rock, is 154 ft., and the breadth of
the crest, which carries a road, is 49 ft. 3 in., and at the base 216 ft.
The outlet pipes are carried through tunnels, which are driven on the
curve into the hill side a considerable distance clear of each end of the
dam.

Another very important structure is the Villar dam, Fig. 15, in connection
with the water supply of Madrid, and situated on the river Lozoya. The
storage capacity of this reservoir is very considerable, viz., 4,400,000,000,
or nearly thirteen times as great as that of Furens.
The height of the dam is 162 ft., with a breadth of 14 ft. 9 in. at the
crest. It is built on the curve to a radius of 440 ft., and the
length of the dam measured along the crest is 546 ft., of which 197 ft.
is by-wash, thus describing nearly one-fifth of a circle, and consequently
well designed to resist pressure. The dam is built of rubble masonry
in hydraulic mortar, and cost £80,556.

The Stony Creek lower reservoir dam of the Geelong water supply, Fig. 16,
colony of Victoria, is interesting as being constructed of
concrete, in the proportion of 1 to 8½. Its erection occupied
eighteen months, and cost about £18,000. It is curved in plan to a
radius of 300 ft., and the greatest depth or head of water is 52 ft. 4
in. The width at the crest is only 2 ft. 8 in., although surmounted
by a heavy coping of bluestone 3 ft. 3 in. broad and 1 ft. 9 in. deep.
There being no facility for making a by-wash at the side, the center
of the dam is dished to form a weir 30 ft. long. There are both outlet
and scour pipes, and valves of 2 ft.
diameter, and the capacity of the reservoir is 143,145,834 gallons.

The Paramatta dam, in New South Wales, built of masonry in hydraulic
mortar, is another instance of a dam built on the curve, and which
has resisted a flood of water 4 ft. in depth over the crest; and in
the case of a dam of about 40 ft. high across the river Wyre, in
connection with the Lancaster Water Works, made of cement concrete
in proportion of 4 to 1, there has, according to Mr.

Mansergh, frequently been a depth of 5 ft.
of flow over it. This dam is built to a radius of 80 ft. only,
and as it measures 100 ft. along the crest, must include about the fifth
of a circle.

There now remain only two other examples of masonry dams, the first being
that in connection with the Liverpool water supply, and known as the
Vyrnwy dam, Fig. 17, this being thrown across a stream of that name
in North Wales. It is now under construction, and when completed will
impound an area of 1,115 acres.

The dam will be 1,255 ft. long, and formed of Cyclopean rubble set in
cement mortar, and the interstices or spaces between the large
masses of stone, which are rough hewn and not squared, are filled
with cement concrete. The proportion of the cement mortar is 2½
to 1. These masses of stone weigh from two to eight tons each, and
it is expected that the wall will be of a most solid description,
as great care is being taken to fill up all spaces. The face next
to the water is cemented. The area of the cross section shown on
the diagram, which is at one of the deepest points, is 8,972 square
feet, and the height from foundation to flood level is 129 ft., the
breadth at the base being 117 ft. 9 in.He soon found Monthault to be as
perfidious and unprincipled as he was daring and ready to undertake any
office which would gratify his passions, which (being now past the
heyday of youth) were diverted from licentious indulgence by the more
substantial enjoyments of avarice and ambition.

At this time Cromwell was secretly panting to add the name and
paraphernalia of a King to the authority which he actually exercised.
The fanatics, whom he had so long courted, were the most active
opponents of this project. The other sectaries had been long convinced,
by experience, that their views of republican felicity and perfection
were illusory. The respectable dissenters always professed themselves
friends of a limited monarchy; many staunch royalists thought the
renewal of kingly power would gradually turn the public eye on their
exiled Prince; and some selfish ones would have been content with such
an approach to the old order of things as would give them back their
sequestered estates. Some parties would be brought over by seeming to
fall in with their views, others cajoled by bribing their leaders, but
the levellers and fanatics were invincible. They had been Cromwell's
agents in subduing his enemies, and a consciousness of their power made
them unmanageable; they were determined on owning no King but Jesus, and
on thinking the regal title, when assumed by man, the mark of the beast
and the seal of reprobation to its supporters. "The Protector's
son-in-law, Fleetwood, kneeled and prayed publickly, that the Lord might
spit in his face if the unrighteous mammon tempted him into this sin;
and his brother Desborough anathematized him, and vowed to devote his
own sword to Charles Stewart sooner than to him, if he persevered in
longing for the forbidden spoil." Lambert, who was in the entire
confidence of these two, had seduced the affections of the army;
Cromwell, therefore, had a difficult game to play. His passionate desire
of royalty combated those secret fears that arose from a mysterious
warning which he received when he first meditated on the designs
afterwards realized by his lucky and unprincipled ambition. A vision, or
day-dream, impressed his enthusiastic imagination, detailing the steps
by which he was to rise, and assuring him, "that he should be the
greatest man in England, and near being King." Yet, though this seemed
to warn him of an impassable bound to his greatness, the pageant of
royalty which he had so often vilified and derided, on a close view
appeared so irresistible, that he became enchanted with its
fascinations, till, in aiming at the decorations of power, he nearly
sacrificed the substance.

At this juncture the daring character and versatility of Monthault
marked him out to the Protector as a proper instrument to negotiate with
Lambert, whose talents were far more dangerous than the fanaticism of
Fleetwood or Desborough's virulence. It was plain that though Monthault
wore the enlarged phylacteries and sanctified demeanour of the sect he
had lately adopted, he was more a hypocrite than an enthusiast. It is
well known, that Cromwell found means to discover every private incident
in the lives of his agents, and thus penetrated into all their views.
While pleading for the imprisoned Beaumonts, the Protector read the soul
of the former lover of Constantia, now known to be nearly allied to the
true stock of the house of Bellingham. Cromwell therefore took occasion
to commend the filial piety and courage which he heard that this young
lady had exemplified; and declared himself resolved, not only to show
Dr. Beaumont favour, but also to consider the case of Neville;
intimating, that he looked on an hereditary and uncontaminated nobility
as the strongest link between the people and the government; and from
this acknowledgment he took occasion to glance at the benefit of a
partial restoration of old usages, as most likely to unite all parties,
and heal the wounds of the three kingdoms. The stress laid on the last
word, (the use of which had been for some time interdicted,) shewed
Monthault what was expected from him, and he left the presence,
persuaded that if he would assist to gird the austere brows of the
Usurper with the kingly diadem, the hand of his mistress, and a large
portion of the Bellingham property, if not its reversionary honours,
would be his reward.

It was with a further view of securing this prize that Monthault visited
the dying Lady Bellingham, to whom their party-connexions gave him free
access. Pretending he had received a special revelation, which he must
impart to her alone, he dismissed the ministers, and assured her of the
actual existence of her brother, whose pardon her again-alarmed
conscience seemed most anxious to secure, even at the price of
relinquishing to him those possessions which her increasing weakness
told her she could not long retain. Monthault assured her it would be
greatly for the benefit of her soul, if she would sign a deed
bequeathing to Allan Neville the inheritance of their ancestors; and
produced a prepared instrument, which Lady Bellingham was not in a state
to read, or indeed to listen to its recital. Relying on the veracity of
one whom she considered as a saint upon earth, and catching eagerly at
every thing which would allay those inward terrors that had been rather
benumbed than pacified, Lady Bellingham was induced to consent, and the
ministers were re-introduced to certify her being in a sound mind and to
witness the execution of a deed, which they trusted was to promote the
good cause, but which in reality bequeathed the Bellingham estate, after
the demise of Allan Neville, to Constantia Beaumont, provided she
consented to marry Monthault. Thus cheated and bewildered in her last
moments by those whom she believed to be endowed with super-human
perfections, this wretched woman terminated her miserable and guilty
life.

Monthault's next care was, to discover if his apparent reformation of
manners could so far impose on the simplicity and candour of the
Beaumonts as to make them strain the principle of Christian forgiveness,
and receive him as a friend. They were still in prison, but the
Protector had given orders, that they should be provided with handsome
apartments, and every comfort compatible with confinement at the public
expence. But though Monthault took on himself the merit of this lenient
treatment, the prejudices of the whole family against him formed an
insuperable bar to his designs. His change of conduct was too pointedly
obtrusive; his piety and penance too ostentatious to pass on a man who
was thoroughly conversant with the marks of genuine repentance. Dr.
Beaumont did not approve of an elaborate and unnecessary disclosure of
the secret enormities of his early life, which seemed to him more like
the wantonness of a depraved imagination wallowing in its former
abominations, than penitence shrinking, with horror, from its
recollected transgressions. But when Monthault proceeded to talk of his
present sinless rectitude, certainty of acceptance, rapturous exercises,
and experiences of future beatification, (the common cant of those
times,) the sound divine saw the once audacious sinner covering his
adhesive wickedness with the Pharisee's cloak, exchanging libertinism
for spiritual pride, and the excesses of debauchery for ambition and
malevolence. Though no one was more adverse than Dr. Beaumont from
colouring gross sins with the name of amiable frailties, he thought
Monthault more horrible with his Scripture-appellative and precise
habits, than when as a drunken cavalier he toasted the King and the
Church, while he disgraced the one by his rapine, and the other by his
profaneness.

Monthault was equally unsuccessful with Constantia. In vain did he
assure her that the awakening change in his soul had been expedited by
his yearnings after her. She coldly told him, she hoped for his sake the
reformation was real. He assured her he had disposed the Protector to
befriend her relations. She thanked the Protector's justice, and
relapsed into silence. He spoke of the identity of her uncle as being
indisputable, and that he was likely soon to be removed from a prison to
an earldom. She answered, that would be miraculous, but no irradiation
of her countenance implied her belief that such an event was probable.
He inquired if her cousin Isabel was still devoted to Sedley. Constantia
could here speak with energy, and replied, "She is." Monthault reminded
her, that whatever became of his father, he was necessarily proscribed;
having violated the bond of private friendship, as well as of public
trust, with the Protector. Constantia answered, that Isabel saw nothing
infamous in banishment or poverty, but much in breaking her early vows
to a man whose misfortunes were his praise. "But," replied Monthault,
"your early vows have been dissolved by death; and celibacy is one of
the popish snares of Satan. Marriage was divinely appointed, and it is
sinful to neglect the godly ordinance." "To marry with an unconsenting
heart is more so," replied Constantia; "I was betrothed to Eustace
Evellin, and living or dead, to him will I ever be faithful. His genuine
integrity, his frank affectionate disposition won all my heart; and
since I have lost him, I live only to the claims of filial duty and
sisterly affection. I have been long familiarized with fear and sorrow,
but hope and joy can only visit me in his form."

Monthault told her, that this persevering regret was a mark of her being
in an unsanctified rebellious state. He quoted many texts to prove that
the saints would eventually inherit the earth; declaring that the
wonderful success which attended Cromwell, first pointed him out as an
instrument of Providence, designed for an especial purpose. Constantia
expressed her belief that he was; but silenced Monthault's intended
allusions to a millennial state of felicity under his government, by
declaring her conviction that he was the sword of vengeance, rather than
the renovating sun of mercy.

Monthault withdrew sullen and offended, planning schemes of vengeance,
all pointed at Arthur de Vallance, whose retreat he determined to
discover. He questioned the keeper of the prison, who had access to the
Beaumonts, and was by him directed to Jobson. His talkative simplicity,
and the danger that would result from his being sifted by Cromwell's
spies, had obliged them to dispense with the services of the faithful
trooper, who now earned his bread by manual labour, and only came
occasionally to inquire after their health. Though care was taken to
represent him as a porter occasionally employed, the jailor suspected he
had been an old servant. Monthault immediately recollected him as
attached to Eustace a little before their separation at Dartmoor, and
recommended himself to the affectionate creature, by recognising him as
one who leaped with him into the moat, and climbed the wall at his side,
when Prince Rupert stormed Bristol. Taking him apart, he avowed himself
to be a stanch royalist, watching every opportunity to serve a cause he
still wore at his heart. He declared that he accepted the office of a
judge at Dr. Beaumont's trial, with a resolution of saving him; he
praised his firm demeanour, the beauty of Constantia, the goodness of
Isabel, and the noble self-devotedness of Neville; assuring Jobson, that
he was most sedulous in employing the interest he possessed with the
Protector to the advantage of this family. But he lamented that there
existed one obstacle to Neville's becoming Earl of Bellingham: the
Protector's betrayed confidence required a victim, and Arthur de
Vallance must be given up to his vengeance.

The honest countenance of Jobson fell at this information. "Ah, worthy
sir," said he, "there is no washing the black-a-moor white; Old Noll
will continue Old Noll, dress him up how you will. There's no putting a
King's heart into a scoundrel's body; and a tailor never yet made more
than the clothes of a gentleman. I say, the man that can't forgive a
brave young gentleman, never ought to wear the crown of England. You had
half persuaded me to forget the true King beyond sea, and to think, as
this ruler would do justice, we might go on as we are, but when you talk
about harping on old grievances, and taking vengeance for private
fallings-out, I say, though Old Noll may do for a Lord-Protector, Kings
must never have any enemies but the enemies of their country."

Monthault, seeming to enter into his feelings, uttered many encomiums on
young De Vallance, whom he said he really thought one of the finest
gentlemen in England. "Aye, in England _now_, I grant you," returned
Jobson; "but there is another before him, Mr. Eustace Evellin; we used
to call him the true Lord Sedley, for the other is but a make-believe.
Very good-humoured and generous, and fair-spoken I allow; but the right
lord, O! he has an eye like a hawk, and so open and daring, and
spirited--I wish, noble Sir, you had seen him."

Monthault affected to brush a tear from his eye, lamenting that an
interview was now impossible. Jobson had an inveterate antipathy to
giving any one pain, except in the field of battle. He caught Monthault
by his cloak, pressed him to be secret, and whispered he might have that
pleasure before he died. "Mum," said he, "for your life; Mr. Eustace is
alive and merry, and only waits for the King's coming over to be among
us."

Monthault vowed secresy, and readily drew from Jobson all he knew
respecting the preservation and subsequent history of the heir of
Neville. Fortunately, he had never been intrusted with the place of
their retreat, and could only say, that he and De Vallance were
somewhere very safe, and ready to drub Old Noll into better manners than
authorizing the shooting of men in cold blood.

Monthault then informed Jobson, that he possessed a large fortune, and
secretly devoted ample remittances to the service of the King, and the
most eminent Loyalists. As the state now liberally supported the
prisoners, the exiles had the first claim on his purse. Unintentionally
he feared, he had been of great disservice to Eustace, and therefore
justice, as well as humanity and admiration, pointed him out as the
first person whom he ought to assist. He would most willingly send
Jobson with a sum of money to these illustrious friends, and he
entreated him to discover where they had taken shelter, and say he was
commissioned to supply their wants. But as he was ever attentive to the
rule of doing good in secret, his own name was, on no account, to be
divulged, nor would he press Jobson to inform him where the fugitives
resided. The language of loyalty, unostentatious generosity, and warm
attachment to Eustace, was, to Jobson, a sure pledge of the honour and
sincerity of Monthault. He readily promised to get the whole secret out
of Mrs. Isabel, and discover none of his intentions. "I see, noble sir,"
continued he, "you are a true gentleman, and know, that a gentleman like
yourself hates to be thought poor, and had rather starve than have money
given him; whereas we poor men never care how much we get from our
betters. But trust me for managing the business cleverly."

Happily for the exiles, Jobson was equally deficient in finesse and
secrecy. The first question he put to Isabel respecting the place of
their retreat, discovered that he had a mysterious reason for wishing to
be informed, and she soon drew from him that the benevolent unknown was
a tall, solemn gentleman, who turned up the whites of his eyes, and was
dressed like a round-head, though a stanch Loyalist in his heart. This
description, so applicable to Monthault, excited her liveliest terrors.
It was impossible to convince Jobson, that a man who talked so kindly
could have any insidious design; and thinking it best not to combat this
delusion, she thought it expedient to misdirect the wily traitor, and
observed, that the inhabitants of the mountainous parts of Cumberland,
where she and her father had so long lived, were well affected to the
King, and disposed to shelter and protect her brother. From the manner
in which Jobson communicated this intelligence, Monthault was convinced
that Isabel had penetrated into his designs; and he resolved to suspend
his machinations till he could extort, by terror, what intrigue had
failed to procure.

When Isabel communicated this intelligence to her friends, their
apprehensions of some fatal snare which might blast all their hopes,
determined them to send the faithful and discreet Williams to the
exiles, advising them of Cromwell's designs to get them into his power,
and entreating them immediately to quit their present abode. But whither
to point for a safe retreat was the difficulty, since at that time this
extraordinary man seemed to extend the scorpion fangs of his tyranny
over the continent, as well as the British dominions. He had, at every
court, not only an accredited minister, but a subordinate host of spies
liberally paid, who gave him an account of every stranger of distinction
that sought a refuge from his cruelty, and contrived also, by false
accusations or threats to the affrighted sovereigns, to have the victims
he had marked for destruction delivered into his power. Cromwell had
formerly made a close league with the Queen of Sweden, between whose
successor and his neighbour the King of Denmark, a furious contest had
commenced. As all hope of serving his native Prince was for the present
suspended, Neville advised his son to draw his sword for the royal Dane,
and Williams was charged with many affectionate remembrances. "Tell my
son," said he, "never to disgrace the name, to which, at hazard of my
life, I have proved his title." Constance whispered a tender assurance
that the tidings of his preservation had reconciled her to life. "Yet
tell my Eustace," said she, "that though time and sorrow have so changed
the face he used to admire, that he would now hardly know his Constance,
they have improved the heart, which neither calumny, nor suspence, nor
despair, could alienate from its only love." Isabel, too, had a brief
encouraging remembrance for her lover: "Tell my De Vallance," said she,
"I live for him and for happier times. Bid him remember me in the hour
of peril and the moment of temptation; assure him I count the years of
our separation, and endure my present sorrows in the confidence that
they will serve for sweet discourses in the time to come." The message
of Dr. Beaumont was pious and prudential.--He rejoiced that an
opportunity was afforded them of serving a Protestant King, and he
advised them, if their successful services allowed them an honourable
establishment in Denmark, to withdraw their views, though not their love
or their prayers, from England.

Charged with these endearing recollections Williams departed, but on his
arrival at Jersey found the fugitives had long left the island. Their
protectress was dead, and her husband had removed to the South of
France. Dr. Lloyd was well remembered for his medical skill, and his
pupils for their correct manners and exemplary friendship. A lady,
daughter of one of the first people in St. Helier, had formed a strong
attachment to one of the gentlemen, and as she left the island about the
time they did, it was supposed a marriage had been solemnized. Williams
durst not be very minute in his inquiries; he gathered however that the
place of their retreat could not be discovered, though the friends of
the lady had taken every measure to regain her.

This intelligence greatly increased the dejection of Constantia, and
almost clouded the sanguine mind of Isabel. "Has mutability," she would
often say, "entirely usurped the earth? No. Inanimate nature is not
changed; the sun-beams steal through these grated windows at the same
hour this year as they did last. Summer and winter, day and night,
return at stated periods; the animal organs present the same objects,
and excite the usual sensations; nor are my moral feelings altered;
truth and honour continue to delight me; vice and falsehood are as
odious to my soul as if good men still triumphed, and guilt held its
alliance with infamy. Yet are not subjects transformed into traitors and
rebels; lovers forsworn; do not Christians renounce their baptism and
abjure their faith; and is not friendship become a cloak to conceal the
informer and assassin? Whom shall we acquit of inconstancy, if either
Eustace or De Vallance are false? How shall we depicture fidelity and
honour if they dwell not in the open front of heroic candour, or the
mild suavity of undeviating rectitude? Away!--the report of Williams is
a gossip's tale, forged to explain a mystery of their own forming.
Constance, I shall live to arrange your jewels and fold your robe, when
you walk at the coronation as Countess of Bellingham, and you shall be
sponsor to my little Arthur. At least I will cherish these day-dreams,
till I know Cromwell has done a disinterested generous action; I will
then resign you to Monthault, and employ myself in clear-starching and
crimping bands for the conventicle."

Thus rallying her own spirits, and endeavouring to animate the hopes of
others, Isabel contrived to lighten the burden of voluntary captivity,
as she had used to alleviate the hardships of poverty. Her mind, equally
firm and innocent, feared nothing but the reproaches of her conscience
and the despair of her father. Happy in the resources of an active
disposition, she soon convinced Constantia that even confinement does
not proscribe utility. While Dr. Beaumont administered to the spiritual
wants of his fellow-prisoners, Isabel contrived to promote their
comforts, often with the labours of her hand, always by the un-failing
cordial of her hilarity, and sometimes with her slender purse,
cheerfully abridging her own wants to supply the need of others. Nor was
she wholly disinterested in this conduct; she found it the best method
of diverting anxiety and suppressing doubt; of resisting that
misanthropy which a long continuance of adversity is apt to engender in
the tenderest hearts; and of preserving those social feelings of general
good-will, which, to austere dispositions, render even prosperity
distasteful.


    [1] Many of these circumstances are copied from the death of
    Cromwell.


CHAP. XXV.

    "See Cromwell damn'd to everlasting fame."

                                                 Pope.


It was at this period that Cromwell underwent that memorable struggle
between his ambition and his fears, which ultimately preserved the
monarchy of England in the line of legitimate descent. He tampered with
all parties, and found none hearty in his cause: the best-disposed to
his interests were only passive; but his enemies were implacable. The
popularity of a pamphlet recommending his assassination upon principle,
and declaring that the perpetrator of the deed would deserve the favour
of God and man, destroyed every vestige of his comfort. "He read it, and
was never seen to smile more." With late repentance for his vanity,
which prompted him to excite such furious opposition, he pushed from him
the crown he had courted, when offered by his creatures; but he did it
with an affectation of disdain and self-command, that ill accorded with
his former intrigues to obtain it. All his anxiety was now directed to
the preservation of his joyless life. He had long worn light armour
under his clothes, and carried pistols in his pockets. He seldom lay
twice in the same chamber, or informed any one which apartment he meant
to select. He travelled with extreme rapidity, attended by numerous
guards, and never returned by the way he went. Yet no sooner was one
conspiracy detected, than another was formed; the fanatics were
irreconcileable, and the most worthy and eminent among the dissenters
determined on his overthrow. His old military comrades, Fairfax and
Waller, were bent to destroy him. His treasury was drained by the
rapacity of his numerous spies; and as fines and exactions had been
strained to the utmost, he had no means of replenishing it but by a
recourse to measures similar to those which had overthrown the monarchy;
for his fanatical puppet-shows had brought the name of Parliament into
contempt, and he durst not appeal to the free voice of the nation. I
have already mentioned the disunion of his family, and the desertion of
his kindred and near alliances. Such were the accumulated miseries, such
the soul-harrowing and unremitting sufferings, of this man, whom Europe
considered as the favourite of fortune, and whose extraordinary success
has been urged as a plea against the divine government, and a proof that
the kingdoms of this world are left to the disposal of Satan. Penetrate
the recesses of the tyrant's palace, and it will be seen that enormous
offences, after they have outstripped the power of human punishment,
visit, on the oppressor, their own atrocity, and revenge the wrongs of a
bleeding world by torments more insupportable than any which cruelty can
inflict on others.

Distrusting even his most faithful informers, and jealous of his own
creatures, Cromwell always endeavoured to see every thing with his own
eyes. A little before his unlamented death, two strangers visited the
prison where Neville and Dr. Beaumont were confined. One of them avowed
himself to be the Lord Whitlock, the other passed as his secretary. They
were both masked, and wore long cloaks to conceal their persons. The
secretary was furnished with writing materials; he placed himself at a
table, and affected only to take minutes of the conversation.

Whitlock began with upbraiding the national ingratitude, and
acknowledging its general indisposition to the Protector's vigorous and
successful administration. He insisted that His Highness wished to
conciliate all parties by a mild and impartial government, though the
ample means with which he was furnished, the tried fidelity of the army,
and the respect he was held in by foreign Potentates, prevented him from
needing the friendship of any. But being now past the meridian of life,
he was desirous of leaving the nation whom he had rendered great and
prosperous, in the possession of internal tranquillity. Though
irreconcileable from principle, he regarded the royalists as the most
respectable of his opponents, and "he had ever resisted the advice of
the fanatics, to cut them off by a general massacre." Whitlock then
expressed his hope, that the prisoners condemned the newly-broached
opinion that assassination was allowable, and were disposed to be quiet,
if not contented, under the present government, which would reward such
submission by relaxing the penal statutes now in force against them. Dr.
Beaumont spoke first, and declared that assassination was forbidden by
the general tenor of Scripture. The particular instances now so much
dwelt on, of Jael's killing Sisera, or Judith's Holofernes, could not be
urged in vindication of similar attempts. Both acts were committed
previous to the Christian dispensation, which prescribes submissive
patience under injuries, and overcoming evil with good. Those deeds were
performed under a Divine impetus, and though, by their performance, the
will of God was fulfilled, it is not clear that the perpetrators were
justified in His sight, any more than was Hazael, when (as had been
divinely predicted) he acted as the chastiser of offending Israel.

Neville then took up the argument. He retorted on Whitlock the
expressions used by St. John to procure the condemnation of Lord
Strafford, and asked how they had the effrontery to object to that rule
when employed against themselves. "You have cut off our nobles, our
prelates, and our King," said he, "by that formal and public
assassination, an illegal trial; but we alike abjure your principles and
practice. If I hunt a usurper and tyrant to death, it shall be by
honourable means. If his character deserves no respect, I know what is
due to my own. I hold no tenets in common with regicides. Man cannot
commit a crime that can so far deface the image of his Maker impressed
upon him as to reduce him to the level of a beast of prey. Would that
this unnerved arm had strength, and that this sinking frame were again
erect with youthful vigour, then, if the awakened feelings of the nation
allowed me opportunity to meet, in the field of battle, the brave,
great, wicked man you serve, I would single him out from every opponent;
but were he unarmed, and in my power, I would give him a sword before I
assailed him."

Whitlock walked to the table; but it was evident that he received,
rather than gave, directions. The soul-searching eye of Cromwell peered
through his visor, and turned alternately on Neville and Beaumont.
Though a stranger to the feelings of magnanimity, he honoured its
expressions. He walked towards the captives, removed the shade from his
sickly, care-worn features, and asked how he could make them his
friends.

Neville shrunk aghast, petrified at the aspect of his Sovereign's
murderer. The feelings of a father repressed his maledictions, while he
gazed on him with stern silence as he would on a portentous meteor. Dr.
Beaumont sooner recollected himself. Bowing to Cromwell as to one of
those powers that are ordained by God, he answered that forgiveness and
obedience were duties; but that the feelings of friendship were a
voluntary engagement, and arose from very different motives.

And please to recollect that it matters not in the least whether the
medium which is rendered turbid is solid, liquid, or air. Sulphur
is yellow in mass, and mastic varnish is nearly white, while tobacco
smoke when condensed is black, and very minute particles of water are
colorless; it matters not what the color is, the loss of light is
_always_ the same. The result is simply due to the scattering of light
by fine particles, such particles being small in dimensions compared
with a wave of light. Now, in this trough is suspended 1/1000 of a
cubic inch of mastic varnish, and the water in it measures about 100
cubic inches, or is 100,000 times more in bulk than the varnish.
Under a microscope of ordinary power it is impossible to distinguish any
particles of varnish; it looks like a homogeneous fluid, though
we know that mastic will not dissolve in water.

Now a wave length in the red is about 1/40000 of an inch, and a
little calculation will show that these particles are well within the
necessary limits. Prof. Tyndall has delighted audiences here with an
exposition of the effect of the scattering of light by small particles
in the formation of artificial skies, and it would be superfluous for
me to enter more into that. Suffice it to say that when particles are
small enough to form the artificial blue sky, they are fully small enough
to obey the above law, and that even larger particles will suffice. We
may sum up by saying that very fine particles scatter more blue light
than red light, and that consequently more red light than blue light
passes through a turbid medium, and that the rays obey the law
prescribed by theory.

I will exemplify this once more by using the whole spectrum and placing
this cell, which contains hyposulphite of soda in solution in water, in
front of the slit.

By dropping in hydrochloric acid, the sulphur separates out in minute
particles; and you will see that, as the particles increase in
number, the violet, blue, green, and yellow disappear one by one
and only red is left, and finally the red disappears itself.

Now let me revert to the question why the sun is red at sunset. Those
who are lovers of landscape will have often seen on some bright summer's
day that the most beautiful effects are those in which the distance
is almost of a match to the sky.

Distant hills, which when viewed close to are green or brown, when seen
some five or ten miles away appear of a delicate and delicious, almost
of a cobalt, blue color.

Now, what is the cause of this change in color? It is simply that we
have a sky formed between us and the distant ranges, the mere outline
of which looms through it. The shadows are softened so as almost to
leave no trace, and we have what artists call an atmospheric effect.
--The
public clamour, which will not now permit you to immolate the confined
victims whom your own lips have pronounced innocent of recent
provocations, and against whom you dare not revive the charge of
acknowledged resistance, which, by long impunity, you seem to have
pardoned. All these reasons are pledges for our safety. You cannot
further tempt the sufferance of Englishmen. Your declining health makes
you fear to add to the long indictment which your crimes have prepared
against you.

    The garlands wither on your brow,
      Then boast no more your mighty deeds,
    Upon Death's purple altar now,
      See where the victor-victim bleeds:
    All heads must come to the cold tomb;
      Only the actions of the just
      Smell sweet, and blossom in the dust."[1]

As Neville uttered this bold appeal to the feelings of an alarmed and
conscious villain, a cold shivering ran through the Protector's frame,
and his eye expressed a vain supplication, that it were possible to
exchange his garlands and his glories for those ever-fragrant actions
which blossom on the grave of the just. He strove to rally his air of
moody dignity, to recover the austere deliberate tone of his
expressions; but his manner was embarrassed, and his voice inarticulate.
A groan, such as only tortured guilt can utter, partially relieved his
swollen bosom. "Neville," said he, "I will not expect you to be my
friend; but will you cease to be my enemy?"

"Miserable victim of ambition," said Neville to himself; "how much
happier is my lot than thine!" Cromwell persisted in asking if there was
any favour he would receive at his hand. Neville paused, and answered,
"Yes; liberty."

"And what pledge," said Cromwell, "can you give me that you will not use
freedom to my prejudice?"

"My own honour," returned Neville, "which will never allow me to use the
instrument you put in my hand to destroy you."

"No equivocation!" said Whitlock; "in receiving freedom from His
Highness you acknowledge his authority."

"No," returned Neville, "I simply own he has a power to confine me. The
question of right is undetermined. If a Usurper restores me to the free
use of light and air, I need not examine his title before I resume the
enjoyment of those common blessings."

Cromwell addressed Dr. Beaumont: "You belong to a church whose doctrine
is passive obedience. You are not bewildered by this madman's chimeras,
but can prudently estimate the value of our free grace and promised
favour."

"My religion," replied the Doctor, "teaches me to submit to the
dispensations of Providence; but it will not allow me to divide the
spoil with those who have grown mighty on the ruins of my friends."

"Are there no points," again inquired Cromwell, "in which we may agree
to join our common wishes? What if I beseech the Lord to give you the
spirit of wisdom?"

"May he afford you that of consolation," was the emphatical wish of Dr.
Beaumont. Neville waved his hand in silence. "Oh! my friend," said he,
as soon as the Protector and Whitlock had retired, "I have suffered more
than the rack. I have seen the fiend-like face which looked, without
compunction, on the sufferings of the Royal Martyr, and I felt too weak
to revenge his wrongs. Have I not gone too far in saying I would accept
of freedom from his hands?"

"Vengeance for such a crime," replied Dr. Beaumont, "is too vast and
comprehensive to be entrusted to mortal agency. Let us leave it to Him
who claims it as his own prerogative. Murder, perfidy, and treason, will
be remembered when the avenging angel shall visit the sins of man."

Cromwell returned from his insidious visit, disappointed and dejected.
He had failed of the end which he proposed to himself by his
condescension. A reconciliation with two such distinguished Loyalists,
founded on the mutual benefits of submission and restitution, would have
strengthened his government; but he found abstinence from treacherous
hostility was all that his blandishments could obtain, and this he would
owe rather to their own principles of honour and religion than to his
threats or his promises. Though stung to the heart by the bold taunts of
Neville, he could not punish him. The very aspect and figure of the two
venerable sufferers were so fitted to excite sympathy and indignation,
that he durst not expose them on a scaffold, nor could he privately cut
them off. The fate of Syndercome, a daring Anabaptist, who had several
times attempted his life, and, on his trial, persevered in expressing
his determination, if possible, to kill him, alike deterred Cromwell
from bringing his private enemies to the bar of a court of justice, or
resorting to private measures of revenge. He had with difficulty
procured this man's condemnation; but the night previous to his intended
execution he escaped, by suicide, the Protector's power; and so
prejudiced were the populace against their Ruler, that they accused him
of having poisoned the victim he feared to bring to a public death. If
the prosecution of a notorious and avowed ruffian brought him into this
dilemma, what odium would the death of two respectable and aged
Loyalists excite, especially as their story was become public, and the
wrongs of Neville, and the generous friendship of Beaumont, had awakened
a powerful sympathy. Yet his narrow soul could not accede to the
generous alternative of giving them freedom. Pretending that the state
had a claim to the Bellingham-property, he prevented Monthault from
taking any measures to establish the will of the guilty Countess, and
contented himself with keeping the lawful claimant in prison, hoping
that confinement would accelerate the decays of nature, and thus give a
safe quietus to his own fears.

But ere that event happened the Usurper was called to the dreadful
tribunal for which few among the descendants of Adam were apparently
less prepared. His restless, intriguing ambition; the dissimulation and
hypocrisy by which he rose to supreme power; the ability with which he
wielded it; his splendid wretchedness; the terror he excited and felt;
his cruelty and fanaticism, his determined spirit, and occasionally
timid vacillation, read a most impressive lesson to aspiring minds
infatuated by success, and regardless of moral or religious restraints.
O that, in this age of insubordination, selfishness, and enterprise, a
poet would arise, animated with Shakespeare's "Muse of fire," embody the
events of those seventeen years of wo, and invest the detestable
Regicide with the same terrible immortality which marks the murderous
Thane in his progress from obedience and honour to supreme power and
consummate misery!

Nor does the death-bed of Cromwell afford a less useful warning to the
pen of instruction, when she aims at distinguishing true piety from
hypocrisy or fanaticism. It is still doubtful under which of those
counterfeits of religion we must rank this great but wicked man. Yet,
whether he deceived his own soul, or attempted to deceive others;
whether he really believed himself an elected instrument of Providence;
or, having long worn devotion as the mask of ambition, retained it to
the last,--his almost unexampled crimes (so plainly forbidden by that
scripture he had ever on his lips), and the security and confidence of
his last moments, furnish stronger arguments than a thousand volumes of
controversy, to prove the fallacy and danger of those speculative
notions which he patronized, propagated, and exemplified.


    [1] The Usurper's terrors at hearing this fine song of Shirley's
    is an historical fact. Some of the speeches attributed to him in
    this interview, he really used to persons he had confined, and
    wished to win over. In the close of his life he grew timid; and,
    conscious of being hated, bore insults calmly. Bishop Wren
    rejected his offered favours in as strong language as that
    attributed to Neville.


CHAP. XXVI.

    A good man should not be very willing, when his Lord comes, to be
    found beating his fellow-servants; and all controversy, as it is
    usually managed, is little better. A good man would be loth to be
    taken out of the world reeking hot from a sharp contention with a
    perverse adversary; and not a little out of countenance to find
    himself, in this temper, translated into the calm and peaceable
    regions of the blessed, where nothing but perfect charity and
    good-will reign for ever.

                                                 Tillotson.


During the turbulent era that immediately followed the death of
Cromwell, obscurity was the only asylum for integrity and innocence. The
respective demagogues contended for mastery; and the nation gazed on
their contests as on so many prize-fighters, whose uninteresting warfare
regarded only themselves. Weary of confusion and discord; aware that
faction had broken every promise and frustrated every hope; that the
visions of freedom had been the harbingers of despotism; and that
pretensions to moderation, disinterestedness, and purity, were but the
disguise of rapacity, pride, and selfishness, the nation longed for the
restoration of a lineal Sovereign, a regular government, and determinate
laws. This practice does not seem to have been followed in many cases,
as, for instance, again referring to the Dale Dyke dam, Fig. 2,
where the thickness of the top was only 4 ft., with a batter of 1 in 16
downward, giving a thickness of 16 ft. at the base. For a dam 95 ft.
in height this is very light, compared with that of the Vehui dam at
Bombay, of which the engineer was Mr. Conybeare--Fig.
7--where the puddle wall is 10 ft. wide at the top, with a batter
downward of 1 in 8, the Bann reservoir--Fig. 8--of Mr. Bateman's
design, where the puddle is 8 ft. broad at the top, and other
instances. The same dimension was adopted for the puddle wall of
the Harelaw reservoir, at Paisley, by Mr. Alexander Leslie, an
engineer of considerable experience in dam construction.To assist in restoring the regal power was deemed
not merely a rasure of past crimes, but a qualification for trust and
employment; and those who now sought the shelter of royalty as a
protection from their late co-partners in rebellion, seemed, by the high
value which they put on their present services, to overlook, with equal
contempt and injustice, the claims and the wrongs of the Loyalists, who
having never changed their principles, had much to be repaid, and
nothing to be forgiven.

In the struggles which immediately preceded the Restoration, while
Monk's designs were wrapped in mystery, the cruelty of the regicides
increased with their ambition, and the jails were successively crowded
with every party, as the unsettled government alternately vibrated from
the rump to the fanatical faction. Within the walls of the same prison,
suffering the same restraint, and, like himself, the victim of a
conscience which would not temporize, Dr. Beaumont met his worthy friend
Barton. They congratulated each other on having thus far weathered the
political tempest without deserting their principles, or impugning their
honour. The Doctor learned from Barton the particulars of Lady
Bellingham's death, and the claims of Monthault on her fortune, which,
by the turbulence of the times, were still kept in abeyance. Lord
Bellingham was yet alive, poor and wretched, courting every faction,
trusted by none, and so universally despised as to endure the odium of
more crimes than he had even dared to commit. He was allowed a small
stipend out of his vast possessions, the income of the remainder being
still paid into the public treasury; while Morgan, now become a man of
consequence, and a commissioner for compounding forfeited property, was
enabled amply to glut his rapacity, and resided at Bellingham-Castle in
a style of the grossest sensual indulgence. Monthault had joined the
army of Lambert, against whom General Monk was now marching from
Scotland; and as the King had given reiterated commands to all his
friends to remain passive, and wait the event, it seemed as if he had
some private intelligence with Monk's party, to whom, therefore, each
honest Englishman wished success.

Barton believed this effervescence would terminate in a happy calm--a
mild but energetic government; and he looked forward to prosperous
times, when the remembrance of past misfortunes should correct national
manners, and produce a general improvement in the minds and feelings of
men. Neville was always sanguine; and Dr. Beaumont confessed that all
things seemed to tend to the restoration of monarchy; yet, with the
prescience of a man long accustomed to calamity, he doubted whether even
that desired event would speedily repair the deep wound which England
had sustained.

"We shall," said he, "receive with our Prince the inestimable blessings
of our old laws and form of government; but as our troubles have served
rather to show us the necessity, than to prevent the abuse, of the
prerogative, its limits continue undefined, and we shall still too much
depend on the personal character of the King. It were well if the
situation in which we now stand would allow us to propose such
conditions as would make the duties of King and subject plain and easy,
before we invite our Prince to resume the sceptre of his ancestors, as
it would prevent the mistakes into which his father fell, from a
misconception of the bounds of sovereign power, derived from the
arbitrary precedent set by the House of Tudor. But our divisions prevent
us from claiming those advantages which would result from wisdom,
moderation, and unanimity. We fly to the King as to a healer of our
dissensions. Single Copies, 25 Cents.

This is a Special Edition of THE SCIENTIFIC AMERICAN, issued monthly--on
the first day of the month. Each number contains about forty large quarto
pages, equal to about two hundred ordinary book pages, forming, practically,
a large and splendid Magazine of Architecture, richly adorned with
_elegant plates in colors_ and with fine engravings; illustrating
the most interesting examples of modern Architectural Construction
and allied subjects.He has been educated in adversity, a good school; but
are not his advisers men who have endured too much to be dispassionate
and liberal? They have suffered in a good cause: if, when restored to
power, they abstain from indulging any vindictive propensity, they will
be saints as well as confessors; but, considering their long and
grievous provocations, is not this requiring too much of human frailty?

"Consider too, my dear friends, (and let the reflection allay your
sanguine expectations of another golden age,) that the King to whom we
look forward has been bred a foreigner. From his own country he has
hitherto met with nothing but severe injuries. The impression he has
received of the character of his future subjects is repulsive and
disgusting; and the heart of a King of England, as well as his manners,
should be completely English. He will return loaded with debts of
gratitude, which he never can discharge, to those who supported his
father, as well as those who restore him; to the surviving friends of
all that have bled in unsuccessful conflicts, and to those who will ride
by his side in triumph; to those who spent their fortunes in his
quarrel, and to those who hope to gain or preserve fortunes by voting
for his return. What course are men apt to pursue when they find
themselves in a state of inextricable insolvency? Do they not endeavour
to forget their creditors in general, and think only of taking care of
themselves and their personal friends. Royalty does not extinguish human
feelings. Let us consider its difficulties, and palliate while we
anticipate its errors.

"Are these all the remaining evils which the crimes of the last twenty
years have entailed upon us and our posterity? Call me not a prophet of
evil if I foresee general laxity of principle arising out of these sad
vicissitudes and deplorable contests. You, my good Barton, will not
deny, that the extravagance, absurdity, and hypocrisy of many low
fanatics, who sheltered themselves under that unbounded liberty of
conscience which you Dissenters (I think unwisely, as well, as
erroneously) claim, have made every extraordinary pretension to piety
suspicious. The nation has been whirled in the vortex of enthusiasm,
perplexed with the discordant pretensions and controversial clamour of
various sects, till it has begun to consider indifference to religion as
a philosophical repose; and its contempt for hypocrites is increased
till it has generated a toleration, if not a partiality of
licentiousness and immorality. Infidelity (a sin unknown to our
forefathers) has lately appeared among us, not like a solitary, restless
sceptic, affecting a wish for conviction, nor in the bashful form of an
untried novelty, cautiously stealing upon public favour--but under the
licence long allowed to opinions however blasphemous or immoral, a party
has arisen, calling themselves free-thinkers, who not only deride every
ecclesiastical institution, and publicly insult religion in its
ministers, but even make the word of God an object of profane travesty
and licentious allusion. This never could have happened, the manly
feeling and good sense of Englishmen would never have permitted such
audacity, had not trifling, malicious, ignorant, and ridiculous
misapplications of the sacred writings, sunk, in too many minds, the
veneration in which they were formerly held; and thus benumbed what
ought to have been the natural sentiments of indignation at the
blasphemies of deism.

"We must admit that the return of the King is likely to introduce an
influx of foreign manners, and that the long-suspended festivities of a
court will foster an exultation bordering on extravagance. The first
is that which governs the movement of the pendulum. The number of swings
it makes per minute depends on the length of the suspending cords; a
pendulum three feet long will swing 62½ times per minute, and a
pendulum six feet long will swing 44¼ times per minute.
Whether the swings are long ones or short ones, the number per minute is
still the same. You cannot, therefore, alter the natural rate of
movement of a punka unless you pull it at both sides.

The next law is that which determines that the angles of incidence and
of reflection are equal. This in simple language means that it is useless
to expect a good downward current of air from a slow moving and heavy
punka, with long suspending cords which keep it nearly always in a
vertical position to its plane of movement. Striking the air squarely
as it does in its forward and backward movement, it throws almost
as much air upward as downward, and of course all the air that is
propelled in any other than a downward direction represents just so
much power wasted.

One more law, and then we may proceed to demonstration.

As the air weighs 0.072 lb. per cubic foot at 82° Fahrenheit, and as a
considerable quantity of air is put in motion, the power required to
drive a punka depends upon the quantity of air it puts in motion
in a given time.
The _useful effect_ is a separate matter; it depends on the amount
of air thrown in a downward direction.
To summarize; all punkas of the same size or surface, and going at
the same speed, require the same amount of pulling.Mr. Barton admitted all the evils which had resulted from overstrained
rigidity, but expressed the hopes his party entertained that Episcopacy
would not be considered as a necessary adjunct to monarchy; or, in case
of its revival, that it might be re-instated in its primitive form, and
that the objectionable parts of the Liturgy, the articles, and the
canons, might be so modified as to satisfy all parties. He spoke of the
obligations which the King would owe to the Dissenters; who he trusted
would be rewarded by being placed on an equality with the Church.

Dr. Beaumont argued, that if these late services cancelled their former
transgressions, the Dissenters would have no just cause of complaint at
being replaced in the situation which they held previously to the
rebellion. He much feared that the vindictive feelings of those who had
been despoiled, ridiculed, plundered, imprisoned, and deprived of every
earthly blessing, would produce some measures, which, though they might
be supported by the pretence of preventing further mischief, he should
lament and blame, but never justify. As to jointly establishing
Episcopacy and Presbytery, or simply tolerating both, he could never
consent to either plan politically, because he conceived one established
religion was necessary to preserve national piety; and the Church had
too many claims on the King's gratitude, and was too intimately
connected with the laws and manners of the people to be laid aside, or
reduced to the level of her opponents; and, considered as a point of
conscience, he was so firmly convinced of her conformity, in doctrine
and discipline, to apostolical institutions, ancient customs, and, above
all, to Scripture, that, though he would be the last man in the kingdom
to consent to persecute those who, through conscience, refused to
conform, he would be the first to defend her pre-eminence. As to giving
the Church a more primitive dress, by which he supposed was meant,
depriving her of her endowments, it must be remembered, that when the
ministers of the Gospel lost miraculous gifts, they became dependant on
temporal support. Though the apostles appeared as mendicants, yet while
they could heal diseases with a touch, they inspired reverence. But in
the present times men showed more observance to those who could bestow
alms than to those who required support. It should likewise be
remembered that an injunction was given to the bishops of the first
century "to use hospitality," a proof that the primitive church was not
in all respects clad in sackcloth.

Dr. Beaumont farther declared his doubts of the good effects of a
conference between the Episcopalian and Presbyterian clergy. He was
willing to sacrifice non-essentials to peace; but personal disputations
were more apt to confirm than to remove prejudices. One party would be
too querulous, the other too tenacious. Personal considerations would
mix in the dispute; difficulties would be started; objections raised,
when none, in fact, existed; and, in the heat of debate, real
improvements would be rejected, which, in the calm seclusion of the
closet, would be allowed to be important. Declaimers, conscious of their
own powers, would seek distinction rather by acuteness and
fastidiousness than by candour and placability. The enemies of the
Church would argue rather with a view to her destruction than to her
purification; and, on the other hand, her friends would gloss over her
imperfections through fear that her opponents had some latent hostility,
which the least concession on their part would bring to maturity.

He reminded Barton that as a body the Dissenters could not complain at
their being expelled from the situations in which they were placed by an
unlawful and usurped authority. He trusted that wise and moderate men
would, by conformity, avoid this evil, and prefer the true praise of
sacrificing their scruples at the shrine of peace and unity, to the
false glory of courting reputation, by first exciting and then enduring
persecution. He spoke of schism as an evil the most afflictive; the most
opposite to the spirit of the Gospel, and to the commands of its Divine
Founder, and as the greatest impediment to its universal promulgation.
He exhorted Barton to use his influence with his friends, persuading
them to acquire the only triumph over the church in their power, by
renouncing their own prejudices, when they could not make their
opponents subdue theirs, and thus prove themselves to be the truest
disciples of the Prince of Peace. "Let the contest," said he, "be only
which shall serve our common master best, by leading a life of
unpretending holiness. Schism does infinitely more harm by the enmity it
engenders, than it does good by the zeal it kindles. Controversial
ardour is rather the death than the life of piety."

Mr. Barton replied, that he was become much more sensible of the evils
attendant on a separating humour, on the gathering of parties and
forming sects from the church; their effects had proved them to be
mischiefs. He confessed that until he had imbibed prejudices against the
Liturgy, he had joined in it with as hearty fervency, as he afterwards
did in other prayers, and felt, from its imperfections, no hinderance in
his devotions. He said, that he had lost his relish for controversy, and
now took most delight in what was fundamental, the Creed, the Lord's
Prayer, and the Ten Commandments, furnishing him with matter for
meditation equally acceptable and abundant. That he less admired gifts
of utterance, and bare professions of religion, than he once did, and no
longer thought that all those who could pray movingly and fluently, and
talk well of religion, were of course saints. That he was convinced most
controversies had more need of right stating than of debating, and that
many contenders actually differed less than they supposed[1]. But still
if the conditions of conformity should require him to acknowledge the
invalidity of his present ordination, he could not consent to admit that
he had hitherto been an Uzzah, touching the ark with unhallowed hands.
In that case he would submit to the rod of chastisement, instead of
receiving the staff of pastoral cure, and if he were forbidden to
instruct others, he would discipline himself. For the sake of peace he
would attend the services of the church, in which, though he saw much
that might be improved, he discerned nothing absolutely sinful. To
preserve a Christian spirit in himself and others, he would avoid
dwelling on the restraints he suffered; but instead of repining, be
thankful for the liberty he enjoyed. They are especially suitable for
blocking narrow rocky valleys, and as such situations must, from the
character of the ground, be liable to sudden and high floods, great
care is necessary to make sufficient provision for overflow.He concluded by saying, that whoever had seen the ill-will engendered by
controversy, and the miseries incident to civil war, must think peace
cheaply purchased by any sacrifice short of conscience; and that, for
his own part, no private injuries, disappointments, or harsh treatment,
should make him obtrude his wrongs upon the public, so as to excite
clamour against the government. He had seen how soon clamour brings on
insurrection, and how partial commotion leads to universal confusion.
During such scenes, inconsiderate, daring, and worthless men, acquire an
ascendancy, and bring, by their extravagance, disgrace upon their party.
Yet, proudly ascribing their influence to a superiority of desert, they
reject the counsels of prudence, while their inordinate passions lead
them to subdue the restraints of conscience. To preserve the nation from
such misrule, he protested that he ardently wished to see the reins of
government again in the hands of prescriptive authority.


    [1] See Baxter's reflections on his early religious opinions.

    [2] The behaviour of Barton is copied from the conduct of Philip
    Henry, a non-conformist divine.


CHAP. XXVII.

    Tho' with their high wrongs I am struck to the quick,
    Yet with my nobler reason 'gainst my fury
    Do I take part; the rarer action is
    In virtue than in vengeance.

                                                 Shakspeare.

