Produced by Nick Hodson of London, England


Saved by the Lifeboat, by R.M. Ballantyne.

________________________________________________________________________
This book is mainly to describe the lifeboat service, and how private
individuals can donate the money for building a new lifeboat.

We start off with a wreck just occurring near a little seaside village,
and how the local men rushed down to the beach to do what they could to
save life.  We then move to the offices of a mean grasping shipowner,
who will do anything to avoid properly equipping his ships with what
they would need if disaster struck.  Eventually he is brought to a more
sensible state of mind, and donates money for a new lifeboat.

There is a good fund-raising chapter, and it is interesting how very
much the same today's appeals for the lifeboat service are, though of
course today's lifeboat is a very different item to the lifeboats of
over a hundred years ago.

________________________________________________________________________
SAVED BY THE LIFEBOAT, BY R.M. BALLANTYNE.


CHAPTER ONE.

THE WRECK IN THE BAY.

On a dark November afternoon, not many years ago, Captain Boyns sat
smoking his pipe in his own chimney-corner, gazing with a somewhat
anxious expression at the fire.  There was cause for anxiety, for there
raged at the time one of the fiercest storms that ever blew on the
shores of England.

The wind was howling in the chimney with wild fury; slates and tiles
were being swept off the roofs of the fishermen's huts and whirled up
into the air as if they had been chips of wood; and rain swept down and
along the ground in great sheets of water, or whirled madly in the air
and mingled with the salt spray that came direct from the English
Channel; while, high and loud above all other sounds, rose the loud
plunging roar of the mighty sea.

"I fear there will be a call before long, Nancy, for the services of the
new lifeboat," said Captain Boyns, rising and taking down an oilcloth
coat and sou'-wester, which he began to put on leisurely; "I'll go down
to the beach and see what's doin' at the Cove."

The captain was a fine specimen of a British sailor.  He was a massive
man, of iron build, and so tall that his sou'-wester almost touched the
ceiling of his low-roofed parlour.  His face was eminently masculine,
and his usual expression was a compound of sternness, gravity, and
good-humour.  He was about forty years of age, and, unlike the men of
his class at that time, wore a short curly black beard and moustache,
which, with his deeply bronzed countenance, gave him the aspect of a
foreigner.

"God help those on the sea," said Mrs Boyns, in reply to her husband's
remark; "I'm thankful, Dan, that you are on shore this night."

Nancy was a good-looking, lady-like woman of thirty-three or
thereabouts, without anything particularly noteworthy about her.  She
was busy with her needle at the time we introduce her, and relapsed into
silence, while her stalwart husband pulled on a pair of huge sea-boots.

"Did you hear a gun, Nancy?" cried the captain, as a terrific blast
shook every timber in the cottage--"there! ain't that it again?"

Nancy listened intently, but could hear nothing save the raging of the
storm.  The captain completed his toilet, and was about to leave the
room when the door suddenly burst open, and a lad of about fourteen
years of age sprang in.

"Father," he cried, his eyes flashing with excitement, "there's a brig
on the sands, and they are going to launch the new lifeboat!"

"Whereaway is't, lad?" asked Boyns, as he buttoned up his coat.

"To lee'ard of the breakwater."

"Oh Harry, don't be too venturesome," cried Mrs Boyns earnestly, as her
strapping boy was about to follow his father out into the pelting storm.

Harry, who was tall and strong for his age, and very like his father in
many respects, turning round with a hearty smile, cried, "No fear,
mother," and next instant was gone.

The scene on the beach when father and son reached it was very
impressive.  So furious was the gale that it tore up sand and gravel and
hurled it against the faces of the hardy men who dared to brave the
storm.  At times there were blasts so terrible that a wild shriek, as if
of a storm-fiend, rent the air, and flakes of foam were whirled madly
about.  But the most awful sight of all was the seething of the sea as
it advanced in a succession of great breaking "rollers" into the bay,
and churned itself white among the rocks.

Out among these billows, scarce visible in the midst of the conflicting
elements, were seen the dark hull, shattered masts, and riven sails of a
large brig, over which the waves made clear breaches continually.

In the little harbour of the seaport, which was named Covelly, a number
of strong men were engaged in hastily launching a new lifeboat, which
had been placed at that station only three weeks before, while,
clustering about the pier, and behind every sheltered nook along the
shore, were hundreds of excited spectators, not a few of whom were
women.

Much earnest talk had there been among the gossips in the town when the
lifeboat referred to arrived.  Deep, and nautically learned, were the
discussions that had been held as to her capabilities, and great the
longing for a stiffish gale in order that her powers might be fairly
tested in rough weather, for in those days lifeboats were not so
numerous as, happily, they now are.  Many of the town's-people had only
heard of such boats; few had seen, and not one had ever had experience
of them.  After her arrival the weather had continued tantalisingly calm
and fine until the day of the storm above referred to, when at length it
changed, and a gale burst forth with such violence that the bravest men
in the place shook their heads, and said that no boat of any kind
whatever could live in such a sea.

When, however, the brig before referred to was seen to rush helplessly
into the bay and to strike on the sands where the seas ran most
furiously, all lent a willing hand to launch the new lifeboat into the
harbour, and a few men, leaping in, pulled her across to the stairs near
the entrance, where a number of seamen were congregated, holding on
under the lee of the parapet-wall, and gazing anxiously at the fearful
scene outside.

"Impossible!" said one; "no boat could live in such a sea for half a
minute."

"The moment she shows her nose outside the breakwater she'll capsize,"
observed another.

"We'll have to risk it, anyhow," remarked a stout young fellow, "for I
see men in the foreshrouds of the wreck, and I, for one, won't stand by
and see them lost while we've got a lifeboat by us.  Why, wot's the use
o' callin' it a lifeboat if it can't do more than other boats?"

As he spoke there came an unusually furious gust which sent a wave right
over the pier, and well-nigh swept away one or two of them.  The
argument of the storm was more powerful than that of the young sailor--
no one responded to his appeal, and when the boat came alongside the
stairs, none moved to enter her except himself.

"That's right, Bob Gaston," cried one of the four men who had jumped
into the boat when she was launched, "I know'd you would be the first."

"And I won't be the last either," said young Gaston, looking back at the
men on the pier with a smile.

"Right, lad!" cried Captain Boyns, who came up at the instant and leaped
into the boat.  "Come, lads, we want four more hands--no, no, Harry," he
added, pushing back his son; "your arms are not yet strong enough; come
lads, we've no time to lose."

As he spoke, a faint cry was heard coming from the wreck, and it was
seen that one of the masts had gone by the board, carrying, it was
feared, several poor fellows along with it.  Instantly there was a rush
to the lifeboat!  All thought of personal danger appeared to have been
banished from the minds of the fishermen when the cry of distress broke
on their ears.  The boat was overmanned, and old Jacobs, the coxswain,
had to order several of them to go ashore again.  In another minute they
were at the mouth of the harbour, and the men paused an instant as if to
gather strength for the mortal struggle before quitting the shelter of
the breakwater, and facing the fury of wind and waves.

"Give way, lads! give way!" shouted old Jacobs, as he stood up in the
stern-sheets and grasped the steering oar.

The men bent to the oars with all their might, and the boat leaped out
into the boiling sea.  This was not one of those splendid boats which
now line the shores of the United Kingdom; nevertheless, it was a noble
craft--one of the good, stable, insubmergible and self-emptying kind
which were known as the Greathead lifeboats, and which for many years
did good service on our coasts.  It sat on the raging waters like a
swan, and although the seas broke over it again and again, it rose out
of the water buoyantly, and, with the brine pouring from its sides, kept
end-on to the seas, surmounting them or dashing right through them,
while her gallant crew strained every muscle and slowly urged her on
towards the wreck.

At first the men on shore gazed at her in breathless anxiety, expecting
every moment to see her overturned and their comrades left to perish in
the waves; but when they saw her reappear from each overwhelming billow,
their hearts rose with a rebound, and loud prolonged huzzas cheered the
lifeboat on her course.  They became silent again, however, when
distance and the intervening haze of spray and rain rendered her motions
indistinct, and their feelings of anxiety became more and more intense
as they saw her draw nearer and nearer to the wreck.

At last they reached it, but no one on the pier could tell with what
success their efforts were attended.  Through the blinding spray they
saw her faintly, now rising on the crest of a huge wave, then
overwhelmed by tons of water.  At last she appeared to get close under
the stern of the brig, and was lost to view.

"They're all gone," said a fisherman on the pier, as he wiped the salt
water off his face; "I know'd that no boat that ever wos built could
live in that sea."

"Ye don't know much yet, Bill, 'bout anything a'most," replied an old
man near him.  "Why, I've see'd boats in the East, not much better than
two planks, as could go through a worse surf than that."

"May be so," retorted Bill, "but I know--hallo! is that her coming off?"

"That's her," cried several voices--"all right, my hearties."

"Not so sure o' that," observed another of the excited band of men who
watched every motion of the little craft intently,--"there--why--I do
believe there are more in her now than went out in her, what think 'ee,
Dick?"

Dick did not reply, for by that time the boat, having got clear of the
wreck, was making for the shore, and the observers were all too intent
in using their eyes to make use of their tongues.  Coming as she did
before the wind, the progress of the lifeboat was very different from
what it had been when she set out.  In a few minutes she became
distinctly visible, careering on the crest of the waves towards the
harbour mouth, and then it was ascertained beyond doubt that some at
least, if not all, of the crew of the brig had been rescued.  A short
sharp Hurrah! burst from the men on the outlook when this became
certain, but they relapsed into deep silence again, for the return of
the boat was more critical than its departure had been.  There is much
more danger in running before a heavy sea than in pulling against it.
Every roaring billow that came into the bay near the Cove like a green
wall broke in thunder on the sands before reaching the wreck, and as it
continued its furious career towards the beach it seemed to gather fresh
strength, so that the steersman of the lifeboat had to keep her stern
carefully towards it to prevent her from turning broadside on--or, as it
is nautically expressed, broaching to.  Had she done so, the death of
all on board would have been almost inevitable.  Knowing this, the men
on the pier gazed with breathless anxiety as each wave roared under the
boat's stern, lifted it up until it appeared perpendicular; carried it
forward a few yards with fearful velocity, and then let it slip back
into the trough of the sea.

But the boat was admirably managed, and it was seen, as she drew near,
that the steering oar was held in the firm grip of Captain Boyns.  On it
came before the gale with lightning speed towards the harbour mouth; and
here a new danger had to be faced, for the entrance was narrow, and the
seas were sweeping not into but athwart it, thereby rendering the danger
of being dashed against the pier-end very great indeed.

"Missed it!" burst from several mouths as the boat flew round the head
of the breakwater and was overwhelmed by a heavy sea which rendered her
for one moment unmanageable, but almost as soon as filled she was again
emptied through the discharging tubes in her floor.

"No fear of father missing it," exclaimed young Harry Boyns, with a
proud look and flashing eye as he saw the stalwart form of the captain
standing firm in the midst of the foam with his breast pressed hard
against the steering oar.

"Back your starboard oars!  Hold water hard!" shouted several voices.

"She's round! hurrah!" cried Harry, as the boat almost leaped out of the
foam and sprang into the comparatively smooth water at the harbour
mouth.  The rowers gave vent to a short shout of triumph, and several
worn, exhausted seamen in the bottom of the boat were seen to wave their
hands feebly.  At the same time, Captain Boyns shouted in a deep loud
voice--"All saved, thank God!" as they swept towards the land.

Then did there arise from the hundreds of people assembled on and near
the pier a ringing cheer, the like of which had never been heard before
in Covelly.  Again and again it was repeated while the lifeboat shot up
on the beach, and was fairly dragged out of the sea, high and dry, by
many eager hands that were immediately afterwards extended to assist the
saved crew of the brig to land.

"Are all saved, father?" asked Harry Boyns, who was first at the side of
the boat.

"Ay, lad, every one.  Fifteen all told, includin' a woman and a little
girl.  Lend a hand to get the poor things up to our house, Harry," said
the captain, lifting the apparently inanimate form of a young girl over
the side as he spoke; "she ain't dead--only benumbed a little with the
cold."

Many hands were stretched out, but Harry thrust all others aside, and,
receiving the light form of the child in his strong arms, bore her off
to his father's cottage, leaving his comrades to attend to the wants of
the others.

"Oh Harry!" exclaimed Mrs Boyns, when her son burst into the house, "is
your father safe?"

"Ay, safe and well," he cried.  "Look sharp, mother--get hot blankets
and things ready, for here's a little girl almost dead with cold.  She
has just been rescued from a wreck--saved by the new lifeboat!"


CHAPTER TWO.

DESCRIBES A MERCHANT AND HIS GOD, AND CONCLUDES WITH "A MESSAGE FROM THE
SEA."

A close-fisted, hard-hearted, narrow-minded, poor-spirited man was John
Webster, Esquire, merchant and shipowner, of Ingot Lane, Liverpool.  And
yet he was not altogether without good points.  Indeed, it might be said
of him that if he had been reared under more favourable circumstances he
might have been an ornament to society and a blessing to his country,
for he was intelligent and sociable, and susceptible to some extent of
tender influences, when the indulging of amiable feelings did not
interfere with his private interests.  In youth he had even gone the
length of holding some good principles, and was known to have done one
or two noble things--but all this had passed away, for as he grew older
the hopeful springs were dried up, one by one, by an all-absorbing
passion--the love of money--which ultimately made him what he was, a
disgrace to the class to which he belonged, and literally (though not,
it would seem, in the eye of law) a wholesale murderer!

At first he began by holding, and frequently stating, the opinion that
the possession of much money was a most desirable thing; which
undoubtedly was--and is, and will be as long as the world lasts--
perfectly true, if the possession be accompanied with God's blessing.
But Mr Webster did not even pretend to look at the thing in that light.
He scorned to make use of the worldly man's "Oh, of course, of course,"
when that idea was sometimes suggested to him by Christian friends.  On
the contrary, he boldly and coldly asserted his belief that "God, if
there was a God at all, did not interfere in such matters, and that for
his part he would be quite satisfied to let anybody else who wanted it
have the blessing if he only got the money."  And so it pleased God to
give John Webster much money without a blessing.

The immediate result was that he fell in love with it, and, following
the natural laws attached to that vehement passion, he hugged it to his
bosom, became blind to everything else, and gave himself entirely up to
it with a self-denying devotion that robbed him of much of his natural
rest, of nearly all his graces, and most of his happiness--leaving him
with no hope in this world, save that of increasing his stores of money,
and with no hope for the world to come at all.

The abode of Mr Webster's soul was a dingy little office with dirty
little windows, a miserable little fireplace, and filthy little chairs
and tables--all which were quite in keeping with the little occupant of
the place.  The abode of his body was a palatial residence in the
suburbs of the city.  Although Mr Webster's soul was little, his body
was large--much too large indeed for the jewel which it enshrined, and
which was so terribly knocked about inside its large casket that its
usual position was awry, and it never managed to become upright by any
chance whatever.

To the former abode Mr Webster went, body and soul, one dark November
morning.  Having seated himself before his desk, he threw himself back
in his chair and began to open his letters--gazing with a placid smile,
as he did so, at the portrait of his deceased wife's father--a very
wealthy old gentleman--which hung over the fireplace.

We omitted to mention, by the way, that Mr Webster had once been
married.  This trifling little event of his life occurred when he was
about forty-eight years of age, and was a mercantile transaction of an
extremely successful kind, inasmuch as it had brought him, after
deducting lawyers' fees, stamps, duties, lost time in courtship,
wedding-tour expenses, doctor's fees, deathbed expenses, etcetera, a
clear profit of sixty thousand pounds.  To be sure there were also the
additional expenses of four years of married life, and the permanent
board, lodging, and education of a little daughter; but, all things
considered, these were scarcely worth speaking of; and in regard to the
daughter--Annie by name--she would in time become a marketable
commodity, which might, if judiciously disposed of, turn in a
considerable profit, besides being, before she was sold, a useful
machine for sewing on buttons, making tea, reading the papers aloud,
fetching hats and sticks and slippers, etcetera.  There had, however,
been a slight drawback--a sort of temporary loss--on this concern at
first, for the piece of goods became damaged, owing to her mother's
death having weighed heavily on a sensitive and loving spirit, which
found no comfort or sympathy at home, save in the devoted affection of
an old nurse named Niven.  When Annie reached the age of six years, the
doctors ordered change of air, and recommended a voyage to the West
Indies.  Their advice was followed.  Nothing was easier.  Mr Webster
had many ships on the sea.  These were of two classes.  The first class
consisted of good, new, well found and manned ships, with valuable
cargoes on board which were anxiously watched and longed for; the second
class comprised those which were old, worn-out, and unseaworthy, and
which, being insured beyond their value, might go to the bottom when
they pleased.

One of the best of the first class was selected--the _Water Lily_, A1 on
Lloyd's--and in it Annie, with her nurse, was sent to sea for the
benefit of her health.  The parting was a somewhat important event in
Mr Webster's life, for it convinced him, to his own surprise, that his
power to love a human being was not yet utterly gone!  Annie's arms
clasped convulsively round his neck at the moment of parting--her
sobbing "Good-bye, darling papa," had stirred depths which had lain
unmoved almost from the days of early manhood.  But the memory of this
passed away as soon as he turned again to gaze upon the loved
countenance of his yellow mistress.

The voyage did Annie much good.  The short residence in Demerara, while
the vessel was discharging cargo and reloading, wrought wonders, and a
letter, forwarded by a ship that sailed a short time after their arrival
in "foreign parts," told Mr Webster that he might expect to see his
daughter home again, sound and well, in a month or two at the farthest.

But, to return from this digression to the abode of Mr Webster's
soul:--

Having looked at the portrait of his late wife's father for a moment and
smiled, he glanced at the letter in his hand and frowned.  Not because
he was displeased, but because the writing was cramped and difficult to
read.  However, the merchant was accustomed to receive such letters from
seafaring men on many subjects of interest; he therefore broke the seal
and set himself patiently to decipher it.  Immediately his countenance
became ghastly pale, then it flushed up and became pale again, while he
coughed and gasped once or twice, and started up and sat down abruptly.
In fact Mr Webster exhibited all the signs of having received a severe
shock, and an eye-witness might have safely concluded that he had just
read the news of some great mercantile loss.  So it was in one sense--
but that was not the ordinary sense.

The letter in question was in the handwriting of a fussy officious
"bumble" friend of the wealthy man, who dwelt in the town of Covelly.
It ran as follows:

  "My dear Sir,--I write in great haste, and in much perturbation,
  having just heard from my servant of the wreck of your ship, the
  _Water Lily_, in Covelly Bay.  She does not seem to be quite sure,
  however, of the name, and says that the only man who has been rescued
  is scarcely able to speak, so that I do sincerely hope my domestic,
  who is a stupid old woman, may turn out to be mistaken.  I am on the
  point of hasting down to the shore to ascertain the truth for myself,
  but am obliged to write to you this brief and unsatisfactory account
  of what I have heard, in order to save the post, which is just being
  closed.  The merchants refused to receive the paper of the Deseret
  Currency Association with which the Territory was flooded; and
  its notes were depreciated instantly by more than fifty per cent.

  Many of the people were driven to barter cattle and farm-produce
for the articles they needed; and for the first time since the
establishment of the Church in Utah an audible murmur arose among
its adherents against its exactions.

The sight of their neglected farms was also calculated to bring
the poorer agriculturists to sober reflection. They perceived that the
army, which they had been taught to believe would commit every
conceivable outrage, was, on the contrary, demeaning itself with
extreme forbearance and even kindness toward them, and was supplying
an ampler market for the sale of their produce than they had enjoyed
since the years when the overland emigration to California culminated.

Nevertheless, their regrets, if entertained at all, found no public and
concerted utterance.

The authority of the Church exacted a sullen demeanor toward all
Gentiles.

The 24th of July, the great Mormon anniversary, was suffered to pass
without celebration; but its recurrence must have suggested anxious
thoughts and bitter recollections to a great part of the population.
When they remembered their enthusiastic declaration of independence
only one year before, the warlike demonstrations which followed it, the
prophecies of Young that the Lord would smite the army as he smote the
hosts of Sennacherib, the fever of hate and apprehension into which
they had been worked, and contrasted that period of excitement with
their present condition, they must, indeed, have found abundant
material for meditation.

By the emigration southward they had lost at least four months of the
most valuable time of the year. Their families had been subjected to
every variety of exposure and hardship.

Their ready money had been extorted from them by the Currency
Association, or consumed in the expenses of transporting their
movables to Lake Utah.

And more than all, the fields had so suffered by their absence, that
the crops were diminished to at least one-half the yield of an
ordinary year.

To a community the mass of which lives from hand to mouth, this was a most
serious loss.

Almost all agriculture in Utah is carried on by the aid of irrigation.

From April till October hardly a shower falls upon the soil, which
parches and cracks in the hot sunshine.

The settlements are all at the base of the mountains, where they can
take advantage of the brooks that leap down through the cañons.

They are, therefore, necessarily scattered along the line of the main
Wahsatch range, from the Roseaux River, which flows into the Salt Lake
from the north, to the Vegas of the Santa Clara,--a distance of
nearly four hundred miles.

  The labor expended in ditching has been immense, but it has been
  confined wholly to tapping the smaller streams.
  
  By damming the Jordan in Salt Lake Valley and the Sevier in Parawan
  Valley, and distributing their water over the broad bottom-lands, on
  which the only vegetation now is wild sage and greasewood, the area
  of arable ground might be quintupled; and any considerable increase
  of population will render such an undertaking indispensable; for the
  narrow strip which is fertilized by the mountain-brooks yields
scarcely more than enough to supply the present number of inhabitants.

  Nowhere does it exceed two or three miles in breadth, except along the
  eastern shore of Lake Utah, where it extends from the base of the
  mountains to the verge of the lake.
  
  Almost all cereals and vegetables attain the utmost perfection, rivalling
  the most luxuriant productions of California. Within the last few
  years the cultivation of the Chinese sugar-cane has been introduced,
and has proved successful.

  In Salt Lake City considerable attention is paid to horticulture.

Peaches, apples, and grapes grow to great size, at the same time
retaining excellent flavor. The grape which is most common is that of
the vineyards of Los Angeles.

In the vicinity of Provo an attempt has been made to cultivate the
tea-plant; and on the Santa Clara several hundred acres have been devoted
to the culture of cotton, but with imperfect success.

Flax, however, is raised in considerable quantity. The fields are
rarely fenced with rails, and almost never with stones. The
dirt-walls by which they are usually surrounded are built by driving
four posts into the ground, which support a case, ten or twelve feet
in length, made of boards. This is packed full of mud, which dries
rapidly in the intense heat of a summer noon. When it is sufficiently
dry to stand without crumbling, the posts are moved farther along and the
same operation is repeated.

The country is not dotted with farmhouses, like the agricultural
districts of the East.

The inhabitants all live in towns, or "forts," as they are more
commonly called, each of which is governed by a Bishop.

These are invariably laid out in a square, which is surrounded by a
lofty wall of mere dirt, or else of adobe.

In the smaller forts there are no streets, all the dwellings backing
upon the wall, and inclosing a quadrangular area, which is covered with
heaps of rubbish, and alive with pigs, chickens, and children. The
same stream which irrigates the fields in the vicinity supplies the
people with water for domestic purposes. There are few wells, even in the
cities.

Except in Salt Lake City and Provo, no barns are to be seen. The wheat
is usually stored in the garrets of the houses; the hay is stacked; and
the animals are herded during the winter in sheltered pastures on
the low lands.

All the people of the smaller towns are agriculturists. In none of them
is there a single shop. In Provo there are several small manufacturing
establishments, for which the abundant water-power of the Timpanogas
River, that tumbles down the neighboring cañon, furnishes great
facilities.

The principal manufacturing enterprise ever undertaken in the
Territory--that for the production of beet-sugar--proved a complete
failure.

A capital advanced by Englishmen, to the amount of more than one hundred
thousand dollars, was totally lost, and the result discouraged foreigners
from all similar investments. Rifles and revolvers are made in limited
number from the iron tires of the numerous wagons in which goods are
brought into the Valley. There are tanneries, and several distilleries
and breweries.

In the large towns there are many thriving mechanics; but elsewhere even
the blacksmith's trade is hardly self-supporting, and the carpenters
and shoemakers are all farmers, practising their trades only during
intervals from work in the fields.

The deficiency of iron, coal, and wood is the chief obstacle to the
material development of Utah.

No iron-mines have been discovered, except in the extreme southern
portion of the Territory; and the quality of the ore is so inferior,
that it is available only for the manufacture of the commonest
household utensils, such as andirons.

The principal coal-beds hitherto found are in the immediate vicinity of
Green River.

There are several sawmills, all run by water-power, scattered among
the more densely-wooded cañons; but they supply hardly lumber
enough to meet the demand,--even the sugar-boxes and boot-cases
which are thrown aside at the merchants' stores being eagerly sought
after and appropriated.

The most ordinary articles of wooden furniture command extravagant
prices.

Nowhere is the absence of trees, the utter desolation of the scenery,
more impressive than in a view from the southern shore of the Great
Salt Lake. The broad plain which intervenes between its margin and the
foot of the Wahsatch Range is almost entirely lost sight of; the
mountain-slopes, their summits flecked with snow, seem to descend into
water on every side except the northern, on which the blue line of the
horizon is interrupted only by Antelope Island. The prospect in
that direction is apparently as illimitable as from the shore of
an ocean.

The sky is almost invariably clear, and the water intensely blue, except
where it dashes over fragments of rock that have fallen from some
adjacent cliff, or where a wave, more aspiring than its fellows,
overreaches itself and breaks into a thin line of foam.

Through a gap in the ranges on the west, the line of the Great Desert
is dimly visible.
The beach of the lake is marked by a broad belt of fine sand, the
grains of which are all globular.

Along its upper margin is a rank growth of reeds and salt grass. Swarms
of tiny flies cover the surface of every half-evaporated pool, and
a few white sea-gulls are drifting on the swells. Nowhere is there a
sign of refreshing verdure except on the distant mountainsides,
where patches of green grass glow in the sunlight among the vast
fields of sage.

The buildings throughout the entire Territory are, almost without
exception, of adobe. The brick is of a uniform drab color, more
pleasing to the eye than the reddish hue of the adobes of New Mexico
or the buff tinge of many of those in California. In size it is
about double that commonly used in the States.

The clay, also, is of very superior quality. The principal stone building
in the Territory is the Capitol, at Fillmore, one hundred and
fifty miles south of Salt Lake City.

The design of the architect is for a very magnificent edifice in the
shape of a Greek cross, with a rotunda sixty feet in diameter. Only one
wing has been completed, but this is spacious enough to furnish all
needful accommodation.

The material is rough-hammered sandstone, of an intense red.

The plan of Salt Lake City is an index to that of all the principal
towns.

It is divided into squares, each side of which is forty rods in length.
The streets are more than a hundred feet wide, and are all unpaved.

There is not a single sidewalk of brick, stone, or plank. The situation
is well chosen, being directly at the foot of the southern slope of a
spur which juts out from the main Wahsatch range. Less than twenty miles
from the city, almost overshadowing it, are peaks which rise to the
altitude of nearly twelve thousand feet, from which the snow of
course never disappears.

But during the summer months, when scarcely a shower falls upon the valley,
its drifts become dun-colored with dust from the friable soil
below, and present an aspect similar to that of the Pyrenees at the
same season.

During most of the year, the rest of the mountains which encircle the
Valley are also capped with snow. The residences of Young and Kimball
are situated on almost the highest ground within the city-limits, and the
land slopes gradually down from them to the south, east, and west. This
inclination suggested the mode of supplying the city with water. A
mountain-brook, pure and cold, bubbling from under snow-drifts, is
guided from this highland down the gently sloping streets in gutters
adjoining both the sidewalks.

A municipal ordinance imposes severe penalties on any one who fouls
it.
Young's buildings and gardens occupy an entire square, ten acres in
extent, as do also Kimball's. They consist, first, of the Mansion, a
spacious two-storied building, in the style of the Yankee-Grecian
villas which infest New England towns, with piazzas supported by Doric
columns, and a cupola which is surmounted by a beehive, the peculiar
emblem of the Mormons, although there is not a single honey-bee in
the Territory.

This, like all its companions, is of adobe, but it is coated with
plaster, and painted white. Next to it is a small building, used formerly
as an office, in which the temporal business of the Governor was transacted.
By its side stands another office, on the same model, but on a
larger scale, devoted to the business of the President of the Church.

These are connected by passage-ways both with the Mansion and with the
Lion-House, which is the most westerly of the group, and is the
finest building in the Territory, having cost nearly eighty thousand
dollars. Like both the offices, it stands with a gable toward the street,
and the plaster with which it is covered has a light buff tinge.
The architecture is Elizabethan. Above a porch in front is the figure of
a recumbent lion, hewn in sandstone. On each of the sides, which overlook
the gardens, ten little windows project from the roof just above the
eaves. The whole square is surrounded by a wall of cobblestones and mortar,
ten or twelve feet in height, strengthened by buttresses at intervals
of forty or fifty feet. Massive plank gates bar the entrances.

In one corner is the Tithing-Office, where the faithful render their
reluctant tribute to the Lord. Only the swift city-creek intervenes between
this square and Kimball's, which is encompassed by a similar wall. His
buildings have no pretensions to architectural merit, being merely
rough piles of adobe scattered irregularly all over the grounds.

The Temple Square is in the immediate neighborhood, and is of the
same size. It is inclosed by a wall even more massive than the
others, plastered and divided into panels. Near its southwestern
corner stands the Tabernacle, a long, one-storied building, with
an immense roof, containing a hall which will hold three thousand
people.

There the Mormon religious services are conducted during the winter
months; but throughout the summer the usual place of gathering to
listen to the sermons is in "boweries," so called, which are
constructed by planting posts in the ground and weaving over them
a flat roof of willow-twigs.

An excavation near the centre of the square, partially filled with dirt
previously to the exodus to Provo, marks the spot where the Temple is
to rise. It is intended that this edifice shall infinitely surpass
in magnificence its predecessor at Nauvoo. The design purports to be
a revelation from heaven, and, if so, must have emanated from some
one of the Gothic architects of the Middle Ages whose taste had
become bewildered by his residence among the spheres; for the turrets
are to be surmounted by figures of sun, moon, and stars, and the
whole building bedecked with such celestial emblems.

Only part of the foundation-wall has yet been laid, but it sinks
thirty feet deep and is eight feet broad at the surface of the ground.
Its length, according to the heavenly plan, is to be two hundred
and twenty feet, and its width one hundred and fifty feet.

Beside the Tabernacle and the incipient Temple, the only considerable
building within the square is the Endowment-House, where those rites
are celebrated which bind a member to fidelity to the Church under
penalty of death, and admit him to the privilege of polygamy.

  The other principal buildings within the city are the Council-House,
  a square pile of sandstone, once used as the Capitol,--and the County
  Court-House, yet unfinished, above which rises a cupola covered
  with tin. Most of the houses in the immediate vicinity of Young's are
  two stories high, for that is the aristocratic quarter of the town.
  In the outskirts, however, they never exceed one story, and resemble
  in dimensions the innumerable cobblers'-shops of Eastern
  Massachusetts.

  

None of the streets have names, except those which bound the Temple Square
and are known as North, South, East, and West Temple Streets, and
also the broad avenue which receives the road from Emigration Cañon
and is called Emigration Street.

Except on East Temple or Main Street, which is the business street
of the city, the houses are all built at least twenty feet back
from the sidewalk, and to each one is attached a considerable plot of
ground.

There is no provision for lighting the streets at night.

The cotton-wood trees along the borders of the gutters have attained a
considerable growth during the eight or nine years since they were
planted, and afford an agreeable shade to all the sidewalks.

Around a great portion of the city stretches a mud wall with embrasures
and loopholes for musketry, which was built under Young's direction
in 1853, ostensibly to guard against Indian attacks, but really to keep
the people busy and prevent their murmuring. To the east of this runs
a narrow canal, which was dug by the voluntary labor of the Saints,
nearly fifteen miles to Cottonwood Creek, for the transportation
of stone to be used in building the Temple.

Just outside the city-limits, near the northeastern corner of the
wall, lies the Cemetery, on a piece of undulating ground traversed by
deep gullies, and unadorned even by a solitary tree,--the only vegetation
sprouting out of its parched soil being a melancholy crop of weeds
interspersed with languid sunflowers. The disproportion between the
deaths of adults and those of children, which has been a subject for
comment by every writer on Mormonism, is peculiarly noticeable there.

Most of the graves are indicated only by rough boards, on which are scrawled
rudely, with pencil or paint, the names and ages of the dead, and
usually also verses from the Bible and scraps of poetry; but among all
the inscriptions it is remarkable that there is not a single quotation
from the "Book of Mormon."

The graves are totally neglected after the bodies are consigned to them.
Nowhere has a shrub or a flower been planted by any affectionate
hand, except in one little corner of the inclosure which is assigned to
the Gentiles, between whose dust and that of the Mormons there
seems to exist a distinction like that which prevails in Catholic
countries between the ashes of heretics and those of faithful
churchmen.

The mode of burial is singularly careless. A funeral procession is rarely
seen; and such instances are mentioned by travellers as that of a
father bearing to the grave the coffin of his own child upon his
shoulder.

The interiors of the houses are as neat as could be expected, considering
the extent of the families. Very often, three wives, one husband,
and half-a-dozen children will be huddled together in a hovel containing
only two habitable rooms,--an arrangement of course subversive of
decency.

Few people are able to purchase carpets, and their furniture is of the
coarsest and commonest kind.

There are few, if any, families which maintain servants.

In that of Brigham Young, each woman has a room assigned her, for the
neatness of which she is herself responsible;--Young's own chamber is
in the rear of the office of the President of the Church, upon the
ground floor.

The precise number of the female inmates can often be computed from the
exterior of the houses. These being frequently divided into compartments,
each with its own entrance from the yard, and its own chimney, and being
generally only one story in height, the number of doors is an exact
index to that of residents.

The domestic habits of the people vary greatly according to their nativity.
Of the forty-five thousand inhabitants of the Territory, at least
one-half are immigrants from England and Wales,--the scum of the
manufacturing towns and mining districts, so superstitious as to
have been capable of imbibing the Mormon faith,--though between what
is preached in Great Britain and what is practised in America there
exists a wide difference,--and so destitute in circumstances as to
have been incapable of deteriorating their fortunes by emigration.
Possibly one-fifth are Danes, Swedes, and Norwegians. This allows a
remainder of three-tenths for the native American element.

An Irishman or a German is rarely found.

Of the Americans, by far the greater proportion were born in the
Northeastern States; and the three principal characters in the history
of the Church--Smith, Young, and Kimball--all originated in Vermont,
but were reared in Western New York, a region which has been the hot-bed
of American _isms_ from the discovery of the Golden Bible to the
outbreak of the Rochester rappings.

This American element maintains, in all affairs of the Church, its
natural political ascendency.

Of the twelve Apostles only one is a foreigner, and among the rest of the
ecclesiastical dignitaries the proportion is not very different.

The Scandinavian Mormons are very clannish in their disposition. They
occupy some settlements exclusively, and in Salt Lake City there
is one quarter tenanted wholly by them, and nicknamed "Denmark," just
as that portion of Cincinnati monopolized by Germans is known as "over
the Rhine." Like their English and Welsh associates, they belonged to
the lowest classes of the mechanics and peasantry of their native
countries.
They are all clownish and brutal. Their women work in the fields.
In their houses and gardens there is no symptom of taste, or of
the recollection of former and more innocent days; while in every
cottage owned by Americans there is visible, at least, a clock, or
a pair of China vases, or a rude picture, which once held a similar
position in some farm-house in New England.

It is not intended to discuss here the cardinal points of the Mormon
faith, for the subject is too extensive for the limits of this
article.
A great misapprehension, however, prevails concerning polygamy,
that it was one of the original doctrines of the Church. On the
contrary, it was expressly prohibited in the Book of Mormon, which
declares:--
"Behold, David and Solomon truly had many wives and concubines, which
thing was abominable before me, saith the Lord. ... Wherefore hearken
to the word of the Lord: There shall not any man among you have save
it be one wife, and concubines he shall have none; for I, the Lord
God, delight in the chastity of women."--p. 118.

Up to this date, there have been four eras in the history of polygamy
among the Mormons: the first, from about 1833 to 1843, during which it
was practised stealthily only by those Church leaders to whom it was
considered prudent to impart the secret; the second, from 1843 to 1852,
during which its existence was known to the Church, but denied to the
world; the third, from 1852 to 1856, during which it was left
to the discretion of individuals whether to adopt its practice or not;
and the fourth, since 1856, when its acceptance was inculcated as
essential to happiness in this world and salvation in the next.

It was the inevitable tendency of Mormonism, like every other religious
delusion, from the advent of John of Leyden to that of the Spiritualists,
to disturb the natural relation of the sexes under the Christian
dispensation. The mystery surrounding the subject constituted the most
attractive charm of the religion, both to the initiated and to
those who were seeking to be admitted to the secrets of the Endowment,--for
the Endowed alone possess the privilege of a plurality of wives.

Meanwhile, the loading of the _Swordfish_ went on--also the pumping of
her.  That same day she was visited by a surveyor from the Underwriters'
Association, who found her only five feet clear above water, and still
taking in cargo.  That gentleman called in another surveyor to a
consultation, who agreed with him in pronouncing her overladen.  She was
represented as such to the local Underwriters' Association for which the
surveyor acted, but as the _Swordfish_ was insured in London and not
with them, the Liverpool underwriters did not consider themselves called
upon to interfere.  Their surveyor, however, visited the vessel again, a
few days later, when he found her "only four feet clear," and declared
that, so far from going to Bombay, he should not like to attempt to
cross to Dublin in her in anything like rough weather.

Now it must be observed that all these consultations and investigations
took place in a quiet way.  To the public eye all was "fair and above
board."  Few among the thousands who visited the docks knew much about
deep loading; still less about adequate equipping.  They saw nought but
a "noble ship," well painted, washed, gilded, and varnished, taking
merchandise into her insatiable hold, while the "Yo-heave-ho" of the
seamen rang out cheerily to the rattling accompaniment of chains and
windlass.  Many other ships were there, similarly treated, equally
beautiful, and quite as worthy of the titles "good" and "noble" as the
whited sepulchre is to be styled pure.

A few days before the _Swordfish_ was ready for sea, a new captain was
sent down to her.  This captain was not a "bad man" in the worst sense
of that term--neither was he a "good" one.  Vigour, courage, resolution
when acting in accordance with his inclinations--these were among his
characteristics.  But he was a reckless man, in want of money, out of
employment, and without an appreciable conscience.  In the
circumstances, he was glad to get anything to do, and had been so long
ashore and "in trouble," that he would probably have agreed to take
command of and go to sea in a washing-tub if part paid beforehand for
doing so.

Nevertheless, even this man (Captain Phelps by name) felt some degree of
nervous anxiety on getting on board and examining the state of the ship.
On further acquaintance with her, he was so dissatisfied that he also
resolved to throw up his appointment.  But he had obtained the berth
through the influence of a friend who happened to be acquainted with Mr
Webster.  This "friend" wrote him a stern letter, saying, if he ventured
to do as he proposed, he should never have a ship out of Liverpool
again, as long as he (the friend?) could prevent it!

Captain Phelps was one of those angry men of iron mould, who appear to
take pleasure in daring Fate to do her worst.  On receipt of the letter,
he swore with an awful oath that he would now go to sea in the
_Swordfish_, even if he knew she would go to the bottom in twenty-four
hours after weighing anchor.  Accordingly, having intrenched himself
behind a wall of moral adamant, he went about with quiet indifference,
and let things take their course.  He made no objection whatever when,
in addition to the loading already in the ship, the agents added a deck
cargo of some massive pieces of machinery, weighing thirty tons, and a
supply of coals, the proper receptacle for which below had been filled
with iron goods.  Neither did he utter a word when--after the vessel had
been taken out into the stream by the riggers--he and the owner, agents,
pilot, and crew (only six of which last were A.B.'s), were taken off to
her in a tug and put on board with orders to sail immediately.

Only a few passengers were going.  These were already on board, but some
of their friends went off in the tug to bid them a last farewell.

This was a sad scene, but the captain regarded it with stoical
indifference.  There was a stout, hale old Indian officer going out on a
pleasure trip to his beloved East, and a daughter of the same whom he
hoped to get married "offhand, comfortably there."  There was a sick
nephew of the old officer, going the voyage for the benefit of his
health, on whose wan countenance consumption, if not death, had
evidently set a deep mark.  There were, also, a nurse and a lady's-maid,
and two girls of ten or thirteen years of age--sisters--who were going
to join their father and mother, besides one or two others.  Earnest
loving words passed kindly between these and their relatives and friends
as the moment of parting drew near.

"Don't forget to remember me to Coleman and the rest of `ours,'" cried a
stout elderly man, waving his hand as the tug moved off.

"That I won't, and I shall expect to shake you by the hand again, old
fellow, in a year or two."

"You'll never see him again," thought Captain Phelps, as he stood with
compressed lip and frowning eye on the quarter-deck.

"Good-bye, darling Nelly," cried a lady to one of the sobbing girls from
whom she was parting; "remember the message to mamma."

"Oh! yes," exclaimed the child, trying to look bright, "and we won't be
very long of coming back again."

"You'll never come back again," thought the captain, and he sighed
_very_ slightly as the thought passed through his brain.

"Look alive there, lads," exclaimed the pilot, as the tug sheared away.

Soon the anchor was at the bows, the sails were shaken out, and the
_Swordfish_ began her voyage.

"There's not a piece of spare rope aboard, sir," said the first mate,
coming up to the captain with a blank look; "we can't even get enough to
cat and fish the anchor."

"You can unreeve the tops'l halyards," replied the captain, quietly.

This was done, and the anchor was secured therewith.

"How much water in the hold?" asked the captain.

"Three feet, sir; the carpenter has just sounded.  It seems that the
riggers were at work on the pumps when we came out in the tug, but were
stopped by the agents before we got alongside.  I fear she is very
leaky, sir," said the mate.

"I _know_ she is," replied the captain; "keep the men at the pumps."

That night the weather became what sailors call "dirty," and next
morning it was found that the water had mounted to 4 feet 10 inches.
The pumps had become almost unworkable, being choked with sand, and it
became evident that the voyage thus inauspiciously begun would very soon
be ended.  During the day the "dirty" weather became gale, so that,
although the wind was fair, Captain Phelps determined to run to the
nearest port for shelter.  With a "good ship" this might have been done
easily enough--many a vessel does it during every gale that visits our
stormy shores--but the _Swordfish_ was by this time getting water-logged
and unmanageable.  She drifted helplessly before the gale, and the heavy
seas broke over her continually, sweeping away everything moveable.
Another night passed, and next morning--Sunday--it became plain that she
was settling down so the captain gave orders to get out the long-boat,
and told the passengers to get ready.  Day had broken some time before
this, but the weather was still so thick that nothing could be seen.

"Take a cast of the lead," said the captain.

"Ay, ay, sir," was the prompt reply, but before the order could be
obeyed, the roar of breakers was heard above the howling of the storm,
and the shout, "Land on the port bow!" was instantly followed by "Down
with the helm!" Bullion needed no servant to watch with him. The
ghosts were laid.

[To be concluded in the next number.]
* * * * *

INSCRIPTION
FOR AN ALMS-CHEST MADE OF CAMPHOR-WOOD.

This fragrant box that breathes of India's balms Hath one more
fragrance, for it asketh alms; But, though 'tis sweet and blessed
to receive, You know who said, "It is more blest to give":
Give, then, receive His blessing,--and for me Thy silent boon
sufficient blessing be!

If Ceylon's isle, that bears the bleeding trees, With any perfume
load the Orient breeze,-- If Heber's Muse, by Ceylon as he sailed,
A pleasant odor from the shore inhaled,-- More lives in me; for
underneath my lid A sweetness as of sacrifice is hid.

Thou gentle almoner, in passing by, Smell of my wood, and scan me with
thine eye;-- I, too, from Ceylon bear a spicy breath That might put
warmness in the lungs of death; A simple chest of scented wood I
seem, But, oh! within me lurks a golden beam,--
A beam celestial, and a silver din, As though imprisoned angels played
within; Hushed in my heart my fragrant secret dwells; If thou
wouldst learn it, Paul of Tarsus tells;-- No jangled brass nor
tinkling cymbal sound, For in my bosom Charity is found.

* * * * *

A TRIP TO CUBA.

THE DEPARTURE.

Why one leaves home at all is a question that travellers are sure,
sooner or later, to ask themselves,--I mean, pleasure-travellers.

Home, where one has the "Transcript" every night, and the "Autocrat"
every month, opera, theatre, circus, and good society, in constant
rotation,--home, where everybody knows us, and the little good there
is to know about us,--finally, home, as seen regretfully for the last
time, with the gushing of long frozen friendships, the priceless
kisses of children, and the last sad look at dear baby's pale face
through the window-pane,--well, all this is left behind, and we review
it as a dream, while the railroad-train hurries us along to the spot where
we are to leave, not only this, but Winter, rude tyrant, with all
our precious hostages in his grasp. Soon the swift motion lulls our
brains into the accustomed muddle; we seem to be dragged along
like a miserable thread pulled through the eye of an ever-lasting
needle,--through and through, and never through,--while here and
there, like painful knots, the _dépôts_ stop us, the poor thread is
arrested for a minute, and then the pulling begins again. Or, in another
dream, we are like fugitives threading the gauntlet of the grim forests,
while the ice-bound trees essay a charge of bayonets on either side;
but, under the guidance of our fiery Mercury, we pass them as safely as
ancient Priam passed the outposts of the Greeks,--and New York, as
hospitable as Achilles, receives us in its mighty tent.

Here we await the "Karnak," the British Mail Company's new screw-steamer,
bound for Havana, _viâ_ Nassau. At length comes the welcome order
to "be on board."

We betake ourselves thither,--the anchor is weighed, the gun fired, and
we take leave of our native land with a patriotic pang, which soon
gives place to severer spasms.

I do not know why all celebrated people who write books of travels
begin by describing their days of sea-sickness.

Dickens, George Combe, Fanny Kemble, Mrs. Stowe, Miss Bremer, and many
others, have opened in like manner their valuable remarks on foreign
countries. While intending to avail myself of their privilege and example,
I would, nevertheless, suggest, for those who may come after me, that
the subject of sea-sickness should be embalmed in science, and enshrined
in the crypt of some modern encyclopaedia, so that future writers
should refer to it only as the Pang Unspeakable, for which _vide_
Ripley and Dana, vol. ---, page ---. But, as I have already said,
I shall speak of sea-sickness in a hurried and picturesque manner,
as follows:--
Who are these that sit by the long dinner-table in the forward
cabin, with a most unusual lack of interest in the bill of fare?A tremendous billow met her.  "Steady lads, give way!" cried the
coxswain, on whose steering everything depended at the first plunge.
The short oars cracked as the men strained every muscle, and shot the
boat, not over, but right through the falling deluge.  Of course it was
filled, but the discharging tubes freed it in a few seconds, and the
cheers of the spectators had scarce burst forth when she rushed out to
meet the succeeding breaker.  There was another breathless moment, when
hundreds of men, eager to vent their surcharged breast in another cheer,
could only gaze and gasp--then a roar, a world of falling foam, and the
lifeboat was submerged.  But the gallant coxswain met the shock straight
as an arrow, cleft the billow, and leaped onward--irresistibly onward--
over, through, and in the teeth of raging wind and waves, until they
were fairly out and dancing on the chaotic ocean.

But, just before this took place, the captain of the _Swordfish_,
ignorant of the fact that the lifeboat was hastening to the rescue,
unfortunately took a fatal step.  Believing that no boat would venture
to put off in such a gale, he ordered the ship's launch to be lowered.
This was done, but it was immediately upset and stove against the side.
Then the jollyboat was lowered, and nine men and the captain got into
it.  The old Indian officer, with his daughter and all the women and
children, were also, with great difficulty, put on board of it.

Captain Phelps was cool and self-possessed in that hour of danger.  He
steered the boat with consummate skill, and succeeded in keeping her
afloat for some time.  On she rushed, as if driven by an irresistible
impulse, amid the cheers of the crowd, and the prayers of many that she
might safely reach the land.  The brave fellows who manned her struggled
hard and well, but in vain.  When the boat was little more three hundred
yards from the shore an immense breaker overtook her.

"She'll be swamped!"  "She's gone!"  "God save her!" and similar cries
burst from those on shore.  Next moment the wave had the boat in its
powerful grasp, tossed her on its crest, whirled her round, and turned
her keel up, leaving her freight of human beings struggling in the sea.

Oh! it was a terrible thing for the thousands on land to stand so close
to those drowning men and women without the power of stretching out a
hand to save!  No one could get near them, although they were so near.
They were tossed like straws on the raging surf.  Now hurled on the
crest of a wave, now sucked into the hollow beneath, and overwhelmed
again and again.  The frail ones of the hapless crew soon perished.  The
strong men struggled on with desperate energy to reach the shore.  Three
of them seized the keel of the boat, but three times were they driven
from their hold by the force of the seas.  Two or three caught at the
floating oars, but most of them were soon carried away by the
under-current.  The captain, however, with five or six of the men, still
struggled powerfully for life, and succeeded in swimming close to the
beach.

Up to this point there was one of the spectators who had stood behind
the shelter of a bush, surveying, with sorrowful countenance, the tragic
scene.  He was a short, but fine-looking and very athletic man--a
champion Cornish wrestler, named William Jeff.  He was a first-rate
boatman, and a bold swimmer.  Fortunately he also possessed a generous,
daring heart.  When this man saw Captain Phelps near the shore, he
sprang forward, dashed into the surf, at the imminent risk of his life,
and caught the captain by the hair.  The retreating water well-nigh
swept the brave rescuer away, but other men of the town, fearless like
himself, leaped forward, joined hands, caught hold of Jeff, and hauled
him safe ashore along with the captain, who was carried away in a state
of insensibility.  Again and again, at the risk of his life, did the
champion wrestler wrestle with the waves and conquer them!  Aided by his
daring comrades he dragged three others from the jaws of death.  Of
those who entered the jolly-boat of the _Swordfish_, only five reached
the land.  These were all sailors, and one of them, Captain Phelps, was
so much exhausted by his exertions that, notwithstanding all that
cordials, rubbing, and medical skill could effect, he sank in a few
minutes, and died.

But while this was occurring on the beach, another scene of disaster was
taking place at the wreck.  The lifeboat, after a severe pull of more
than an hour, reached the vessel.  As she was passing under her stern a
great sea struck the boat and immediately capsized her.  All on board
were at once thrown out.  The boat was, however, one of those
self-righting crafts, which had just at that time been introduced.  She
immediately righted, emptied herself, and the crew climbed into her by
means of the life-lines festooned round her sides; but the brave
coxswain was jammed under her by some wreck, and nearly lost his life--
having to dive three or four times before he could extricate himself.
When at last dragged into the boat by his comrades he was apparently
dead.  It was then discovered that the man who had pulled the stroke oar
had been swept overboard and carried away.  His companions believed him
to be lost, but he had on one of the cork life-belts of the Lifeboat
Institution, and was by it floated to the shore, where a brave fellow
swam his horse out through the surf and rescued him.

Meanwhile, the lifeboat men were so much injured and exhausted that they
were utterly incapable of making any attempt to rescue those who
remained of the crew of the _Swordfish_.  It was as much as they could
do to guide the boat again towards the shore, steered by the second
coxswain, who, although scarcely able to stand, performed his duty with
consummate skill.

Nothing of all this could be seen by the thousands on shore, owing to
the spray which thickened the atmosphere, and the distance of the wreck.
But when the lifeboat came in sight they soon perceived that something
was wrong, and when she drew near they rushed to meet her.  Dismay
filled every breast when they saw the coxswain carried out apparently
dead, with a stream of blood trickling from a wound in his temple, and
learned from the worn-out and disabled crew that no rescue had been
effected.  Immediately the local secretary before mentioned, who had
been all this time caring for those already rescued, and preparing for
those expected, called for a volunteer crew, and the second coxswain at
once shouted, "I'll go again, sir!"  This man's bravery produced a
wonderful moral effect.  He was not permitted to go, being already too
much exhausted, but his example caused volunteers to come forward
promptly.  Among them were men of the coastguard, a body to which the
country is deeply indebted for annually saving many lives.  Several
gentlemen of the town also volunteered.  With the new crew, and the
chief officer of the coastguard at the helm, the noble boat was launched
a second time.

The struggle which followed was tremendous, for they had to pull direct
to windward in the teeth of wind and sea.  Sometimes the boat would rise
almost perpendicularly to the waves, and the spectators gazed with bated
breath, fearing that she must turn over; then she would gain a yard or
two, and again be checked.  Thus, inch by inch, they advanced until the
wreck was reached, and the sailors were successfully taken off.  But
this was not accomplished without damage to the rescuers, one of whom
had three ribs broken, while others were more or less injured.

Soon the boat was seen making once more for the beach.  On she came on
the wings of the wind.  As she drew near, the people crowded towards her
as far as the angry sea would permit.

"How many saved?" was the anxious question.

As the boat rushed forward, high on the crest of a tumultuous billow,
the bowman stood up and shouted, "Nine saved!" and in another moment,
amid the ringing cheers of the vast multitude, the lifeboat leaped upon
the sand with the rescued men!

"Nine saved!"  A pleasant piece of news that was to be read next day in
the papers by those who contributed to place that lifeboat on the coast;
for nine souls saved implies many more souls gladdened and filled with
unutterable gratitude to Almighty God.

But "Twenty lost!"  A dismal piece of news this to those at whose door
the murders will lie till the day of doom.  Even John Webster, Esquire,
grew pale when he heard of it, and his hard heart beat harder than usual
against his iron ribs as he sat in the habitation of his soul and gazed
at his deceased wife's father over the chimney-piece, until he almost
thought the canvas image frowned upon him.

There was more, however, behind these twenty lost lives than Mr Webster
dreamed of.  The links in the chains of Providence are curiously
intermingled, and it is impossible to say, when one of them gives way,
which, or how many, will fall along with it, as the next chapter will
show.


CHAPTER FIVE.

THINGS BECOME SHAKY, SO DOES MR WEBSTER, AND THE RESULTS ARE AN ILLNESS
AND A VOYAGE.

The old Indian officer who was drowned, as we have seen, in the wreck of
the _Swordfish_, was in no way connected with Mr John Webster.  In
fact, the latter gentleman read his name in the list of those lost with
feelings of comparative indifference.  He was "very sorry indeed," as he
himself expressed it, that so many human beings had been swept off the
stage of time by that "unfortunate wreck," but it did not add to his
sorrow that an old gentleman, whom he had never seen or heard of before,
was numbered with the drowned.  Had he foreseen the influence that the
death of that old officer was to have on his own fortunes, he might have
looked a little more anxiously at the announcement of it.  But Colonel
Green--that was his name--was nothing to John Webster.  What mattered
his death or life to him?  He was, no doubt, a rich old fellow, who had
lived in the East Indies when things were conducted in a rather loose
style, and when unscrupulous men in power had opportunities of
feathering their nests well; but even although that was true it mattered
not, for all Colonel Green's fortune, if thrown into the pile or taken
from it, would scarcely have made an appreciable difference in the
wealth of the great firm of Webster and Company.  Not that "Company" had
anything to do with it, for there was no Company.  There had been one
once, but he had long ago passed into the realms where gold has no
value.

There was, however, a very large and important firm in Liverpool which
was deeply interested in the life of Colonel Green, for he had long been
a sleeping partner of the firm, and had, during a course of years,
become so deeply indebted to it that the other partners were beginning
to feel uneasy about him.  Messrs. Wentworth and Hodge would have given
a good deal to have got rid of their sleeping partner, but Colonel Green
cared not a straw for Wentworth, nor a fig for Hodge, so he went on in
his own way until the _Swordfish_ was wrecked, when he went the way of
all flesh, and Wentworth and Hodge discovered that, whatever riches he,
Colonel Green, might at one time have possessed, he left nothing behind
him except a number of heavy debts.

This was serious, because the firm had been rather infirm for some years
past, and the consequences of the colonel's death were, that it became
still more shaky, and finally came down.  Now, it is a well understood
fact that men cannot fall alone.  You cannot remove a small prop from a
large old tree without running the risk of causing the old tree to fall
and carry a few of the neighbouring trees, with a host of branches,
creeping plants, and parasites, along with it.  Especially is this the
case in the mercantile world.  The death of Colonel Green was a calamity
only to a few tradesmen, but the fall of Wentworth and Company was a
much more serious matter, because that firm was an important prop to the
much greater firm of Dalgetty and Son, which immediately shook in its
shoes, and also went down, spreading ruin and consternation in the city.
Now, it happened that Dalgetty and Son had extensive dealings with
Webster and Company, and their fall involved the latter so deeply, that,
despite their great wealth, their idolatrous head was compelled to
puzzle his brain considerably in order to see his way out of his
difficulties.

But the more he looked, the less he saw of a favourable nature.  Some of
his evil practices also had of late begun to shed their legitimate fruit
on John Webster, and to teach him something of the meaning of those
words, "Be sure your sins shall find you out."  This complicated matters
considerably.  He consulted his cash-books, bank-books, bill-books,
sales-books, order-books, ledgers, etcetera, etcetera, again and again,
for hours at a time, without arriving at any satisfactory result.  He
went to his diminutive office early in the morning, and sat there late
at night; and did not, by so doing, improve his finances a whit,
although he succeeded in materially injuring his health.  He worried the
life of poor meek Grinder to such an extent that that unfortunate man
went home one night and told his wife he meant to commit suicide, begged
her to go out and purchase a quart of laudanum for that purpose at the
fishmonger's, and was not finally induced to give up, or at least to
delay, his rash purpose, until he had swallowed a tumbler of mulled port
wine and gone to sleep with a bottle of hot water at his feet!  In
short, Mr Webster did all that it was possible for a man to do in order
to retrieve his fortunes--all except pray, and commit his affairs into
the hands of his Maker; _that_ he held to be utterly ridiculous.  To
make use of God's winds, and waves, and natural laws, and the physical
and mental powers which had been given him, for the furtherance of his
designs, was quite natural, he said; but to make use of God's word and
His promises--tut! tut! he said, that was foolishness.

However that may be, the end was, that Webster and Company became very
shaky.  They did not, indeed, go into the _Gazette_, but they got into
very deep water; and the principal, ere long, having overwrought all his
powers, was stricken with a raging fever.

It was then that John Webster found his god to be anything but a
comforter, for it sat upon him like a nightmare; and poor Annie, who,
assisted by Mrs Niven, was his constant and devoted nurse, was
horrified by the terrible forms in which the golden idol assailed him.
That fever became to him the philosopher's stone.  Everything was
transmuted by it into gold.  The counting of guineas was the poor man's
sole occupation from morning till night, and the numbers to which he
attained were sometimes quite bewildering; but he invariably lost the
thread at a certain point, and, with a weary sigh, began over again at
the beginning.  The bed curtains became golden tissue, the quilt golden
filigree, the posts golden masts and yards and bowsprits, which now
receded from him to immeasurable distance, and anon advanced, until he
cried out and put up his hands to shield his face from harm; but,
whether they advanced or retired, they invariably ended by being
wrecked, and he was left in the raging sea surrounded by drowning men,
with whom he grappled and fought like a demon, insomuch that it was
found necessary at one time to have a strong man in an adjoining room,
to be ready to come in when summoned, and hold him down.  Gold, gold,
gold was the subject of his thoughts--the theme of his ravings--at that
time.  He must have read, at some period of his life, and been much
impressed by, Hood's celebrated poem on that subject, for he was
constantly quoting scraps of it.

"Why don't you help me?" he would cry at times, turning fiercely to his
daughter.  "How can I remember it if I am not helped?  I have counted it
all up--one, two, three, on to millions, and billions, and trillions of
gold, gold, gold, hammered and rolled, bought and sold, scattered and
doled--there, I've lost it again!  You are constantly setting me wrong.
All the things about me are gold, and the very food you gave me
yesterday was gold.  Oh! how sick I am of this gold!  Why don't you take
it away from me?"

And then he would fall into some other train of thought, in which his
god, as before, would take the reins and drive him on, ever in the same
direction.

At last the crisis of the disease came and passed, and John Webster
began slowly to recover.  And it was now that he formed a somewhat true
estimate of the marketable value of his daughter Annie, inasmuch as he
came at length to the conclusion that she was priceless, and that he
would not agree to sell her for any sum that could be named!

During this period of convalescence, Annie's patience, gentleness, and
powers of endurance were severely tried, and not found wanting.  The
result was that the conscience of the invalid began to awake and smite
him; then his heart began to melt, and, ere long, became knit to that of
his child, while she sought to relieve his pains and cheer his spirits
she chatted, played, sang, and read to him.  Among other books she read
the Bible.  At first Mr Webster objected to this, on the ground that he
did not care for it; but, seeing that Annie was much pained by his
refusal, he consented to permit her to read a few verses to him daily.
He always listened to them with his eyes shut, but never by look or
comment gave the least sign that they made any impression on him.

During the whole period of Mr Webster's illness and convalescence,
Captain Harry Boyns found it convenient to have much business to
transact in Liverpool, and he was extremely regular in his calls to
inquire after the health of his late employer.  This was very kind of
him, considering the way in which he had been treated!  Sometimes on
these visits he saw Annie, sometimes he saw Mrs Niven--according as the
one or other chanced to be on duty at the time; but, although he was
never permitted to do more than exchange a few sentences with either of
them, the most careless observer could have told, on each occasion,
which he had seen, for he always left the door with a lengthened face
and slow step when he had seen Mrs Niven: but ran down the steps with a
flushed countenance and sparkling eyes when he had met with Annie!

At last Mr Webster was so much restored that his doctor gave him leave
to pay a short visit to his counting-room in the city.

How strangely Mr Webster felt, after his long absence, when he entered
once more the temple of his god, and sat down in his old chair.
Everything looked so familiar, yet so strange!  There were, indeed, the
old objects, but not the old arrangements, for advantage had been taken
of his absence to have the office "thoroughly cleaned!"  There was the
same air of quiet, too, and seclusion; but the smells were not so musty
as they used to be, and there was something terribly unbusinesslike in
the locked desk and the shut books and the utter absence of papers.  The
portrait of his deceased wife's father was there, however, as grim,
silent, and steadfast in its gaze as ever, so Mr Webster smiled, nodded
to it, and rang a hand-bell for his confidential clerk, who entered
instantly, having been stationed at the back of the door for full ten
minutes in expectation of the summons.

"Good morning, Mr Grinder.  I have been ill, you see.  Glad to get
back, however.  How has business been going on in my absence?  The
doctor forbade my making any inquiries while I was ill, so that I have
been rather anxious."

"Yes, sir, I am aware--I--in fact I was anxious to see you several times
on business, but could not gain admittance."

"H'm! not going on so well as might be desired, I suppose," said Mr
Webster.

"Well, not quite; in short, I might even say things are much worse than
they were before you took ill, sir; but if a confidential agent were
sent to Jamaica to--to--that is, if Messrs. Bright and Early were seen
by yourself, sir, and some arrangement made, we might--might--go on for
some time longer, and if trade revives, I think--"

"So bad as that!" exclaimed Mr Webster, musing.  "Well, well, Grinder,
we must do our best to pull through.  Are any of our vessels getting
ready for sea just now?"

"Yes, sir, the _Ocean Queen_ sails for Jamaica about the end of this
month."

"Very well, Grinder, I will go in her.  She is one of our best ships, I
think.  The doctor said something about a short voyage to recruit me, so
that's settled.  Bring me writing materials, and send a statement of
affairs home to me to-night.  I have not yet strength to go into details
here."

Grinder brought the writing materials and retired.  His employer wrote
several letters; among them one to the doctor, apprising him of his
intention to go to Jamaica, and another to the captain of the _Ocean
Queen_, giving him the same information, and directing him to fit up the
two best berths in the cabin for the reception of himself and his
daughter, with a berth for an old female servant.

Three weeks thereafter he went on board with Annie and Mrs Niven, and
the _Ocean Queen_, spreading her sails, was soon far out upon the broad
bosom of the restless Atlantic.


CHAPTER SIX.

DESCRIBES THE PRESENTATION OF A NEW LIFEBOAT TO COVELLY, AND TREATS OF
THE ROYAL NATIONAL LIFEBOAT INSTITUTION.

from every person she met; and the isolation of the individual in the
city was to her something unnatural, even appalling.

She had cut out some boarding-house advertisements from the daily
papers, and her first care was to find a home suited to her slender
means.

Reaching the door of the first on her list, she rang and was shown into
a small drawing-room, shabby-genteel in its furniture and ornaments. Two
seamstresses sat chattering around the centre-table; while a ruddy
young man, with greenish brown moustaches and sandy hair, rested his
clumsy boots on the fender, holding an open music-book in his lap and a
flute in his ill-kept and gaudily-ringed hands. The kitchen,
apparently, was not ventilated; and a mingled odor, beyond the analysis
of chemistry, came up into the entry and pervaded the hot and confined
atmosphere of the room. The landlady, a stout and resolute
woman, entered with a studied smile, which changed gradually to a
cold civility. Her eyes, unlike Banquo's, had a deal of speculation in
them.

One might read the price-current in the busy wrinkles. Around her
pursed-up mouth lurked the knowledge of the number of available
slices in a sirloin,--the judgment of the lump of butter that should
leave no margin for prodigality. Warfare with market-men, shrewish
watchfulness over servants, economy scarcely removed from meanness at the
table, all were clearly indicated in her flushed and hard-featured
face.

Alice was not familiar with such people; but she shrank from her by
instinct, as the first chicken fled from the first hawk. The landlady,
on her part, was equally suspicious, and, finding that Alice had no
relatives to depend upon, and that she expected to earn her own living,
was not at all solicitous to increase the number of her boarders.

"It's pootty hard to tell who's who, now-a-days," she said. "I have to
pay cash for all I set on the table, and I can't trust to fair
promises.
Perhaps, though, you've got some _cousin_ that looks arter your
bills?"

The flute-player exchanged knowing glances with the seamstresses.

All-unconscious of the taunt, Alice simply replied,--
"No, I have told you that I have no one to depend upon."
The landlady's mouth was primly set, and she merely exclaimed,--
"Oh!

indeed!"
"I think I'll look further," said Alice. "Good-morning."
"Good-morning."
Half-suppressed chuckles followed her, as she left the room. Sorely
grieved and indignant, she took her way to another house. Fortune this
time favored her.

The landlady, a kind-hearted woman, was in mourning for her only daughter,
and with the first words she heard she felt her heart drawn to the
lovely and soft-voiced stranger. Without any offensive inquiries,
Alice was at once received, and an upper room assigned to her. After
sending for her trunk, she dressed for dinner.

The table presented specimens of all the familiar characters of boarding-house
life. There was the lawyer, sharp, observant, talkative, ready for
a joke or an argument.

There was the solemn man of business, who ate from a sense of duty, and
scowled at the lawyer's bad puns. Near him, with an absurdly youthful wig
and opaque goggles, sat the Unknown; his name, occupation, resources, and
tastes alike a profound mystery.
Several dapper clerks, whose right ears drooped from having been used
as pen-racks, wearing stunning cravats, _outré_ brooches and
shirt-studs, learned in the lore of "two-forty" driving, were ranged
opposite. Then there was the jolly widow, who was the admiration of men
of her own age, but who cruelly gave all her smiles to the boys with
newly-sprouting chins. Near her sat the fastidious man, whose nostrils
curled ominously when any stain appeared on his napkin, or when
anything sullied the virgin purity of his own exclusive fork. His
spectacles seemed to serve as microscopes, made for the sole purpose
of detecting some fatal speck invisible to other eyes. There was the
singer, with a neck like a swan's, bowing with the gracious air
that is acquired in the acknowledgment of bouquets and _bravas_.

The artist was her _vis-à-vis_, powerful like Samson in his bushy locks,
negligent with fore-thought, wearing a massive seal-ring, and fragrant
with the perfume of countless pipes. The nice old maid near him turns
away in disgust when she sees his moustaches draggle in the soup.

Down the long row of faces Alice looked timidly, and at length
fastened her eyes upon a lady in mourning like herself. There is no
physiognomist like the frank, affectionate young man or woman who looks
to find appreciation and sympathy.

It is not necessary, for such a purpose, to speculate upon Grecian or
Roman noses, thin or protruding lips, blue, gray, or brown eyes;
each soul knows its own sphere and the people that belong in it;
and a sure instinct or prescience guides us in our choice of friends.

Alice at a glance became conscious of an affinity, and quietly waited
till circumstances should bring her into associations with the
woman whom she hoped to make a friend.

It was not long before the occasion came. Not to make any mystery, it was
our old acquaintance, Mrs. Sandford, who attracted the gaze of Alice,
and who soon became her kindly adviser. Never was there a more _motherly_
woman; and, as she was now almost a stranger in the house, she attached
herself to Alice with a warmth and an unobtrusive solicitude that quite
won the girl's heart. Alice lost no time in procuring such work from a
tailor as she felt competent to do, and applied herself diligently
to her task; but a very short trial convinced her, that, at the
"starvation prices" then paid for needlework, she should not be
able to earn even her board.

Then came in the thoughtful friend, who, after gently drawing out the facts
of the case, furnished her with sewing on which she could display her
taste and skill. Day after day new employment came through the same kind
hands, until Alice wondered how one wearer could want such a quantity of
the various nameless, tasteful articles in which all women feel so
much pride.
It was not until long after, that she learned how the work had been
procured by her friend's active, but noiseless agency.

Not many days after their intimacy commenced, as Mrs. Sandford sat watching
Alice at her work, it occurred to her that there was a look of tender
sorrow, an unexplained melancholy, which her recent bereavement did
not wholly account for. Not that the girl was given to romantic
sighs or tragic starts, or that she carried a miniature for
lachrymose exercises; but it was evident that she had what we term
"a history." She was frank and cheerful, although there was palpably
something kept back, and her cheerfulness was like the mournful
beauty of flowers that blossom over graves.

No sympathetic nature could refuse confidence to Mrs. Sandford, and it
was not long before she discovered that Alice had passed through the
golden gate to which all footsteps tend, and from which no one
comes back except with a change that colors all the after life.

"And so you are in love, poor child!" said Mrs. Sandford,
compassionately.

"I have been" (with a gentle emphasis).

"Ah, you think you are past it now, I suppose?"
"I sha'n't _forget_ soon,--I could not, if I would; but love is
over,--gone like yesterday's sunshine."
"But the sun shines again to-day."
"Well, if you prefer another comparison," said Alice, smiling faintly,--"gone
out like yesterday's fire."

"Fire lurks a long time in the ashes unseen, my dear."
Alice dropped her needle and looked steadily at her companion.

"I am young," she said; "yet I have outgrown the school-girl period.
The current of my life has flowed in a deep channel: the shallow little
brook may fancy its first spring-freshet to be a Niagara; but my feelings
have swelled with no transient overflow. I gave my utmost love and
devotion to a man I thought worthy. He treated me with neglect, and at
last falsified his word in offering his hand to another, I do not hate
him. I have none of that alchemy which changes despised love to
gall. But I could never forgive him, nor trust him again. And if he,
who seemed always so frank, so earnest, so tender, so single in his
aims,--if he could not be trusted, I do not know where I could rest my
heart and say,--'Here I am safe, whatever betide!'"
It was a strange thing for Alice to speak in such an exalted strain,
and she trembled as she tried to resume her sewing.

The thread slipped and knotted; the needle broke and pricked her finger;
and then, feeling her cheeks begin to glow, she laid down her work
and turned to the window.

"Don't lose _all_ faith, Alice; there are true hearts in the world.
Perhaps this lover of yours, now, has repented and is striving to find
you. Or you may have been misinformed as to the extent of his
treachery.
To take your own simile, you don't accuse the brook of fickleness merely
because it eddies around under some flowery bank; after it has
made the circle, it keeps on its steady course."
Alice only shook her head, still keeping her face averted to conceal
the tremor of her lips.

"But you haven't told me who this man is. How odd it would be, if I
knew him!"
"I would rather not have you know. The secret isn't a fatal one, to be
sure; but I prefer to keep it."
Suddenly she stepped back from the window, ashy pale, and gasping
hysterically. Mrs. Sandford rose hastily to assist her, and, as she did
so, noticed her old acquaintance, Mr. Greenleaf, on the opposite
sidewalk. She helped Alice to her seat and brought her a glass of
water, and, as she did so, in an instant the long track of the past was
illumined as by a flash of lightning. She saw the reason for
Greenleaf's conduct towards her sister-in-law, Marcia. She remembered
his early fascination, his long, vacillating resistance, his brief
engagement, and the stormy scene when it was broken.

She had seen the thread of Fate spun for each, without knowing that
invisible strands connected them.
She had begun to read a tale of sorrow, but the page was torn, and now she
had finished it upon the chance-found fragment; the irregular and jagged
edges fitted together like mosaic-work.

What a mystery is Truth! A Lie may simulate its form or hue, and,
taken by itself, may deceive the most acute observer. But in the
affairs of the world, every fact is related; it meets and is joined by
other facts on every side,--the whole forming an harmonious figure in all
its angles and curves as well as in its gradations of color. Each truth
slips easily into its predestined place; a lie, however trivial, has no
place; its angles are belligerent, its colors false; it makes confusion,
and is thrown out as soon as the eye of the Master falls upon it.

Alice revived.

"Did I speak?" she asked.

"No,--you said nothing."
"I am glad. I feared I had been foolish.

It was a mere passing faintness."
Mrs. Sandford thought it was the _cause_ of the faintness that was
passing, but she prudently kept her discovery to herself.

CHAPTER XXVIII.

Fletcher rose next morning betimes, after a night of fitful and unrefreshing
slumber. In his dreams he had sought Bullion in vain; that substantial
person seemed to have become a new Proteus, and to escape, when nearly
overtaken, by taking refuge in some unexpected transformation.
Sometimes the scene changed, and it was the dreamer that was flying,
while Sandford, shod with swiftness, pursued him, swinging a lasso; and
as often as the fierce hunter whirled the deadly coil, Fletcher awoke
with a suffocating sensation, and a cold sweat trickling from his
forehead. At breakfast, his wife noticed with intense anxiety
his sharpened features and his evident preoccupation of mind. He hurried
off, snatching a kiss from the baby and from the mother who held
it, and walked towards Bullion's office.

He knew Bullion was an early riser, and he felt sure of being able to
see him before the usual hour of commencing business. But the office
was not even opened; and, looking through the glass door, he saw
that there was no fire in the grate. What was the meaning of this? Going
into the street, he met Tonsor near the post-office. At the first sight
of the broker's face, Fletcher's heart seemed to stop
beating.

"Good-morning, Fletcher. Bad business, this! I suppose you've heard.
Bullion went to protest yesterday. Hope you got wind of it in time, and
made all safe."
"Bullion failed!" exclaimed Fletcher, through his chattering teeth.
"Then I'm a ruined man!"
But a sudden thought struck him, and he asked eagerly,--
"But the money,--haven't you got it still?"
"No,--paid it over yesterday."
"Well, the shares, then?"

"No,--sorry to say, Bullion's clerk came for them not ten minutes
before I heard of the protest."
"O God!" groaned the unhappy man, "there is no hope! But you, Mr.
Tonsor, you are my friend; help me out of this! You can raise the money."

"Ten thousand dollars! It's a pretty large sum. I'm afraid I couldn't get
it."
"Try, my friend,--you shall never regret it."
Tonsor hesitated, and Fletcher's spirits rose. He watched the broker's
composed face with eyes that might pierce a mummy.

"What is the collateral?" asked Tonsor, slowly raising his wrinkled
eyelids.

"Bullion's notes for seventeen thousand dollars."
"And Bullion gone to protest."
"He'll come up again."
"Perhaps; but while he is down, I can't do anything with his paper.

The truth is, Fletcher, you ought not to have advanced the money
for him.
Remember, I warned you when you were about to do it."
Fletcher did not look as though he found the "Balm of I-told-you-so"
very consoling.

Tonsor continued,--
"Now, if I were in your place, I would go and make a clean breast of
it to Danforth. It was wrong, though I know you didn't mean any harm. He
may be angry, but he won't touch you. You _can't_ raise ten thousand
dollars in these times,--not to save your soul."
"Keep your advice, and your money, too," said Fletcher, in sullen despair.
"I ask for bread, and you give me a stone. Your moral lecture won't
pay my debts."
He turned away abruptly and went again to Bullion's office.

It was still closed. Determined at all hazards to see the man for whom
he had risked so much, he went to his house on Beacon Hill. The servant
said Mr.
Bullion was not at home. Fletcher did not believe it, but the door
was closed in his face before he could send a more urgent message, and
with a sinking heart he retraced his steps towards State Street.

The horror of his position was now fully before him. He could not conceal
his defalcation, and there was no longer a shadow of hope of replacing
the money. Many a time he had taken the risk of lending large sums
to brokers and others; but who would trust him, a man without estate,
in a time like this?

In his terrible anxiety about the new obligation, he had forgotten
the old, until he chanced to observe Sandford on the opposite sidewalk,
strolling leisurely towards the business quarter of the town. The
ex-secretary made a barely-perceptible bow, and, drawing out his
watch, significantly turned the face towards his debtor. It was
enough; there was no need of words. It was a little after ten o'clock;
the fatal letter would be delivered at eleven!

Fletcher crossed the street and accosted Sandford, though not without
trepidation; for he shuddered like a swimmer within reach of a shark, as
he encountered those cold and pitiless eyes.

"Come to the office, Mr. Sandford, at eleven," he said. "The affair
will be settled then, and forever."
Mr. Sandford nodded and walked on. Fletcher, meanwhile, quivering with
agony, hurried to his employer's office. He scanned each face sharply as
he entered, and felt sure that the loss had not yet been
discovered.
Going to his desk, he wrote and sealed a letter, and then went out,
saying he had some business with a lawyer overhead.

Mrs. Fletcher grew momently more uneasy, after her husband left the
house. A vague sense of coming evil oppressed her, until at length
she could bear it no longer; she left her child with the servant, and,
walking to the nearest stand, took a coach for State Street. On the way
she recalled again and again the muttered words she heard during the
night; she thought of the silent, comfortless breakfast, the hurried
good-bye; she felt again the pressure of his trembling lips upon her own.
Full of apprehension, she asked the coachman to call her husband to the
door. Answer was made by a clerk that Mr. Fletcher was out on business,
but was expected back presently. So she waited, looking out of the
carriage-window,--a sad face to see! The hands of the Old State-House
clock pointed at eleven, when Mr. Sandford punctually made his
appearance,--smooth, cheerful, and with a slight exhilaration, in
prospect of the two thousand dollars. Almost at the same moment Bullion
came also; for Tonsor, fearing that Fletcher would take
some desperate step, had been to the surly bankrupt's house and insisted
upon his coming down to see his unfortunate agent.

Just at the office-door, and opposite the carriage, met the two bankrupts,
the disgraced "bull" and the vanquished "bear." It was an odd look
of recognition that was exchanged between them; and if there was a
shade of triumph in Sandford's face, it was not to be wondered at.
They stood at the door, each motioning the other to enter first, when
an unusual sound from the adjoining entry caused both of them to stop,
and one of them, at least, to shiver. It was a sound of slow and
hesitating, shuffling steps, as of men carrying a burden. The steps came
nearer. Both Bullion and Sandford moved hurriedly to the spot. The
men stopped in the doorway with their burden, and in a moment, with
frantic shrieks, Mrs. Fletcher rushed in and fell upon the body of
her husband!

"Good God! what's this?" exclaimed Bullion. "Dead?" He stooped down and
thrust his hand under the waistcoat.

The heart was still! He shuddered convulsively and drew back, covering
his eyes. "Dead!"
Mr. Sandford seemed frozen to the threshold in speechless horror. There
was his debtor, free,--the old account settled forever! The pallid
temples would throb no more; the mobile lips had trembled their last;
the glancing, restless eyes had found a ghastly repose; the slender
and shapely frame, bereft of its active tenant, was limp and
unresisting.
What a moment for the two men, as they stood over the corpse of their
victim!

Attracted by the unusual outcry, Mr. Danforth came hastily out of the
office, and stood, as it were, transfixed at the sight of the dead. The
men who had brought down the body at last found words to tell their dismal
story.

They were at work on the upper floor, when they heard a noise in
one of the adjoining rooms; as the apartment had been for some time
unoccupied, they were naturally surprised. After a while all
sounds ceased, and still no one came out to descend the stairs. Appalled
by the silence, they broke open the door, and discovered
Fletcher hanging by the neck from a coat-hook; a chair, overturned,
had served as the scaffold from which he had stepped into eternity.
They took him down, but life was already gone. A paper lay on his hat,
with these words hastily pencilled on it:--
"On my desk is a letter that explains all. I'm off. Good-bye.

"JOHN FLETCHER."
Mr. Danforth, hearing this, instantly went into his office, and reappeared,
reading a note addressed to him. Mr. Sandford, meanwhile, was striving
to raise the wretched woman to her feet, and to lead her to the carriage.
Mr. Bullion no longer whisked his defiant eyebrow, but stood
downcast, silent, and conscience-stricken.

"Listen a moment," said Mr. Danforth.

"Here is a letter from our rash friend, and, as it concerns you, gentlemen,
I will read it.

But first, my dear Madam, let me help you into the carriage."
The prostrate woman made no answer, save by a slow rolling of her
body,--her sobs continuing without cessation.

The letter was read:--
"MR. DANFORTH,
"To make a payment for shares bought by Mr. Bullion, I borrowed ten
thousand dollars from your house yesterday. Mr. Bullion has failed,
and does not protect me. He escapes, and I am left in the trap. I charge
him to pay my wife the notes he owes me.

As he hopes to be saved, let him consider that a debt of honor.

"But my death I lay at Sandford's door. He has followed me with a steady
bay, like a bloodhound. His claim is now settled forever, as I
told him.
I don't ask God to forgive him;--I don't, and God won't. Let him
live, the cold-blooded wretch that he is; one world or another would
make no difference; for, to a devil like him, there is no heaven,
no earth, nothing but hell.
"My poor wife! See to her, if you have any pity for
"JOHN FLETCHER."
"Look," said Mr. Danforth, holding the letter under the stony eyes
of Sandford,--"see where the tears blistered the paper!"
All the while, Mrs. Fletcher kept up an inarticulate moaning, though
the sound grew fainter from exhaustion.
"Let us stop this," said Bullion, seeing the gathering crowd of
passers-by. "Better be at home."
Pointing to the still prostrate woman, he, with Mr. Danforth, gently
raised her up and placed her in the carriage. She did not speak,
but murmured pleadingly, while her face wore a look of agonized
longing, and her outstretched hands clutched nervously.
"Poor thing!" said Mr. Danforth, his voice beginning to tremble,--"she
shall have her dead husband, if it is any comfort to her."
"That's right," said Bullion,--"carry him off before half-a-dozen
coroner-buzzards come to fight over him."
The body was laid in the carriage, the head she had so often caressed
resting in her lap, while her tears bathed the unconscious face,
and her groans became heart-rending. Still holding the carriage-door,
Mr.
Danforth turned to Sandford, saying,--
"I don't know _what_ you have done, but his blood is on your soul.
I would rather be like him there, than you, on your feet.--Bullion,
I don't mind the ten thousand dollars; but was it just the manly
thing to leave a man that trusted you in this way to be sacrificed?
Why didn't you come down this morning? God forgive you!--Coachman,
drive to Carleton Street."
He stepped into the carriage, and away it rolled with its load of
sorrow.
Mr. Sandford found the glances of his companion and the bystanders
quite uncomfortable, and he slunk silently away. Failure and disgrace
he had met; but this was a position for which he had not the
nerve.
The self-accusing Cain was not the only man who has exclaimed, "My
punishment is greater than I can bear." Flight was the only alternative
for Sandford. As long as he remained in Boston, every face seemed
to wear a look of condemnation. The mark was set upon him, and
avenging fiends pursued him. That very day he left the city in
disguise. Through what trials he passed will never be known. But
destitute, friendless, and broken-spirited, he wandered from city
to city, a vagabond upon the face of the earth. Nor did a sterner
retribution long delay. In New Orleans, he was so far reduced that
he was obliged to earn a miserable support in an oyster-saloon near
the levee. One night, a fight began between some drunken boatmen:
and Sandford, though in no way concerned in the affair, received a
chance bullet in his forehead, and fell dead without a word.
CHAPTER XXIX.
Bullion, at last, in spite of his armor of selfishness and stoicism,
was touched in a vital part. His dreams of wealth had vanished into
air. The confederate in New York in whom he had trusted had only
made him a dupe.
Blindly following out his agreement, he found himself saddled with
a load of railroad-shares, useless for any present purpose, and all
his convertible property gone. The consciousness that he--the man
of all others who prided himself upon his sagacity--had been so
easily overreached was quite as humiliating as the idea of ruin
itself. He remembered Kerbstone's appeals, also, and now cursed his
own stupidity in refusing to aid him. There he had overreached
himself; it was his own stocks which he had thrown down to the
"bears." And now, heaviest stroke of all, Fletcher, his intrepid
and chivalrous agent, who had stepped into the breach for him, had
paid for his indiscretion with his life.
The thought gave him a pang he had never felt, not even when he
followed his wife to the grave. Homeward he went, but slowly and
almost without volition. He recognized no acquaintances that he
met, but walked on abstractedly, fixing his eyes on vacancy with a
look as mournful as his iron features could wear. In his ears still
rang those thrilling cries.
His hand, that had groped over that motionless heart, still felt a
creeping chill; it would not warm. And constantly an accusing voice
asked, "Why didn't you come down?"At length the boat was cast off to windward of the sands, and bore down
on the brig through the shoal water, which tossed her like a cork on its
raging surface.  They reached the brig and lay by her for some time in
the hope of getting her off, but failed.  The storm increased, the
vessel began to break up, so her crew were taken into the boat, which--
having previously cast anchor to windward of the wreck, and eased off
the cable until it got under her lee--now tried to pull back to its
anchor.  Every effort was fruitless, owing to the shifting nature of the
sands and the fury of the storm.  At last nothing was left for it but to
hoist the sail, cut the cable, and make a desperate effort to beat off
the sands.  In this also they failed; were caught on the crest of a
breaking roller, and borne away to leeward.  Water and wind in wildest
commotion were comparatively small matters to the lifeboat, but want of
water was a serious matter.  The tide happened to be out.  The sands
were only partially covered, and over them the breakers swept in a
chaotic seething turmoil that is inconceivable by those who have not
witnessed it.  Every one has seen the ripples on the seashore when the
tide is out.  On the Goodwins these ripples are great banks, to be
measured by yards instead of inches.  From one to another of these
sand-banks this boat was cast.  Each breaker caught her up, hurled her
onward a few yards, and let her down with a crash that well-nigh tore
every man out of her, leaving her there a few moments, to be caught up
again and made sport with by the next billow.  The Portuguese sailors,
eighteen in number, clung to the thwarts in silent despair, but the crew
of the boat did not lose heart.  They knew her splendid qualities, and
hoped that, if they should only escape being dashed against the portions
of wreck which strewed the sands, all might yet be well.  Thus,
literally fathom by fathom, with a succession of shocks that would have
knocked any ordinary boat to pieces, was this magnificent lifeboat
driven, during two hours in the dead of night, over two miles of the
Goodwin Sands!  At last she drove into deep water on the other side; the
sails were set, and soon after, through God's mercy, the rescued men
were landed safely in Ramsgate Harbour.  So, we repeat, the lifeboat is
almost indestructible.

That she is insubmergible has been proved by what has already been
written, and our space forbids giving further illustration, but a word
about the cause of this quality is necessary.  Her floating power is due
to _air-chambers_ fitted round the sides under the seats and in the bow
and stern; also to empty space and light wood or cork ballast under her
floor.  If thrust forcibly deep under water with as many persons in her
as could be stowed away, she would, on being released, rise again to the
surface like a cork.

The self-righting principle is one of the most important qualities of
the lifeboat.  However good it may be in other respects, a boat without
this quality is a lifeboat only so long as it maintains its proper
position on the water.  If upset it is no better than any other boat.
It is true that, great stability being one of the lifeboat's qualities,
such boats are not easily overturned.  Nevertheless they sometimes are
so, and the results have been on several occasions disastrous.  Witness
the case of the Liverpool boat, which in January 1865 upset, and the
crew of seven men were drowned.  Also the Point of Ayr lifeboat, which
upset when under sail at a distance from the land, and her crew,
thirteen in number, were drowned.  Two or three of the poor fellows were
seen clinging to the keel for twenty minutes, but no assistance could be
rendered.  Now, both of these were considered good lifeboats, but they
were _not self-righting_.  Numerous cases might be cited to prove the
inferiority of the non-self-righting boats, but one more will suffice.
In February 1858 the Southwold boat--a large sailing boat, esteemed one
of the finest in the kingdom, but _not_ self-righting--went out for
exercise, and was running before a heavy surf with all sail set, when
she suddenly ran on the top of a sea, broached-to and upset.  The crew
in this case being near shore, and having on cork lifebelts, were
rescued, but three gentlemen who had gone off in her without lifebelts
were drowned.  This case, and the last, occurred in broad daylight.

In contrast to these we give an instance of the action of the
self-righting lifeboat when overturned.  It occurred on a dark stormy
night in October 1858.  On that night a wreck took place off the coast
near Dungeness, three miles from shore.  The small lifeboat belonging to
that place put off to the rescue.  Eight stout men of the coastguard
composed her crew.  She belonged to the National Lifeboat Institution--
all the boats of which are now built on the self-righting principle.
The wreck was reached soon after midnight, and found to have been
deserted by her crew; the boat therefore returned to the shore.  While
crossing a deep channel between two shoals she was caught up and struck
by three heavy seas in succession.  The coxswain lost command of the
rudder, and she was carried away before a sea, broached to and upset,
throwing the men out of her.  Immediately she righted herself, cleared
herself of water, and the anchor having fallen out she was brought up by
it.  The crew, meanwhile, having on lifebelts, regained the boat, got
into her by means of the lifelines hung round her sides, cut the cable,
and returned to the shore in safety!

The means by which the self-righting is accomplished are--two large
air-cases, one in the bow, the other in the stern, and a heavy iron
keel.  These air-cases are rounded on the top and raised so high that a
boat, bottom up, resting on them, would be raised almost quite out of
the water.  Manifestly, to rest on these pivots is an impossibility; the
overturned boat _must_ fall on its side, in which position the heavy
iron keel comes into play and drags the bottom down, thus placing the
boat violently and quickly in her proper position.  The simple plan here
described was invented by the Reverend James Bremner, of Orkney, and
exhibited at Leith, near Edinburgh, in the year 1800.  Mr Bremner's
aircases were empty casks in the bow and stern, and his ballast was
three hundredweight of iron attached to the keel.

This plan, however, was not made practically useful until upwards of
fifty years later, when twenty out of twenty-four men were lost by the
upsetting of the _non-self-righting_ lifeboat of South Shields.  After
the occurrence of that melancholy event, the late Duke of
Northumberland--who for many years was one of the warmest supporters and
patrons of the Lifeboat Institution--offered a prize of 100 pounds for
the best self-righting lifeboat.  It was gained by Mr Beeching, whose
boat was afterwards considerably altered and improved by Mr Peak.

The self-emptying principle is of almost equal importance with the
self-righting, for, in every case of putting off to a wreck, a lifeboat
is necessarily filled again and again with water--sometimes overwhelmed
by tons of it; and a boat full of water, however safe it may be, is
necessarily useless.  Six large holes in the bottom of the boat effect
the discharge of water.  There is an air-tight floor to the lifeboat,
which is so placed that when the boat is fully manned and loaded with
passengers it is _a very little above the level of the sea_.  On this
fact the acting of the principle depends.  Between this floor and the
bottom of the boat, a space of upwards of a foot in depth, there is some
light ballast of cork or wood, and some parts of the space are left
empty.  The six holes above mentioned are tubes of six inches diameter,
which extend from the floor through the bottom of the boat.  Now, it is
one of nature's laws that water _must_ find its level.  For instance,
take any boat and bore large holes in its bottom, and suppose it to be
held up in its _ordinary_ floating position, so that it cannot sink,
then fill it suddenly quite full of water, it will be found that the
water _inside_ will run out until it is on a level with the water
_outside_.  Water poured into a lifeboat will of course act in the same
way, but when that which has been poured into it reaches the level of
the water outside, _it has also reached the floor_: in other words,
there is no more water left to run out.

Such are the principal qualities of the splendid lifeboat now used on
our coasts, and of which it may be said that it has almost reached the
state of absolute perfection.

The Lifeboat Institution, which has been the means in God's hands of
saving so many thousands of human lives, is now in a high state of
efficiency and of well-deserved prosperity; both of which conditions are
due very largely to the untiring exertions and zeal of its present
secretary, Richard Lewis, Esquire, of the Inner Temple.  Success is not
dependent on merit alone.  Good though the lifeboat cause unquestionably
is, we doubt whether the Institution would have attained its present
high position so soon, had it not been guided thereto by the judicious
management of its committee--the members of which bestow laborious and
gratuitous service on its great and national work--aided by the able and
learned secretary and an experienced inspector of lifeboats (Captain
J.R. Ward, R.N.) both whose judgement and discretion have often been the
themes of deserved praise by the public.

That the claims of the Institution are very strong must be admitted by
all who reflect that during upwards of forty years it has been engaged
in the grand work of saving human lives.  Up to the present date, it has
plucked 18,225 human beings from the waves, besides an incalculable
amount of valuable property.  It is a truly national blessing, and as
such deserves the support of every man and woman in the kingdom.  (See
footnote.)

But, to return from this prolonged yet by no means unnecessary
digression,--let us remind the reader that we left him at the meeting in
the town-hall of Covelly, of which, however, we will only say further,
that it was very enthusiastic and most successful.  That the mayor,
having been stirred in spirit by the secretary's speech, redeemed
himself by giving vent to a truly eloquent oration, and laying on the
table a handsome contribution towards the funds of the Society.  That
many of the people present gladly followed his lead, and that the only
interruption to the general harmony was the repeated attempts made by
Mr Joseph Dowler--always out of order--to inflict himself upon the
meeting; an infliction which the meeting persistently declined to
permit!

Thereafter the new lifeboat was conveyed to its house on the shore,
where, however, it had not rested many weeks before it was called into
vigorous action.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

For the sake of those who sympathise with us, and desire to give
substantial evidence of their goodwill, we would suggest that
contributions may be sent to the secretary, Richard Lewis, Esquire, 14
John Street, Adelphi, London.


CHAPTER SEVEN.

THE STORM AND THE WRECK.

Listen, O ye who lie comfortably asleep, secure in your homes, oblivious
of danger, when the tempest is roaring overhead!  Come, let us together
wing our flight to the seashore, and cast a searching glance far and
near over the strand.

On a certain Friday morning in the year 18 hundred and something, a
terrific gale broke over the east coast, and everywhere the lifeboat men
went out to watch the raging sea, knowing full well that ere long there
would be rough but glorious work for them to do.  A tremendous sea ran
high on the bar at Tynemouth, and rolled with tremendous force on the
Black Middens--rocks that are black indeed, in their history as well as
their aspect.  A barque was seen making for the Tyne, towed by a
steam-tug.  As the enemy entered the room at one end, after our troops
had retreated to the heights, I went out at the other, not without some
apprehension (as I was to cross the route of their flank-guard) of
being intercepted by the light horse.

"After having seen the medicines, all of them that were worth moving,
safe at New Milford, I returned to town the next morning, and went with
our forces in pursuit of the enemy. About noon the action began in their
rear, and continued with some intermission until night; the running
fight was renewed next morning, and lasted until the enemy got under
cover of their ships. We have lost some brave officers and men. Their
loss is unknown, as they buried some of their dead, and carried off
others; but, from the dead bodies they were forced to leave on the
field, it must have greatly exceeded ours. General Wooster was wounded
early in the action; he is in the same house with me, and I fear will not
live till morning.

"Our loss in provisions, &c., is between two and three thousand
barrels of pork, a quantity of flour, some wheat, and some bedding

."
* * * * *
In this bundle are many letters from Mrs. Foster. They are interesting
for their true-hearted patriotism and domestic love; but there is
room for only a brief extract from a letter referring to this same
expedition.

"_Danbury, May 13, 1777_.

"DEAR MADAM,
"I received yours and father's by Messrs. Russell and Gorham. Doctor had
not the pleasure of seeing either of the gentlemen, as he was gone to
Fishkill to oversee the inoculation of the troops, which was a very
great disappointment.

"I expected last Monday to have been with you by this time, as I was
driven from here by the enemy (tho' very unexpected, as this place was
thought to be very secure). I removed to New Milford, from whence I
intended to have set out for Boston. On Sunday, the Doctor took his leave,
and left me to take care of the wounded. Monday morning, everything
was got ready for me to set out at twelve o'clock, when I received
a note from the Doctor, desiring I would tarry a little longer.

I have now returned to my old lodgings at Danbury, where the Doctor thinks
of building a hospital. He joins me in duty and love.

"Your affectionate daughter,
"MARY FOSTER."
* * * * *
Much of Dr. Foster's time was necessarily spent in journeyings to the
several divisions of the army and various military stations.

On such journeys his letters to his wife were very frequent. We extract
a part of one.

"_Palmer, Thursday even'g, 
"July 31, 1777_.

"DEAR POLLY,
"I arrived here, which is eighty-three miles from Boston, about sunset
this evening, in good health.

The enemy's fleet has sailed from New York, and was seen standing to
eastward.

Some suppose them bound for Boston; but I cannot think so, as General
Washington, who, I presume, has the best intelligence, is moving
towards Philadelphia. Before you receive this, it will be made
certain with you. Should they attack Boston, I would have you get
as many of our effects as possible removed out of their way, and
inform me by the post where you remove to. Should such an event
take place, it will become my duty, after visiting Danbury, to
return to the scene of action. To your own prudence and the care
of Heaven I leave all, and am, with love to the children, ever
yours." 
* * * * *
In the lapse of years, many letters have, without doubt, been
lost.
Thus, but two remain bearing date of 1778. Neither of these contains
matter of public import. In May, he speaks of intending a journey
to Yorktown, and says, "if anything extraordinary happens between
the two armies," he shall be on the spot.cried the first mate in a deep excited voice as he
looked down the companion.

"What!" exclaimed the captain, rushing upon deck.

"Plank must have started, sir, there's three foot water in--"

His voice was drowned by distance and the roaring of the gale, but Mr
Webster and Annie had heard enough to fill them with alarm.

The _Ocean Queen_ had indeed sprung a leak, and so bad was it that when
all the pumps available were set a-going, they failed to reduce the
depth of water in the hold.  Still, by constantly changing hands and
making strenuous exertions, they prevented it from increasing rapidly.
All that night and next day they wrought with unflagging energy at the
pumps.  No man on board spared himself.  The captain took his spell with
the rest.  Even Mr Webster threw off his coat and went to work as if he
had been born and bred a coal-heaver.  The work, however, was very
exhausting, and when land appeared no one seemed to have any heart to
welcome it except Annie and her old nurse Mrs Niven.

Towards evening of the next day the captain came up to Mr Webster, who
was seated on the cabin skylight with his head resting wearily on his
hands.

"We cannot make the port of Liverpool, I find," he said.  "The pilot
says that if we wish to save the ship we must run for the nearest
harbour on the coast, which happens, unfortunately, to be the very small
one of Covelly."

"Then by all means run for it," said Mr Webster.  "Strange," he
muttered to himself, "that fate should lead me there."

The head of the _Ocean Queen_ was at once turned towards the shore, and
as they neared it Mr Webster stood talking to Annie about the time
"long, long ago," when she had been rescued by a lifeboat there, and
remarking on the curious coincidence that she should happen to come to
the same place in distress a second time.

The gale, although somewhat more moderate, was still blowing strong, and
an "ugly sea" was rolling on the bank where the _Swordfish_ had gone
ashore many years before.  This, however, mattered little, because the
direction of the wind was such that they could steer well clear of it.
But the channel leading to the harbour was very sinuous, and, as the
pilot observed, required careful steering.  In one part this channel was
so crooked that it became necessary to go on the other tack a short
distance.  In ordinary circumstances the captain would have thought
nothing of this, but he felt anxious just then, because some of the
stores and cordage furnished by mistake to him had been intended for the
_Ruby_.  Now the _Ruby_ was one of the vessels of Webster and Company
which had been sent away with the hope, if not the intention, that it
should be wrecked!  The mistake had been discovered only after the
_Ocean Queen_ had set sail.

"Ready about," cried the pilot.

The men leaped to their respective places.

"Take another pull at that fores'l sheet," said the pilot.

This was done.  At sea this would not have been necessary, because the
ship was lively and answered her helm well, but in the narrow channel
things had to be done more vigorously.  The extra pull was given.  The
tackle of the foresail sheet had been meant for the _Ruby_.  It snapped
asunder, and the ship missed stays and fell away.

Instantly all was desperate confusion.  A hurried attempt was made to
wear ship, then two anchors were let go, but almost before the startled
owner was aware of what had occurred, the good ship received a shock
which made her quiver from stem to stern.  She lifted with the next
wave, and in another minute was fast on the shoal which had proved fatal
to the _Swordfish_, with the waves dashing wildly over her.

Long before this occurred, our hero, Harry Boyns, had been watching the
vessel with considerable anxiety.  He little knew who was on board of
her, else would his anxiety have been infinitely increased.  But Harry
was one of those men who do not require the spur of self-interest to
keep them alive to duty.  He had observed that the ship was in distress,
and, as the honorary secretary of the Lifeboat Branch, he summoned
together the crew of his boat.  Thus all was in readiness for action
when the disaster occurred to the _Ocean Queen_.

Instantly the lifeboat was run down to the beach, where hundreds of
willing hands were ready to launch her, for the people had poured out of
the town on the first rumour of what was going on.  The crew leaped into
the boat and seized the oars.  The launching-ropes were manned.  A loud
"Huzzah" was given, and the lifeboat shot forth on her voyage of mercy,
cutting right through the first tremendous billow that met her.

At that time Old Jacob, the coxswain of the boat, happened to be unwell;
Harry himself therefore took the steering-oar, and Bob Gaston was in the
bow.  Mr Joseph Dowler chanced to be among the spectators on shore.
That fussy and conceited individual, conceiving it to be a fitting
occasion for the exercise of his tremendous powers, stood upon an
elevated rock and began a wildly enthusiastic speech to which nobody
listened, and in which he urged the lifeboatmen to do their duty in
quite a Nelsonian spirit.  Fortunately a sudden gust of wind blew him
off his perch.  He fell on his head so that his hat was knocked over his
eyes, and before he was thoroughly extricated from it, the lifeboat was
far from shore, and the men were doing their duty nobly, even although
Mr Dowler's appeal had failed to reach their ears!

It was a tough pull, for wind, waves, and tide combined to beat them
back, but they combined in vain.  Inch by inch they advanced, slowly and
laboriously, although it was so bitterly cold that the men had little
feeling in the benumbed hands with which they pulled so gallantly.

At last they reached the vessel, pulled well to windward, cast anchor,
and eased off the cable, until they passed her stern and got under her
lee.  Just then Harry looked up and felt as if he had received a shock
from electric fire, for he beheld the pale face of Annie Webster gazing
at him with glowing eyes!  No longer did he feel the chilling blast.
The blood rushed wildly through his veins as he shouted--

"Look alive, Bob,--heave!"

Bob Gaston stood up in the bow, and, with a beautiful swing, cast a line
on board, by means of which the boat was hauled alongside.  Just at that
moment the mainyard came down with a thundering crash upon the ship's
deck, fortunately injuring no one.  At the same time a tremendous billow
broke over the stern of the _Ocean Queen_, and falling into the lifeboat
in a cataract completely sunk her.  She rose like a cork, keel
uppermost, and would have righted at once, but a bight of the mainsail,
with some of the wreck, held her down.  Her crew, one by one, succeeded
in clambering upon her, and Harry shouted to the men in the ship to hand
him an axe.  One was thrown to him which he caught, and began therewith
to cut the wreck of cordage.

"Slit the sail with your knife, Bob Gaston," he cried, but Bob did not
reply.  All the other men were there; Bob alone was missing.  The
difficulty of acting in such turmoil is not to be easily estimated.
Twenty minutes elapsed before the boat was cleared.  When this was
accomplished she righted at once, and Bob Gaston was found sticking to
the bottom of her, inside, having found sufficient air and space there
to keep him alive!

Another moment and Harry Boyns was on the deck of the wreck.

Perhaps the most earnest "Thank God" that ever passed his lips burst
from them when he seized Annie's hand and entreated her to go with him
at once into the boat.

"Stay! hold!" cried Mr Webster, seizing Harry wildly by the sleeve and
whispering to him in quick earnest tones, "Can nothing be done to save
the ship?  _All is lost_ if she goes!"

"Hold on a minute, lads," cried Harry to the men in the boat; "are the
pumps working free,--is your ground tackle good?" he added, turning
hastily to the captain.

"Ay, but the men are used up--utterly exhausted."

"Jump aboard, lads," cried Harry to his men.

The men obeyed, leaving four of their number in the boat to keep her off
the ship's side.  He went in, and, to his surprise, saw, among the
worshippers, scores of his old friends, engaged in devotion.

Like himself, they had, many of them, failed, and, after the loss of all
temporal wealth, had turned their attention to the "more durable riches."
He fell into a profound meditation, from which he did not recover
until the meeting ended.

The next day he returned, and the day following, also,--taking a seat
each time a little nearer the desk, until at last he reached the
front row of benches, where he was to be seen at every service. It is
not necessary to speculate upon his motives, or to conjecture how far
he deceived himself in his professions,--if, indeed, there was any
deception in the case.

Let him have the benefit of whatever doubt there may be. The leading
religious men _hoped_, without feeling any great confidence; the
world, especially the business world, mocked and derided.

But piety, in itself, however heartfelt, does not clothe or feed its
possessor, and Mr. Sandford, even with that priceless gift, must
find some means of supplying his temporal wants. His new friends had
plenty of advice for him, and some of them would have been glad to
furnish him with employment; but none of them were so well satisfied
with the sincerity of his conversion as to trust him far. It was not
to be wondered, after his exploits on the day of his failure, that
there should be a reasonable shyness on the part of those who had
money which they could not afford or did not choose to give away.

It was quite remarkable to see the change produced when the subject was
introduced.

Faces, that a few minutes before had shone with tearful joy or rapturous
aspirations, full of brotherly affection, would suddenly cool, and
contract, and grow severe, when Sandford broached the one topic that was
nearest to him.

He found that there was no way of escaping from the law of compensation
by appropriating the results of other men's labors,--that religion (very
much to his disappointment) gave him no warrant to live in idleness;
therefore he was fain to do what he could for himself. He tried to act
as a curb-stone broker, as an insurance agent, as an adjuster of marine
losses and averages, as an itinerant solicitor for a life-insurance
company, as an accountant, and in various other situations. All in vain.
He was shunned like an escaped convict; the motley suit itself
would hardly have added to his disgrace. No one put faith in him or
gave him employment,--save in a few instances, for charity's sake. Few
men can brave a city; and Sandford, certainly, was not the man to do
it. The scowling, or suspicious, or contemptuous, pitying glances he
encountered smote him as with fiery swords. He quailed; he cowered;
he dropped his eyes; he acquired a stooping, shambling gait. The man who
_feels_ that he is looked down upon grows more diminutive in his
own estimation, until he shrinks into the place which the world
assigns him.

So Sandford shrunk, until he crept through the streets where once
he had walked erect, and earned a support as meagre and precarious as
the more brazen-faced and ragged of the great family of mendicants,
to which he was gravitating.

Mendicants,--an exceeding great army! They do not all knock at area-doors
for old clothes and broken victual, nor hold out hats at street-crossings,
nor expose sharp-faced babies to win pity, nor send their infant
tatterdemalions to torture the ears of the wealthy with scratchy fiddles
and wheezing accordions. No, these plagues of society are only the extreme
left wing; the right wing is a very respectable class in the community.
The party-leader who makes his name and influence serve him in
obtaining loans which he never intends to pay,--shall we call him
a beggar?

It is an ugly word. The parasite who makes himself agreeable to
dinner-givers, who calculates upon his accomplishments as a stock in
trade, intending that his brains shall feed his stomach,--what is
he, pray?

It is ungracious to stigmatize such a jolly dog.

The woman whose fingers are hooped with rings won in wagers which
gallantry or folly could not decline, who is ready by _philopaena_,
or even by more direct suggestions, to lay every beau or acquaintance
under contribution,--is she a beggar, too?

It is a long way, to be sure, from the girl with scanty and draggled
petticoat and tangled hair, picking out lumps of coal from ash-heaps,
or carrying home refuse from the tables of the rich,--a long way from
that squalid object to the richly-cloaked, furred, bonneted, jewelled,
flaunting lady, whose friends are all _so_ kind.

For the love of you I have undermined my health, neglected my
child, ruined the fortunes of hundreds of men and women, and committed
m--"

He could not bring himself to say the word, but he could not help
thinking it, and the thought filled him with horror.  The memory of that
dread hour when he expected every instant to be whelmed in the raging
sea rushed upon him vividly.  He passed from that to the period of his
sickness, when he used to fancy he was struggling fiercely in the
seething brine with drowning men--men whom he had brought to that pass,
and who strove revengefully to drag him down along with them.  He
clasped his hands over his eyes as if he thought to shut out those
dreadful memories, and groaned in spirit.  Despair would have seized
upon the gold-lover at that time, had not his guardian angel risen
before his agonised mind.  Annie's soft tones recurred to him.  He
thought of the words she had spoken to him, the passages from God's Word
that she had read, and, for the first time in his long life, the sordid
man of business exclaimed, "God be merciful to me, a sinner!"

No other word escaped him, but when, after remaining motionless for a
long time, he removed his hands from his face, the subdued expression
that rested there might have led an observer to believe that the prayer
had been answered.

A knock at the office-door caused him to start and endeavour to resume
his ordinary professional expression and composure as he said, "Come
in."

Harry Boyns, however, had not waited for the answer.  He was already in
the room, hat in hand.

"Now, sir," he said, eagerly, "are you ready to start?  The train leaves
in half an hour, and we must not risk losing it _to-day_."

"Losing it!" said Mr Webster, as he rose and slowly put on his
greatcoat, assisted by Harry, "why, it just takes me five minutes to
walk to the station.  How do you propose to spend the remaining
twenty-five?--But I say, Harry," he added with a peculiar smile, "how
uncommonly spruce you are to-day!"

"Not an unusual condition for a man to be in on his wedding-day,"
retorted Harry; "and I am sure that I can return you the compliment with
interest!"

This was true, for Mr Webster had "got himself up" that morning with
elaborate care.  His morning coat still smelt of the brown paper in
which it had come home.  His waistcoat was immaculately white.  His
pearl-grey trousers were palpably new.  His lavender kid-gloves were
painfully clean.  His patent-leather boots were glitteringly black, and
his _tout ensemble_ such as to suggest the idea that a band-box was his
appropriate and native home.

"Don't be impatient, boy," he said, putting some books into an iron
safe, "I must attend to business first, you know."

"You have no right to attend to business at all, after making it over to
me, as you formally did yesterday," said Harry.  "If you come here
again, sir, and meddle with my department, I shall be compelled to
dissolve partnership at once!"

"Please, sir," said Mr Grinder, appearing suddenly at the door, in a
costume which was remarkable for its splendour and the badness of its
fit--for Grinder's was a figure that no ordinary tailor could
understand, "Captain Daniel Boyns is at the door."

"Send him in," said Webster.

"He won't come, sir; he's afraid of being late for the train."

"Well, well," said Webster, with a laugh, "come along.  Are you ready,
Grinder?"

"Yes, sir."

"Then, lock the office-door, and don't forget to take out the key."

So saying, the old gentleman took Harry's arm, and, accompanied by
Grinder and Captain Boyns senior, hurried to the train; was whirled in
due course to Covelly, and shortly after found himself seated at a
wedding-breakfast, along with our hero Harry Boyns, and our heroine
Annie Webster, who was costumed as a bride, and looked inexpressibly
bewitching.  Besides these there were present excellent Mrs Boyns--
happily no longer a widow!--and Grinder, whose susceptible nature
rendered it difficult for him to refrain from shedding tears; and a bevy
of bride's-maids, so beautiful and sweet that it seemed quite
preposterous to suppose that they could remain another day in the estate
of spinsterhood.  Mr Joseph Dowler was also there, self-important as
ever, and ready for action at a moment's notice; besides a number of
friends of the bride and bridegroom, among whom was a pert young
gentleman, friend of Mr Dowler, and a Mr Crashington, friend of Mr
Webster,--an earnest, enthusiastic old gentleman, who held the opinion
that most things in the world were wrong, and who wondered incessantly
"why in the world people would not set to work at once to put them all
right!"  Niven, the old nurse, was there too, of course all excitement
and tears, and so was Bob Gaston, whose appearance was powerfully
suggestive of the individual styled in the ballad, "the jolly young
waterman."

In point of fact, it is one of the many results of _Spiritualism_ to make
the permanent destiny of the race a matter of common reflection
and discourse, and a vehicle for the prevailing disbelief of the Middle-Age
doctrines on the subject. I cannot help thinking, when I remember how
many conversations my friend and myself have reported, that it would
be very extraordinary, if there were no mention of that class of subjects
which involves all that we have and all that we hope, not merely for
ourselves, but for the dear people whom we love best,--noble men,
pure and lovely women, ingenuous children,--about the destiny of
nine-tenths of whom you know the opinions that would have been
taught by those old man-roasting, woman-strangling dogmatists.--However,
I fought this matter with one of our boarders the other day, and I am
going to report the conversation.

* * * * *
The divinity-student came down, one morning, looking rather more
serious than usual. He said little at breakfast-time, but lingered after
the others, so that I, who am apt to be long at the table, found myself
alone with him.

When the rest were all gone, he turned his chair round towards mine, and
began.

I am afraid,--he said,--you express yourself a little too freely on a
most important class of subjects. Is there not danger in introducing
discussions or allusions relating to matters of religion into common
discourse?

Danger to what?--I asked.

Danger to truth,--he replied, after a slight pause.

I didn't know Truth was such an invalid,--I said.--How long is it since
she could only take the air in a close carriage, with a gentleman
in a black coat on the box?

Let me tell you a story, adapted to young persons, but which won't
hurt older ones.

----There was a very little boy who had one of those balloons you may
have seen, which are filled with light gas, and are held by a string to
keep them from running off in aeronautic voyages on their own account.
This little boy had a naughty brother, who said to him, one day,--Brother,
pull down your balloon, so that I can look at it and take hold of it.
Then the little boy pulled it down. Now the naughty brother had a sharp
pin in his hand, and he thrust it into the balloon, and all the gas
oozed out, so that there was nothing left but a shrivelled skin.

One evening, the little boy's father called him to the window to see the
moon, which pleased him very much; but presently he said,--Father, do
not pull the string and bring down the moon, for my naughty brother
will prick it, and then it will all shrivel up and we shall not see
it any more.

Then his father laughed, and told him how the moon had been shining a
good while, and would shine a good while longer, and that all we
could do was to keep our windows clean, never letting the dust get
too thick on them, and especially to keep our eyes open, but that
we could not pull the moon down with a string, nor prick it with a
pin.--Mind you this, too, the moon is no man's private property,
but is seen from a good many parlor-windows.
----Truth is tough. It will not break, like a bubble, at a touch;
nay, you may kick it about all day, like a football, and it will
be round and full at evening. Does not Mr. Bryant say, that Truth
gets well if she is run over by a locomotive, while Error dies of
lockjaw if she scratches her finger? I never heard that a mathematician
was alarmed for the safety of a demonstrated proposition. I think,
generally, that fear of open discussion implies feebleness of inward
conviction, and great sensitiveness to the expression of individual
opinion is a mark of weakness.
----I am not so much afraid for truth,--said the divinity-student,--as
for the conceptions of truth in the minds of persons not accustomed
to judge wisely the opinions uttered before them.But--to
turn from the particular to the general question--I am sure, Ladies and
Gentlemen, that you will bear with me while I descant for a little on
the wrong that is done to society by the present state of our laws in
reference to the saving of life from shipwreck.  Despite the activity of
our noble Lifeboat Institution; despite the efficiency of her splendid
boats, and the courage of those who man them; despite the vigour and
zeal of our coastguardmen, whose working of the rocket apparatus cannot
be too highly praised; despite all this, I say, hundreds of lives are
lost annually on our coasts which might be saved; and I feel assured
that if the British public will continue their earnest support to our
great National Institution, this death-roll must continue to be
diminished.  My friends sometimes tell me that I am a visionary--that
many of my opinions are ridiculous.  Is it ridiculous that I should
regard the annual loss of nearly 600 lives, and above two millions of
money, as being worthy of the serious attention of every friend of his
country?

"Excuse me if I refrain from inflicting on you my own opinions, and,
instead, quote those of a correspondent of the _Times_..."

Craik at Murderer's Creek, and then proceeded through the Clove,
a most disagreeable place, and horrid road.

In the evening we got to Ringwood. Upon our arrival there, we were
informed there was no public house in the place, and it was after
dark. Colonel Biddle had favored me with an order on all his magazines
to supply me with forage; he has one in this place. I waited on
his deputy and presented the order; he went out of the room, and in a few
minutes returned with a Mr. Erskine, who is surveyor-general of the
roads; he gave me a polite invitation to spend the night at his house,
where we were entertained in the most genteel, hospitable, and friendly
manner. A shower of rain yesterday morning prevented our proceeding,
but, as it cleared up about noon, we came on thirty-four miles to this
place.
To illustrate my idea more plainly, I will take the
eastern shore of Mounts Bay in Cornwall.  A vessel has been driven on
shore at Gunwalloe; the captain, having this chart, would find that
there is a lifeboat at Mullion, on the south, and a transporting
lifeboat at Porthleven, on the north of him, as well as a
rocket-apparatus at each place.  Referring to his book of instructions,
he would find something like this:--"The Mullion lifeboat will drop down
on you from Mullion Island.  The Porthleven boat will most likely be
launched from the beach opposite.  PREFACE.

This book requires no further words of introduction than those with
which I have prefaced former volumes--that my object in travel is neither
scientific, statistical, nor politico-economical; but simply artistic,
pictorial,--if possible, panoramic. I have attempted to draw, with a
hand which, I hope, has acquired a little steadiness from long
practice, the people and the scenery of Northern Europe, to colour my
sketches with the tints of the originals, and to invest each one
with its native and characteristic atmosphere. In order to do this,
I have adopted, as in other countries, a simple rule: to live, as near
as possible, the life of the people among whom I travel. The
history of Sweden and Norway, their forms of Government, commerce,
productive industry, political condition, geology, botany, and agriculture,
can be found in other works, and I have only touched upon such
subjects where it was necessary to give completeness to my pictures.

I have endeavoured to give photographs, instead of diagrams, or tables
of figures; and desire only that the untravelled reader, who is interested
in the countries I visit, may find that he is able to see them by the
aid of my eyes.

BAYARD TAYLOR.

LONDON: November, 1857.

CONTENTS.
Page 
CHAPTER I.
A WINTER VOYAGE ON THE BALTIC.Although Crashington's remarks were regarded by some of the
wedding-party as being somewhat out of place, Mr John Webster listened
to them with marked attention, and replied to them with deep feeling.
After commenting slightly on the kind manner in which he had referred to
the heroic deeds of his son-in-law, and expressing his belief and hope,
that, now that he had married Annie, and become a member of the firm of
Webster and Company, a life of usefulness and happiness lay before him,
he went on to say--

"I heartily sympathise with you, sir, in designating this a
lifeboat-wedding, because, under God, my daughter and I owe our lives to
the lifeboat.  You are also right in stating that the lifeboat has been
the means of preserving my fortunes from being wrecked, because the
saving of the _Ocean Queen_ was a momentous turning-point in my affairs.
But a far higher and more blessed result has accrued to myself than the
saving of life or fortune, for these events have been made the means of
opening my eyes to the truth of God, and inducing me to accept the offer
of free forgiveness held out to me by that blessed Saviour to whom my
dear Annie has clung for many a year, while I was altogether immersed in
business.  I feel myself justified, therefore, in saying, with deep
humility and gratitude, that _I_ have been saved by the lifeboat--body
and soul."