Online Distributed Proofreading Team


The Mystery of the Four Fingers

BY FRED M. WHITE

Author of "THE MIDNIGHT GUEST," "THE CRIMSON BLIND," Etc., Etc.

1908


CONTENTS

     I.  THE BLACK PATCH

    II.  THE FIRST FINGER

   III.  THE LOST MINE

    IV.  IN THE LIFT

     V.  A PUZZLE FOR VENNER

    VI.  A PARTIAL FAILURE

   VII.  THE WHITE LADY

  VIII.  MISSING

    IX.  A NEW PHASE

     X.  THE SECOND FINGER

    XI.  AN UNEXPECTED MOVE

   XII.  THE HOUSE NEXT DOOR

  XIII.  THE WHITE LADY AGAIN

   XIV.  MASTER OF THE SITUATION

    XV.  FELIX ZARY

   XVI.  FENWICK MOVES AGAIN

  XVII.  MERTON GRANGE

 XVIII.  A COUPLE OF VISITORS

   XIX.  PHANTOM GOLD

    XX.  THE PRODIGAL'S RETURN

   XXI.  THE THIRD FINGER

  XXII.  "THE TIME WILL COME"

 XXIII.  SMOKED OUT

  XXIV.  THE MOUTH OF THE NET

   XXV.  AN ACT OF CHARITY

  XXVI.  THE LAST FINGER

 XXVII.  NEMESIS

XXVIII.  EXPLANATIONS

  XXIX.  THIS MORTAL COIL

   XXX.  A PEACEFUL SUNSET


CHAPTER I

THE BLACK PATCH

Considering it was nearly the height of the London winter season, the
Great Empire Hotel was not unusually crowded. This might perhaps have
been owing to the fact that two or three of the finest suites of rooms in
the building had been engaged by Mark Fenwick, who was popularly supposed
to be the last thing in the way of American multi-millionaires. No one
knew precisely who Fenwick was, or how he had made his money; but during
the last few months his name had bulked largely in the financial Press
and the daily periodicals of a sensational character. So far, the man had
hardly been seen, it being understood that he was suffering from a chill,
contracted on his voyage to Europe. Up to the present moment he had taken
all his meals in his rooms, but it was whispered now that the great man
was coming down to dinner. There was quite a flutter of excitement in the
Venetian dining-room about eight o'clock.

The beautifully decorated saloon had a sprinkling of well-dressed men
and women already dining decorously there. Everything was decorous about
the Great Empire Hotel. No thought had been spared in the effort to keep
the place quiet and select. The carpets were extra thick, and the waiters
more than usually soft-footed. On the whole, it was a restful place,
though, perhaps, the decorative scheme of its lighting erred just a
trifle on the side of the sombre. Still, flowers and ferns were soft and
feathery. The band played just loudly enough to stimulate conversation
instead of drowning it. At one of the little tables near the door two men
were dining. One had the alertness and vigor which bespeaks the dweller
in towns. He was neatly groomed, with just the slight suspicion of the
dandy in his dress, though it was obvious at the merest glance that he
was a gentleman. His short, sleek hair gave to his head a certain
suggestion of strength. The eyes which gleamed behind his gold-rimmed
glasses were keen and steady. Most men about town were acquainted with
the name of Jim Gurdon, as a generation before had been acquainted with
his prowess in the athletic field. Now he was a successful barrister,
though his ample private means rendered professional work quite
unnecessary.

The other man was taller, and more loose-limbed, though his spare frame
suggested great physical strength. He was dark in a hawk-like way,
though the suggestion of the adventurer about him was softened by a pair
of frank and pleasant grey eyes. Gerald Venner was tanned to a fine,
healthy bronze by many years of wandering all over the world; in fact, he
was one of those restless Englishmen who cannot for long be satisfied
without risking his life in some adventure or other.

The two friends sat there quietly over their dinner, criticising from
time to time those about them.

