Lady Conway was all eagerness and cordiality, enchanted to renew her
acquaintance, venturing so early a call in hopes of prevailing on
Mrs. Ponsonby to come out with her to take a drive.  She conjured up
recollections of Mary's childhood, declared that she looked to her
for drawing Isabel out, and was extremely kind and agreeable.  Mary
thought her delightful, with something of Louis's charm of manner;
and Mrs. Ponsonby believed it no acting, for Lady Conway was
sincerely affable and affectionate, with great warmth and kindness,
and might have been all that was excellent, had she started into life
with a different code of duty.

So there was to be an intimacy.  For Fitzjocelyn's sake, as well as
for the real good-nature of the advances, Mrs. Ponsonby would not
shrink back more than befitted her self-respect.  Of that quality she
had less than Mrs. Frost, who, with her innate punctilious spirit,
avoided all favours or patronage.  It was curious to see the gentle
old lady fire up with all the dignity of the Pendragons, at the least
peril of incurring an obligation, and, though perfectly courteous,
easy, and obliging, she contrived to keep at a greater distance than
if she had been mistress of Cheveleigh.  There, she would have
remembered that both she and Lady Conway were aunts to Louis; at
Northwold, her care was to become beholden for nothing that she could
not repay.

Lady Conway did her best, when driving out with Mrs. Ponsonby, to
draw her into confidence.  There were tender reminiscences from her
heart of poor sweet Louisa, tearful inquiries respecting her last
weeks, certainties that Mrs. Ponsonby had been of great use to her;
for, poor darling, she had been thoughtless--so much to turn her
head.  There was cause for regret in their own education--there was
then so much less attention to essentials.  Lady Conway could not
have borne to bring up her own girls as she herself and her sisters
had grown up; she had chosen a governess who made religion the first
object, and she was delighted to see them all so attached to her; she
had never had any fears of their being too serious--people had learnt
to be reasonable now, did not insist on the impracticable, did not
denounce moderate gaieties, as had once been done to the alarm of
poor Louisa.

Sweetest Louisa's son!  She could not speak too warmly of him, and
she declared herself highly gratified by Mr. Mansell's opinion of his
modesty, attention, and good sense.  Mr. Mansell was an excellent
judge, he had such as opinion of Lord Ormersfield's public character.

And, at a safe interval, she mentioned the probability that
Beauchastel might be settled on Isabel, if she should marry so as to
please Mr. Mansell: he cared for connexion more than for wealth; if
he had a weakness, it was for rank.

Mrs. Ponsonby thought it fair that the Earl should be aware of these
facts.  He smiled ironically.

He left his card with his sister-in-law, and, to have it over while
Louis was safe at Oxford, invited the party to spend a day at
Ormersfield, with Mrs. Frost to entertain them.  He was far too
considerate of the feelings that he attributed to the Ponsonbys to
ask them to come; and as three out of the six in company were more or
less in a state of haughtiness and coolness, Lady Conway's graces
failed entirely; and poor innocent Virginia and Louisa protested that
they had never spent so dull a day, and that they could not believe
their cousin Fitzjocelyn could belong to such a tiresome place.

Isabel, who had undergone more dull days than they had, contrived to
get through it by torturing Adeline with utter silence of all tidings
from the East, and by a swarm of suitors, with the fantastic Viscount
foremost.  She never was awake from her dream until Mr. Holdsworth
came to dinner, and was so straightforward and easy that he thawed
every one.

Afterwards, he never failed to return an enthusiastic reply to the
question that all the neighbourhood were asking each other--namely,
whether they had seen Miss Conway.

No one was a more devoted admirer than the Lady of Eschalott, whose
webs had a bad chance when there was one glimpse of Miss Conway to be
obtained from the window, and the vision of whose heart was that Mrs.
Martha might some day let her stand in the housemaid's closet, to
behold her idol issue forth in the full glory of an evening dress--a
thing Charlotte had read of, but never seen anything nearer to it
than Miss Walby coming to tea, and her own Miss Clara in the
scantiest of all white muslins.

But Mrs. Martha was in an unexampled state of vixenish crossness, and
snapped venomously at mild Mrs. Beckett for the kindest offers of
sparing Charlotte to assist her in her multiplied labours.  She
seemed to be running after time all day long, with five dinners and
teas upon her hands, poor woman, and allowing herself not the
slightest relaxation, except to rush in for a few seconds to No. 7,
to indulge herself by inveighing against the whole of the fine
servants; and yet she was so proud of having lodgers at all, that she
hated them for nothing so much as for threatening to go away.

The object of her bitterest invectives was the fastidious butler, Mr.
Delaford, who by her account could do nothing for himself, grudged
her mistresses their very sitting-room, drank wine with the ladies'
maids like a gentleman, and ordered fish for the second table; talked
of having quitted a duke, and submitting to live with Lady Conway
because he compassionated unprotected females, and my Lady was
dependent on him for the care of Sir Walter in the holidays.  To
crown his offences, he never cleaned his own plate, but drew sketches
and played the guitar!  Moreover, Mrs. Martha had her notions that he
was making that sickly Frenchified maid of Miss Conway's much too
fond of him; and as to his calling himself Mr. Delaford--why, Mrs.
Martha had a shrewd suspicion that he was some kin to her first
cousin's brother-in-law's shopman's wife in Tottenham-court-road,
whose name she knew was Ford, and who had been picked out of a
gutter!  The establishment of such a fact appeared as if it would be
the triumph of Mrs. Martha's life.  In the meantime, she more than
hinted that she would wear herself to the bone rather than let
Charlotte Arnold into the house; and Jane, generally assenting,
though seldom going all lengths, used to divert the conversation by
comparisons with Mr. Frampton's politeness and consideration.  He
never came to No. 5 to give trouble, only to help.

The invectives produced on Charlotte's mind an effect the reverse of
what was intended.  Mr. Delaford, a finer gentleman than Mr. Frampton
and Mr. Poynings, must be a wonder of nature.  The guitar--redolent
of serenades and Spanish cloaks--oh! but once to see and hear it!
The very rudeness of Mrs. Martha's words, so often repeated, gave her
a feeling in favour of their object.  She had known Mrs. Martha
unjust before.  Poor Tom! if he had only been a Spaniard, he would
have sung about the white dove--his pretty thought--in a serenade,
but then he might have poignarded Mr. James in his passion, which
would have been less agreeable--she supposed he had forgotten her
long ago--and so much the better!

It was a Sunday evening.  Every one was gone to church except
Charlotte, who was left to keep house.  Though November, it was not
cold, the day had been warm and showery, and the full moon had risen
in the most glorious brightness, riding in a sky the blue of which
looked almost black by contrast with her brilliancy.  Charlotte stood
at the back door, gazing at the moon walking in brightness, and
wandered into the garden, to enjoy what to her was beyond all other
delights, reading Gessner's Death of Abel by moonlight.  There was
quite sufficient light, even if she had not known the idyll almost by
heart; and in a trance of dreamy, undefined delight, she stood beside
the dark ivy-covered wall, each leaf glistening in the moonbeams,
which shed a subdued pearliness over her white apron and collar,
paled but gave a shadowy refinement to her features, and imparted a
peculiar soft golden gloss to the fair braids of hair on her modest
brow.

A sound of opening the back gate made her give one of her violent
starts; but before she could spring into the shelter of the house,
she was checked by the civil words, 'I beg your pardon, I was
mistaken--I took this for No. 8.'

'Three doors off--' began Charlotte, discovering, with a shy thrill
of surprise and pleasure, that she had been actually accosted by the
great Mr. Delaford; and the moonlight, quite as becoming to him as to
her, made him an absolute Italian count, tall, dark, pale, and
whiskered.  He did not go away at once, he lingered, and said softly,
'I perceive that you partake my own predilection for the moonlight
hour.'

Charlotte would have been delighted, had it not been a great deal
harder to find an answer than if the old Lord had asked her a
question; but she simpered and blushed, which probably did just as
well.  Mr. Delaford supposed she knew the poet's lines--


     'How sweet the moonlight sleeps on yonder bank--'


'Oh yes, sir--so sweet!' exclaimed the Lady of Eschalott, under her
breath, though yonder bank was only represented by the chequer-work
of Mrs. Ponsonby's latticed trellis; and Mr. Delaford proceeded to
quote the whole passage, in a deep mellow voice, but with a great
deal of affectation; and Charlotte gasped, 'So beautiful!'

'I perceive that you have a fine taste for poetry,' said Mr.
Delaford, so graciously, that Charlotte presumed to say, 'Oh, sir! is
it true that you can play the guitar?'

He smiled upon her tone of veneration, and replied, 'a trifle--a
little instrumental melody was a great resource.  If his poor
performance would afford her any gratification, he would fetch his
guitar.'

'Oh, sir--thank you--a psalm-tune, perhaps.  It is Sunday--if you
would be so kind.'

He smiled superciliously as he regretted that his music was not of
that description, and Charlotte felt ready to sink into the earth at
the indignity she had done the guitar in forgetting that it could
accompany anything but such songs as Valancourt sang to Emily.  She
begged his pardon humbly; and he declared that he had a great respect
for a lady's scruples, and should be happy to meet her another
evening.  'If Mrs. Beckett would allow her,' said Charlotte,
overpowered with gratitude: 'there would be the moon full to-morrow--
how delightful!'  He could spare a short interval between the dinner
and the tea; and with this promise he took leave.

Honest little Charlotte told Mrs. Beckett the whole story, and all
her eager wishes for to-morrow evening; and Jane sighed and puzzled
herself, and knew it would make Martha very angry, but could not help
being goodnatured.  Jane had a great deference for Martha's strong,
rough character; but then Martha had never lived in a great house,
and did not know 'what was what,' nor the difference between 'low
people' and upper servants.   So Jane acted chaperon as far as her
easy discretion went, and had it to say to her own conscience, and to
the angry Martha, that he never said one word that need offend any
young woman.

