"I presume it would. Well, Daisy, now you and I will arrange
this affair. I do not consider it wholesome for you to engage
in this particular amusement at this particular time; so I
shall endorse Mrs. Randolph's prohibition; but I will go round
— where does this girl live, and who is she?"

"Her name is Hephzibah Harbonner; she lives in the village, on
the road where the Episcopal church is — you know; — a little
way further on. I guess it's a quarter of a mile."

"South, eh? Well, I will go round by her house, and tell the
girl that I cannot let you do any such kindnesses just now,
and that, till I give her leave, she must not come to see you.
How will that do, Daisy."

"Thank you, Dr. Sandford!"

He saw it was very earnestly spoken, and that Daisy's brow
looked clearer.

"And instead of that amusement, you must study wonderful
things to-morrow. Will you?"

"Oh, yes, Dr. Sandford! But we have not finished about the sun
yet."

"No. Well — to-morrow, then, Daisy."

"Thank you, sir. Dr. Sandford, mamma wanted me to ask you a
question before you go."

"Ask it."

"How soon I can be moved home?''

"Are you in a great hurry?"

"No, sir, but I think mamma is."

"You call bear to wait a little longer, and study wonderful
things from your window?"

"Oh, yes, sir! I think I can do it better here than at home,
because my bed is so close to the window, I can look right
out."

"I shall not let you be moved just yet, Daisy. Good-night. I
will see — what's her name?"

"Harbonner — Hephzibah Harbonner."

"Good-night."

And Daisy watched the doctor as he went down the path, mounted
his horse, and rode away, with great admiration; thinking how
handsome and how clever and how chivalric he was. Daisy did
not use that word in thinking of him; nevertheless, his
skilful nursing, and his taking up her cause so effectually,
had made a great impression upon her. She was greatly
comforted. Juanita, watching her face, saw that it looked so;
there was even a dawning smile upon Daisy's lips at one time.
It faded however into a deep gravity; and one or two long
drawn breaths told of heavy thoughts.

"What troubles has my love?" said the old woman.

Daisy turned her head quick round from the window, and smiled
a very sweet smile in her face.

"I was thinking, Juanita."

"My little lady has a cloud come over her again."

"Yes, Juanita, I think I have. Oh, Juanita, I might tell you!
What shall I do, when everybody wants me to do what — what I
don't think is right? What shall I do, Juanita? I don't know
what I shall do."

"Suppose Miss Daisy take the Bible to her pa' — Miss Daisy
knows what her pa' promised."

"So he did, Juanita! thank you; I had forgotten that."

In five minutes more, Daisy was fast asleep. The black woman
stood looking at her. There was no cloud on the little face
now, but the signs of the day's work were there. Pale cheeks,
and weary features, and the tokens of past tears. Juanita
stood and looked, and twinkled away one or two from her own
eye-lashes; and then knelt down at the head of the bed, and
began a whispered prayer. — A prayer for the little child
before her, in which her heart poured itself out, that she
might be kept from evil, and might walk in the straight path,
and never be tempted or driven from it. Juanita's voice grew
louder than a whisper in her earnestness; but Daisy slept on.


CHAPTER XX.

SUN AND MOON.


The next day was an exceedingly hot and sultry one. Daisy had
no visitors until quite late in the afternoon; however it was
a peaceful day. She lay quiet and happy, and Juanita was quite
as well contented that the house should be empty, and they two
alone. Late in the afternoon, Preston came.

"Well, my dear little Daisy! so you are coming home?"

"Arm I?" said Daisy.

"To be sure; and your foot is going to get well, and we are
going to have all sorts of grand doings for you."

"My foot is getting well."

"Certainly. Don't be a Quaker, Daisy."

"What sort of doings are you going to have, Preston?"

"First thing — as soon as you are well enough for it — we are
going to have a grand pic-nic party to Silver Lake."

"Silver Lake? what, on the other side of the river?"

"Yes."

"Oh, how delightful! But I shall not be able to go in a long
time, Preston."

"Yes, you will. Aunt Felicia says you are coming back to
Melbourne now; and once we get you there, we'll cure you up.
Why, you must have moped half your wits away by this time. I
don't expect to find more than two-thirds of the original
Daisy left."

"I haven't moped at all."

"There! that is proof the first. When people are moping, and
do not know they are moping, that is the sign their wits are
departing. Poor Daisy! I don't wonder. We'll get you to rights
at Melbourne."

"Doctor Sandford will not let me be moved."

"Doctor Sandford cannot help himself. When aunt Felicia says
so, he will find ways and means."

"Preston," said Daisy, "I do not think you understand what
sort of a man Dr. Sandford is."

"Pray enlighten me, Daisy. I thought I did."

But Daisy was silent.

"What sort of a man is he?"

"Preston," said Daisy, abruptly, "I wish you would bring me
from Melbourne that tray filled with something, — plaster, — I
don't know what it is, — on which Captain Drummond and I
studied geography, and history."

"Geography and history on a tray!" said Preston. "That would
be one's hands full to carry!"

"Well, but it was," said Daisy. "The tray was smooth filled
with something, something a little soft, on which you could
mark; and Captain Drummond drew the map of England on it; and
we were just getting into the battle — what battle was it? —
when William came over from France, and King Harold met him?"

"Hastings?"

"We were just come to the battle of Hastings, before Captain
Drummond went away; and I should like so much to go on with
it!"

"But was the battle of Hastings on the tray?"

"No, Preston, but the place was; and Captain Drummond told me
about the battles."

"Who is here to tell you about them now, Daisy?"

"Couldn't you? — sometimes, now and then?"

"I might; but you see, Daisy, you are coming to Melbourne now,
and there will be Silver Lake, and lots of other things to do.
You won't want the tray here."

Daisy looked a little wistfully at her cousin. She said
nothing. And Preston turned sharply, for he heard a soft
rustle coming up the path, and was just in time to spring to
the door and open it for his aunt.

"How insufferably hot!" was Mrs. Randolph's remark. "How do
you do, Daisy?"

"I think she is bewitched to stay in banishment, aunt Felicia;
she will have it she is not coming home."

Mrs. Randolph's answer was given to the doctor, who entered at
the instant behind Preston.

"How soon can Daisy be moved, doctor?"

The doctor took a leisurely view of his little patient before
he replied. "Not at present."

"How soon —"

"If I think her fit for it, in a fortnight; possibly earlier."

"But that is, not till September!"

"I am afraid you are correct," said the doctor, coolly.

Mrs. Randolph stood pondering the question, how far it was
needful to own his authority. "It is dreadfully hot here, in
this little place! She would be much better if she were out of
it."

"How have you found it at Melbourne to-day?"

"Insufferable!"

"How has it been with you, Daisy?"

"It has been a nice day, Dr. Sandford."

The contrast was so extreme between the mental atmosphere of
one speaker and of the other, that Dr. Sandford smiled. It was
ninety degrees of Fahrenheit — and the fall of the dew.

"I have heard nobody say as much for the day before," he
remarked.

"But she would be much better at Melbourne."

"As soon as I think that, she shall go."

The doctor was absolute in his sphere, and Mr. Randolph,
moreover, she knew, would back him; so Mrs. Randolph held her
peace, though displeased. Nay, she entered into a little
conversation with the doctor on other subjects, as lively as
the day would admit, before she de parted. Preston stayed
behind, partly to improve his knowledge of Dr. Sandford.

"All has gone well to-day, Daisy?" he asked her, pleasantly.

"Oh, yes. And Dr. Sandford, shall we finish the sun?"

"By all means. What more shall I tell you?"

"How much more do you know, sir?"

"I know that it is globe — shaped — I know how big it is — I
know how heavy it is; and I know that it turns round and round
continually."

"Oh, sir, do you know all these things?"

"Yes."

"Please, Dr. Sandford, how can you?"

"You would mature into a philosopher, in time, Daisy."

"I hope not," muttered Preston.

"I know that it is globe-shaped, Daisy, because it turns round
and lets me see all sides of it."

"Is one side different from another."

"Only so far, as that there are spots here and there," Dr.
Sandford went on, looking at the exceeding eagerness in
Daisy's eyes. "The spots appear at one edge — pass over to the
other edge, and go out of sight. After a certain time I see
them come back again where I saw them first."

"Oh, I should like to see the spots on the sun!" said Daisy.
"You said they were holes in the curtain, sir?"

"Yes."

"What curtain?" said Preston.

"You are not a philosopher," said the doctor.

"How long does it take them, — the spots, — Dr. Sandford, to
go round and come back again?"

"A little more than twenty-five days."

"How very curious!" said Daisy. "I wonder what it turns round
for — the sun, I mean?"

"You have got too deep there," said the doctor. "I cannot tell
you."

"But there must be some reason," said Daisy; "or it would
stand still."

"It is in the nature of the thing, I suppose," said Dr.
Sandford; "but we do not fully know its nature yet. — Only
what I am telling you."

"How came people to find these things out?"

"By watching — and experimenting — and calculating."

"Then, how big is the sun, Dr. Sandford?"

"How big does it look?"

"Not very large — I don't know — I can't think of anything it
looks like."

"It looks just about as big as the moon does."

"Is it just the same size as the moon? But Dr. Sandford, it is
a great deal further off, isn't it?"

"Four hundred times as far."

"Then, it must be four hundred times as large, I should
think."

"It is just about that."

"But I do not know how large that would be. I cannot think."

"Nor can I, Daisy. But I can help you. Suppose we, and our
earth, were in the centre of the sun; and our moon going round
us at the same distance from us that she is now; there would
be room enough for the whole concern, as far as distances are
concerned."

"In the sun, Dr. Sandford?"

"In the sun."

"And the moon as far off as she is now?"

"Yes."

"But the _moon_ would not be in the sun too?"

"Plenty of room, and to spare."

Daisy was silent now. Preston looked from her face to the
doctor's.

"Not only that, Daisy; but the moon then would be two hundred
thousand miles within the circumference of the sun; the sun's
surface would be two hundred thousand miles beyond her."

"Thank you, Dr. Sandford!"

"What for, Daisy?"

"I am so glad to know all that."

"Why?"

Daisy did not answer. She did not feel ready to tell her whole
thought, — not to both her friends together, at least; and she
did not know how to frame her reply. But then, perceiving that
Dr. Sandford was looking for an answer, and that she was
guilty of the rudeness of withholding it, she blushed and
spoke.

"It makes me understand some things better."

"What, for instance?" said the doctor, looking as grave as
ever, though Preston was inclined to laugh.

Daisy saw it; nevertheless she answered, "The first chapter of
Genesis."

"Oh, you are there, are you?" said the doctor. "What light
have I thrown upon the passage, Daisy? It has not appeared to
myself."

Now Daisy hesitated. A sure though childish instinct told her
that her thoughts and feelings on this subject would meet with
no sympathy. She did not like to speak them.

"Daisy has peculiar views, Dr. Sandford," said Preston.

But the doctor paid him no attention. He looked at Daisy,
lifted her up, and arranged her pillows; then as he laid her
back said,

"Give me my explanation of that chapter, Daisy."

"It isn't an explanation, sir; — I did not know there was
anything to explain."

"The light I have thrown on it then — out of the sun."

Preston was amused, Daisy saw; she could not tell whether the
doctor was; his blue eyes gave no sign, except of a will to
hear what she had to say. Daisy hesitated, and hesitated, and
then, with something very like the old diplomacy she had
partly learned and partly inherited from her mother, she said,
"If you will read the chapter, I will tell you."

Now Daisy did not think Dr. Sandford would care to read the
chapter, or perhaps have the time for it; but, with an unmoved
face, he swung himself round on his chair, and called on Mrs.
Benoit for a Bible. Preston was in a state of delight, and
Mrs. Benoit of wonder. The Bible was brought, Dr. Sandford
took it, and opened it.

"We have only time for a short lecture to-day," he remarked,
"for I must be off. Now, Daisy, I will read, and you shall
comment."

Daisy felt worried. She turned uneasily, and rested her face
on her hand, and so lay, looking at the doctor; at his
handsome calm features and glittering blue eyes. What could
_she_ say to him? The doctor's eye saw a grave sweet little
face, a good deal flushed, very grave, with a whole burden of
thought behind its unruffled simplicity. It may be said, that
his curiosity was as great as Daisy's unwillingness. He began,
facing her as he read. Juanita stood by, somewhat anxious.

"In the beginning God created the heaven and the earth."

The doctor stopped, and looked down at that face of Daisy
looking up at him. He waited.

"I did not use to think how much all that meant," said Daisy,
humbly.

The doctor went on. He went on with the grand, majestic words
of the story, — which sounded very strange to Daisy from his
lips, but — very grand; — till he came to the fourteenth
verse. " 'And God said, Let there be lights in the firmament of
the heaven to divide the day from the night; and let them be
for signs, and for seasons, and for days and years: and let
them be for lights in the firmament of the heaven, to give
light upon the earth: and it was so.' " The doctor looked at
Daisy again.

"There," said she, "that is very different now from what it
used to be — I didn't know what sort of lights those were;
it's a great deal more wonderful now. Won't you read on a
little farther?"

" 'And God made two great lights; the greater light to rule the
day, and the lesser light to rule the night; He made the stars
also. And God set them in the firmament of the heaven, to give
light upon the earth, and to rule over the day, and over the
night, and to divide the light from the darkness: and God saw
that it was good.' "

"That is what I mean," said Daisy, as the doctor paused. "I
never knew before what those 'lights' meant — I thought the
sun was — I don't know what; I didn't think much about it; but
now I never shall forget again. I know now what sort of a
light was made to rule the day; and I don't wonder —"

"Do not wonder what, Daisy?"

"I do not wonder that God said that it was good. I am so much
obliged to you for telling me about it."

"Never heard a more satisfactory application of knowledge in
my life," — the doctor remarked, with a smile, as he handed
back the Bible to Mrs. Benoit.

And then he and Preston went off; but Daisy lay long very
thoughtfully looking after them out of her window. Till the
sound of the horses' feet was far out of hearing, Daisy lay
there, looking into the evening. She did not stir till Mrs.
Benoit brought her supper.

"Isn't it wonderful, Juanita," she said, with a long-drawn
breath, "how the sun divides the light from the darkness!"

"Most things is wonderful, that the Lord makes," answered the
black woman.

"Are they?" said Daisy.

"But what makes my love sigh?" said Juanita, anxiously; for
Daisy's face had not brightened up, though she was taking her
tea.

Daisy looked at her. "Oh, Juanita!" she said, — "I am afraid
that Dr. Sandford is in the darkness!"

"Where the sun don't shine it be darkness, sure!" said
Juanita. "And he do not see the Light of the world, Miss
Daisy."

Daisy's eyes filled, filled. She liked Dr. Sandford very much.
And then, who else that she loved had never seen that Light!
Daisy pushed aside her tears, and tried to drink her tea; but
at last she gave it up. Her spoon fell into her saucer, and
she lay down, and hid her face in the pillow. The black woman
stood, with a strange grave look, and with watering eyes,
silent for a little time; holding Daisy's tray in her hands,
and waiting.

"Miss Daisy —"

"What, Juanita?"

"My love take her tea, to be strong; and then see how many she
can bring out of the darkness."

"I, Juanita?" said Daisy? rousing up.

"Maybe the Lord send His message by little hands. What
hinder?"

"But, Juanita, _I_ can't do anything?"

"Carry the Lord's message, Miss Daisy."

"Can I?"

"Why not, my love? The dear Lord, He do all. And Miss Daisy
knows, He hear the prayer of His servants."

The child looked at the black woman, with a wistful, earnest,
searching look that it was curious to see. She said nothing
more; she eyed Juanita as if she were searching into the depth
of something; then she went on with her supper. She was
thoughtful all the evening; busy with cogitations which she
did not reveal; quiet and absent-minded. Juanita guessed why;
and many a prayer went up from her own secret heart.

But from about this time Daisy began to grow well again. She
could not be moved, of course; Dr. Sandford would not permit
that; neither to be carried home, nor to change her place and
position in the cottage. But she was getting ready for it. The
latter half of August cooled off from its fierce heats, and
was pleasantly warm. Daisy took the benefit of the change. She
had rather a good time, those last weeks at Juanita's house;
and perhaps that was one reason why Dr. Sandford, seeing it,
chose to let well alone, and would not have anybody take Daisy
home. Daisy had a very good time. She had the peace of
Juanita's house; and at home she knew there would be things to
trouble her. She had books, and could read now as much as she
liked; and she was very fond of reading. Preston did not find
it expedient to bring the geography tray; on the other hand,
Mr. Randolph thought it good to come every day and spend a
piece of time with his little daughter; and became better
acquainted with her than ever he had been in his life before.
He discovered that Daisy was very fond of knowledge; that he
could please her no way better than by taking up the history
of' England and reading to her, and stopping to explain
everything by the way which Daisy did not understand.

English history was certainly an old story to Mr. Randolph;
but to discuss it with Daisy was a very new thing. He found
her eager, patient, intelligent, and wise with an odd sort of
child-wisdom which yet was not despicable for older years.
Daisy's views of the feudal system, and of the wittenagemot,
and of trial by jury, and of representative legislation, were
intensely amusing to Mr. Randolph; he said it was going back
to a primitive condition of society, to talk them over with
her; though there, I think, he was mistaken. If Daisy had read
those pages of history to herself, she would have passed over
some of these matters at least with little heed; she would not
have gone to anybody with questions. But Mr. Randolph reading
to her, it was an easy thing to ask the meaning of a word as
they passed; and that word would draw on a whole little bit of
talk. In this intercourse Mr. Randolph was exceedingly gentle,
deliberate, and kind. Daisy had nothing to fear, not even that
she might weary him; so those were hours of real enjoyment to
both parties.

Preston not very seldom came and made himself agreeable;
playing an occasional game of chess, and more often regaling
Daisy with a history of his expeditions. Other visitors Daisy
had from Melbourne, now and then; but her best friend for real
service, after her father and Juanita, was Dr. Sandford. He
took great care of his little patient's comfort and happiness;
which was a pretty thing in him, seeing that he was a young
man, busy with a very good country practice, and, furthermore,
busy with the demands made upon him as an admired pet of
society. For that was Dr. Sandford, and he knew it perfectly
well. Nevertheless his kind care of Daisy never abated.

It was of course partly his professional zeal and care that
were called for; but it could not have been those that made
him keep up his lectures to Daisy on the wonderful things she
found for him, day by day. In professional care those lectures
certainly began; but Daisy was getting well now; had nothing
more to trouble her, and showed an invariably happy as well as
wise little face. Yet Dr. Sandford used to sit down and tell
her of the things she asked about, with a sort of amused
patience — if it was no more; at any rate he was never
impatient. He talked to Daisy of the stars, which, with the
moon, were very naturally the next subjects of investigation
after the sun.

At last Daisy got him upon the subject of trilobites. It was
not difficult. Dr. Sandford was far more easy to move than
Preston — in this matter at least. He only smiled, and slid
into the story very simply; the story that Daisy was so eager
to hear. And it did not seem less worth hearing than she had
expected, nor less wonderful, nor less interesting. Daisy
thought about it a great deal, while Juanita listened and
doubted; but Daisy did not doubt. She believed the doctor told
her true. That the family to which her little fossil trilobite
belonged — the particular family — for they were generally
related, he said, to the lobster and crab, — were found in the
very oldest and deepest down rocks in which any sort of
remains of living things have been found; therefore, it is
likely they were among the earliest of earth's inhabitants.
There were a great many of them, the doctor said, and many
different species; for great numbers of them are found to this
day in those particular rocks. The rocks must have been made
at the time when the trilobites lived, and have somehow shut
them in. And the doctor thought it likely that at the time
when they lived, there was no dry land in existence, but all
covered by the sea. He would not take it upon him to be
positive; but this he could tell Daisy; there was never a
stick or a leaf to be found in those old rocks that ever lived
and grew on dry ground, though there were plenty that grew in
the sea, until in the very topmost or latest of those rocks
some few bits of fern-growth began to appear.

"But what plants live under water?" said Daisy.

"Sea weeds."

"Oh! So many of them?"

"So many, that the rocks are sometimes darkened by their
fossil remains, and in some places those remains form beds of
coal several feet thick."

"And are there a great many remains of the trilobites?"

"There are whole rocks, Daisy, that are formed almost entirely
of trilobites."

"Sea-weeds and trilobites — what a strange time!" said Daisy.
"Was that all that was living?"

"No; there were other sea creatures of the lower kind, and at
last fishes. But when the fishes became very numerous, the
trilobites died out and passed away."

That old time had a wonderful charm for Daisy; it was, as she
thought, better than a fairy tale. The doctor at last let her
into the secret that he had a trilobite too; and the next time
he came he brought it with him. He was good enough to leave it
with Daisy a whole day; and Daisy's meditations over it and
her own together were numberless and profound.

The next transition was somewhat sudden; — to a wasp or two
that had come foraging on Daisy's window-sill. But Dr.
Sandford was at home there; and so explained the wasp's work
and manner of life, with his structure and fitness for what he
had to do, that Daisy was in utter delight; though her eyes
sometimes opened upon Dr. Sandford with a grave wistful wonder
in them, that he should know all this so well, and yet never
acknowledge the hand that had given the wasp the tools and
instinct for his work, one so exactly a match for the other.
But Dr. Sandford never did. He used to notice those grave
looks of Daisy, and hold private speculation with himself what
they might mean; private amused speculation; but I think he
must have liked his little patient as well as been amused at
her, or he would hardly have kept up as he did this personal
ministering to her pleasure, which was one of the great
entertainments of Daisy's life at this period. In truth only
to see Dr. Sandford was an entertainment to Daisy. She watched
even the wave of his long locks of hair. He was a fascination
to her.

"Are you in a hurry to get home?" he would ask her every now
and then. Daisy always said, "No sir; not till you think it is
time;" and Dr. Sandford never thought it was time. No matter
what other people said, and they said a good deal; he ordered
it his own way; and Daisy was almost ready to walk when he
gave permission for her to be taken home in the carriage.
However, the permission was given at last.

"To-morrow night I shall not be here, Juanita," Daisy remarked
as she was taking her supper.

"No, Miss Daisy."

"You will be very quiet when I am gone."

It had not been a bustling house, all those weeks! But the
black woman only answered. "My love will come to see Juanita
sometimes?"

"Oh, yes. I shall come very often, Juanita — if I can. You
know when I am out with my pony, I can come very often, — I
hope."

Juanita quite well understood what was meant by the little
pauses and qualifying clauses of this statement. She passed
them over.

But Daisy shed a good many tears during Juanita's prayer that
night. I do not know if the black woman shed any; but I know
that some time afterwards, and until late in the night, she
knelt again by Daisy's bedside, while a whisper of prayer, too
soft to arouse the child's slumbers, just chimed with the
flutter and rustle of the leaves outside of the window moving
in the night breeze.


CHAPTER XXI.

TEA AT HOME.


The next day turned out so warm, that the carriage was not
brought for Daisy till late in the afternoon. Then it came,
with her father and Dr. Sandford; and Daisy was lifted in Mr.
Randolph's arms, and carefully placed on the front seat of the
carriage, which she had all to herself. Her father and the
doctor got in and sat opposite to her; and the carriage drove
away.

The parting with Juanita had been very tenderly affectionate,
and had gone very near to Daisy's heart. Not choosing to show
this more than she could help, as usual, Daisy at first lay
still on the cushions with an exceedingly old-fashioned face;
it was as demure and sedate as if the gravity of forty years
had been over it. But presently the carriage turned the corner
into the road to Melbourne; Daisy caught sight for a second of
the houses and church spires of Crum Elbow, that she had not
seen for so long. A pink flush rose over her face.

"What is it, Daisy?" said Mr. Randolph, who had been watching
her.

"Papa — it's so nice to see things again!"

"You had a pretty dull time of it at Mrs. Benoit's?" remarked
the doctor.

"No — Oh, no, I didn't. I did not have it dull at all."

"How did you escape that, Daisy?"

"I do not know, Dr. Sandford. There was no room for dulness."

The gentlemen smiled, but Daisy's father with a not altogether
satisfied expression. He grew satisfied, as he marked the
changes in Daisy's face. The ride was delightful to her. The
carriage was easy; she was nicely placed; and through the open
glass before her she could look oat quite uninterruptedly. It
was so pleasant, she thought, even to see the road and the
fences again. That little bit of view before Mrs. Benoit's
window she had studied over and over, till she knew it by
heart. Now every step brought something new; and the roll of
the carriage-wheels was itself enlivening. There was a reaped
grain-field; there a meadow, with cattle pasturing. Now they
passed a farm wagon going home, laden with sheaves; next came
a cottage, well known, but not seen for a long time, with its
wonted half-door open and the cottager's children playing
about. Then came patches of woodland, with the sun shining
through; and a field of flourishing Indian corn with the
sunlight all over it; then more meadows with cattle.

"Do you ride comfortably, Daisy?" her father asked, bending
over to her.

"Yes, papa. It is so nice!"

Mr. Randolph gave up care about Daisy, and the two gentlemen
fell into a conversation which did not regard her, and lasted
till the carriage stopped at the door of Melbourne House. And
there was her mother, and there were Preston and his mother
and sister, and Gary McFarlane, who had been away, and come
back again, all waiting to welcome her; besides some other
guests who were now at Melbourne.

Mr. Randolph got out of the carriage first. Dr. Sandford
followed him; but then, without giving place to anybody else,
he himself took Daisy carefully off the seat where she lay,
lifted her out in his arms, and carried her into the house.
All the others trooped around and after him, through the hall
and into the drawing-room, where the doctor laid his little
charge on the sofa and put the pillows behind her so that she
could sit up comfortably. Then he stood back and let the
others come to her. Mrs. Randolph gave her some very contented
kisses; so did Mr. Randolph. Very glad and tender his were, at
having his little daughter back there again.

"We are very much pleased to see you here, Daisy," her aunt
said.

"Poor Daisy," said Eloise.

"Glad to come back to life and the world again, Daisy." said
Preston, standing at the back of her sofa and drumming on it.

"I understand, Daisy," said McFarlane, "that you have been an
enchanted beauty, or a sleeping princess, during these weeks
of my absence — under the guardianship of an old black witch,
who drew incantations and water together from her well every
morning."

"I can answer for the incantations," said Preston. "I have
heard 'em."

Daisy's face flushed all over. "Preston, you do very wrong,"
she said, turning her head round to him. But Preston only
burst into a fit of laughter, which he turned away to hide.

Others of the company now came up to take Daisy's hand, and
kiss her, and say how glad they were to see her; these people
were very much strangers to Daisy, and their greeting was no
particular pleasure; but it had to be attended to. Then tea
came in, and Daisy was well petted. It was very pleasant to
have it so; after the silence and quiet of Juanita's little
cottage, the lights and dresses and people and silver urn and
tea service and flowers made quite a picture. Flowers had been
in the cottage too, but not such wealth of them. Just opposite
to Daisy, in the middle of the floor, stood a great stone
basket, or wide vase, on a pedestal; and this vase was a mass
of beautiful flowers. Trailing wreaths of roses and fuchsias
and geraniums even floated down from the edges of the vase and
sought the floor; the pedestal was half draped with them. It
was a very lovely sight to Daisy's eyes. And then her mother
ordered a little stand brought to the sofa's side; and her
father placed it; and Gary brought her cup of tea, and Dr.
Sandford spread her slice of toast. Daisy felt as if she loved
everybody, and was very happy. The summer air floated in at
the long windows, just as it used to do. It was _home_. Daisy
began to realise the fact.

Meanwhile attention ceased to be filled with her particular
affairs, and conversation flowed off as usual, away from her.
Preston still held his station at the back of the sofa, where
he dipped sponge-cake in tea with a wonderful persistency; in
fact, the question seemed to be whether he or the cake basket
would give out first; but for a while Daisy eat her toast in
happy quiet; watching everybody and enjoying everything. Till
Gary McFarlane drew near, and took a seat, as if for a regular
siege.

"So what about those incantations, Daisy?" he said.

"I do not know what you mean, Mr. McFarlane."

"No? don't you? That's odd. You have been so long in the
witch's precincts. You have heard them, of course?"

"I do not know what you mean, Mr. McFarlane."

"Why, you must have been bewitched. I wonder, now, if the
witch's house did not seem to you a palace?"

"It seemed a very nice place."

"And the witch herself a sable princess?"

"I think she is a great deal better than a princess."

"Exactly so," said Gary, with a perfectly sober face. "The
witch drew water, didn't she?"

"I don't know what you mean. Mrs. Benoit used to bring pails
of water from her well."

"Very good. And you never heard her incantations, muttering in
the morning before the dew was off the grass, or at night just
as the first beams of the moon lighted on the topmost boughs
of the trees?"

Daisy was confounded. "Mr. McFarlane," she said, after a
moment's looking at him — "I hope I do not know what you
mean."

At that, Gary McFarlane went off into an ecstasy of laughter,
delighted and amused beyond count. Preston interrupted the
sponge-cake exercise, and Daisy felt her sofa shaking with his
burden of amusement. What had she done? Glancing her eye
towards Dr. Sandford, who sat near, she saw that a very
decided smile was curling the corners of _his_ mouth. A flush
came up all over Daisy's face; she took some tea, but it did
not taste good any longer.

"What did you think I meant? — come, Daisy, tell me," said
Gary, returning to Daisy as soon as he could get over his
paroxysm of laughter. "What did you think I meant? I shouldn't
wonder if you had some private witchcraft of your own. Come!
what did you _think_ I meant?"

While he had been laughing, Daisy had been trying to get
command of herself, and to get her throat clear for talking;
there had been a very uncomfortable thick feeling in it at
first. Now she answered with simple dignity and soberness, "I
did not know, Mr. McFarlane, but you meant Juanita's prayers."

"Does she pray?" said Gary, innocently.

"Yes."

"Long prayers, Daisy?"

"Yes," — unwillingly now.

"Then, that must have been what you heard!" Gary said, looking
up to Preston. No answer came from him. Gary was as sober now
as seven judges.

"Did she speak her prayers where you could hear her, Daisy?"

"I used to hear her —"

"Mornings and evenings?"

"Yes."

"But you heard her in broad day, Preston?"

"Yes; one afternoon it was. I heard her as soon as I got near
the house. Daisy was asleep, and I went away as wise as I
came."

"This grows interesting," said Gary, returning to Daisy.
"Could you hear the words that were said?"

"No."

"Only a muttering?"

Daisy was silent. The tears came into her eyes.

"Depend upon it, Daisy, it was incantations you heard.
Description agrees exactly. Confess now, didn't a sort of
feeling grow over you — creep over you — whenever you heard
that muttering sound, as if you would do anything that black
woman told you?"

Daisy was silent.

"Don't you know it is not proper to pray so that people can
hear you? — 'tisn't the way to do. Witches pray that way — not
good Christian people. I regard it as a very fortunate thing,
Daisy, that we have got you safe out of her hands. Don't you
think that prayer ought to be private?"

"Yes," said Daisy. She was overwhelmed with the rapidity and
liveliness of Gary's utterances, which he rattled forth as
lightly as if they had been the multiplication table.

"Yes, just so. It is not even a matter to be talked about —
too sacred — so I am offending even against my own laws; but I
wanted to know how far the old witch had got hold of you.
Didn't you feel when you heard her mutterings, as if some sort
of a spell was creeping over you?"

Daisy wished some sort of a spell could come over _him_; but she
did not know what to say.

"Didn't you gradually grow into the belief that she was a sort
of saint, Daisy?"

"What is a saint, Mr. McFarlane?"

Gary at that wheeled partly round, and stroked his chin and
moustache with the most comical expression of doubt and
confusion.

"I declare I don't know, Daisy! I think it means a person who
is too good for this world, and therefore isn't allowed to
live here. They all go off in flames of some sort — may look
like glory, but is very uncomfortable — and there is a
peculiar odour about them. Doctor, what is that odour called?"

Gary spoke with absurd soberness, but the doctor gave him no
attention.

"The odour of sanctity! — that is it!" said Gary. "I had
forgot. I don't know what it is like, myself; but it must be
very disagreeable to have such a peculiarity attached to one."

"How can anybody be too good for this world?" Daisy ventured.

"Too good to live in it! You can't live among people unless
you live like them — so the saints all leave the rest of the
world in some way or other; the children die, and the grown
ones go missionaries or become nuns — they are a sort of human
meteor — shine and disappear, but don't really accomplish
much, because no one wants to be meteors. So your old woman
can't be a saint, Daisy, or she would have quitted the world
long ago."

Something called off Gary. Daisy was left feeling very
thoroughly disturbed. That people could talk so — and think so
— about what was so precious to her; talk about being saints,
as if it were an undesirable thing; and as if such were
unlovely. Her thought went back to Juanita, who seemed now
half a world's distance away instead of a few miles; her love
and gentleness and truth and wisdom, her prayers and way of
living, did seem to Daisy somewhat unearthly in their beauty,
compared with that which surrounded her now; but so unearthly,
that it could not be understood, and must not be talked about.
Juanita could not be understood here; could Daisy? She felt
hurt, and troubled, and sorry; she did not like to hear such
talk, but Gary was about as easy to stop as a cataract.

Dr. Sandford, lifting his eyes from what had occupied them,
though his ears had not been stopped, saw that the face of his
little charge was flushed with pain, and her eyes glistening.
He came and took Gary's place, and silently felt of her hand
and looked at her; but he did not ask Daisy what was the
matter, because he pretty well knew. His own face, as usual,
showed nothing; however, Daisy's came back to its accustomed
expression.

"Dr. Sandford," said she softly, "what is a meteor?"

"Meteors are fiery stones which fall on the earth
occasionally."

"Where do they come from?"

"Doctors are divided."

"But where do _you_ think they come from?"

If Dr. Sandford's vanity could be touched by a child, it
received a touch then. It was so plain, that what satisfied
him would satisfy her. He would not give the sceptical answer
which rose to his lips. Looking at the pure, wise little face
which watched his, he made answer simply, not without a smile:
"I am inclined to think they are wandering bodies, that we
fall in with now and then, in our journey round the sun."

"Dr. Sandford, what do they look like?"

"You have seen shooting-stars?"

"Yes — are those meteors?"

"Those are meteors that do not come to the earth. Sometimes
they are nearer, and look like great fire-balls."

"Have you seen them."

"Yes, a great many."

"And have you seen them after they fell on the ground?"

"Yes."

"What are they like then?"

"A very black stone, on the outside, and made up of various
metals and earths within."

"But then, what makes them look like fire-balls, before they
fall?"

"Can't tell, Daisy. As I said, the doctors are divided; and I
really have no opinion that you would understand if I gave
it."

Daisy would have liked to hear all the opinions, but she did
not ask for them. Preston was still standing at the back of
the sofa, and started a new subject.

"Dr. Sandford, how soon will Daisy's foot let her go to Silver
Lake?"

"In what way do you propose to get there?"

"By boat, sir, across the river; and the rest of the way is
walking."

"On plain ground?"

"Not exactly!" said Preston.

"How far do you call it?"

"Three miles."

"Of walking! I think Daisy may walk across this floor by next
week; and in a little while after she may go up and down
stairs."

"Oh, doctor!" exclaimed Preston. "Why, at that rate, she
cannot go to Silver Lake at all!"

"Does she want to go very much?" said the doctor. The question
was really put at Daisy's face, and answered by a little flush
that was not a flush of pain this time. He saw what a depth of
meaning there was in it; what a charm the sound of Silver Lake
had for Daisy. No wonder, to a little girl who had lain for so
many weeks looking out of one window, where there was not much
to be seen, either.

"Who is going, Daisy?" said the doctor.

"Mamma means to make up a large party — I do not know exactly
who."

"Then I think I can promise that you shall go too. You may
count upon me for that."

Daisy's eyes shone and sparkled, but she said not a word.
Preston was less sagacious.

"Will you do something to make her foot strong, sir?" he
asked.

"When you have studied in my profession, you will know more
about a physician's powers," — was all the answer he got.

The doctor turned off to conversation with other people, and
Daisy was left to herself again. She was very happy; it was
very pleasant to lie there comfortably on the sofa, and feel
that her long imprisonment was over; it was amusing to look at
so many people together, after having for days and days looked
at only one; and the old wonted scene, the place and the
lights, and the flowers and the dresses, yes, and the voices,
gave her the new sense of being at home. Nevertheless, Daisy
mused a little over some things that were not altogether
pleasant. The faces that she scanned had none of them the
placid nobleness of the face of her black nurse; no voice
within her hearing had such sweet modulation; and Daisy felt a
consciousness that Juanita's little cottage lay within the
bounds of a kingdom which Mrs. Randolph's drawing-room had no
knowledge of. Gradually Daisy's head became full of that
thought; along with the accompanying consciousness, that a
subject of that kingdom would be alone here and find nobody to
help her.

"Daisy, what's the matter?" whispered Preston. "You are as
sober as a judge."

"Am I?" said Daisy.

"What's to pay?"

"Nothing. I feel very nicely."

"Why don't you look like other people, then?"

"I suppose," said Daisy, slowly, "I do not feel like other
people."

"I wish you'd make haste about it, then," said Preston. "Do be
my own dear little old Daisy! Don't be grave and wise."

"Are you going to spend the night here, Daisy?" said Dr.
Sandford, coming up to the sofa.

"No, sir," said Daisy, smiling.

"Where then?"

"I suppose, in my room, sir — up-stairs."

"I must see you there before I go; and it is time now. Shall I
carry you up?"

"If you please, sir."

"Pray do not, Dr. Sandford!" said Mrs. Randolph. "Mr. Randolph
will do it, or one of the servants. There is no occasion for
you to trouble yourself."

"Thank you, ma'am, but I like to see after my patients myself.
Unless Daisy prefers other hands."

Mrs. Randolph protested. The doctor stood quiet, and looked at
Daisy, waiting for her to say what she would like. Now Daisy
knew, that of all hands which had touched her, the doctor's
and Juanita's were far the best; and of those two, the
doctor's; perhaps because he was the strongest. Her father was
very kind and tender, but he did not understand the business.

"I should like Dr. Sandford to take me," she said, when she
found she must speak.

"Then I will trouble you, Mrs. Randolph, for somebody to show
me the way." And the doctor stooped, and put his strong arms
under Daisy, and lifted her up.

"Quite a conquest, I declare, you have made, Dr. Sandford!"
said Mrs. Randolph, laughing. "Preston, show the way, and I'll
send June."

So the doctor marched off with Daisy, Preston going before to
show the way. He carried her, without the least jar or
awkwardness, through the company, out into the hall, and up
the stairs. There June met him, and took Preston's office from
him. Into Daisy's own room at last they came, and Dr. Sandford
laid his little charge at once on her bed.

"You must not try to move, Daisy, until I see you again. Stay
here till then."

"Yes, sir."

"Good-night."

"Good-night. Thank you, sir, for bringing me up."

Dr. Sandford smiled. "Thank you," said he, and with a wave of
his hand, away he went.

"Oh, June!" said Daisy, "how glad I am to see you."

June had seen Daisy only once during her abode at Mrs.
Benoit's cottage; and now Daisy squeezed her hands, and
welcomed the sight of her with great affection; and June on
her part, though not given to demonstrations, smiled till her
wrinkles took all sorts of queer shapes, and even showed her
deep black eyes twinkling with something like moisture. They
certainly were; and putting the smiles and the tears together,
Daisy felt sure that June was as glad to see her as she was to
see June. In truth, Daisy was a sort of household deity to
June, and she welcomed her back accordingly, in her secret
heart; but her words on that subject, as on all others, were
few. The business of undressing, however, went on with great
tenderness. When it was finished, Daisy missed Juanita. For
then Juanita had been accustomed to bring her Bible, and read
and pray; and that had been a time Daisy always enjoyed
wonderfully. Now, in bed, at night, she could not see to read
for herself. She dismissed June, and was left alone in her old
room, with, as she justly thought, a great deal to pray for.
And praying, little Daisy went to sleep.


CHAPTER XXII.

BEING ROBBED.


The next day Daisy felt very much at home. Her orders were not
to stir till the doctor came. So after breakfast, and after
receiving visits from everybody in the house, she was left to
her own devices, for it happened that everybody had something
on hand that morning, and nobody staid with her.

Left with June, Daisy lay for awhile feasting her eyes on all
the pleasant wonted objects around her. She was a particular
little body, and very fond of her room and its furniture and
arrangements. Then came a hankering for the sight of some of
her concealed treasures from which she had been separated so
long.

"June, I wish you would open the drawer of my bureau, the
second drawer from the top, and put your hand back at the left
side, and give me a book that lies there."

June got the key and rummaged. "Don't feel nothing, Miss
Daisy."

"Quite back, June, under everything."

"Why, Miss Daisy, it's tucked away as though you didn't mean
nobody should never find it!"

Precisely what Daisy did mean. But there it was, safe enough —
Mr. Dinwiddie's Bible. Daisy's hands and eyes welcomed it. She
asked for nothing more in a good while after that; and June
curiously watched her, with immense reverence. The thin pale
little face, a little turned from the light, so that she could
see better; the intent eyes; the wise little mouth, where
childish innocence and oldish prudence made a queer meeting;
the slim little fingers that held the book; above all, the
sweet calm of the face. June would not gaze, but she looked
and looked, as she could, by glances; and nearly worshipped
her little mistress in her heart. She thought it almost
ominous and awful to see a child read the Bible so. For Daisy
looked at it with loving eyes, as at words that were a
pleasure to her. It was no duty-work, that reading. At last
Daisy shut the book, to June's relief.

"June, I want to see my old things. I would like to have them
here on the bed."

"What things, Miss Daisy?"

"I would like my bird of paradise first. You can put a big
book here for it to stand on, where it will be steady."

The bird of paradise June brought, and placed as ordered. It
was a bird of spun glass only, but a great beauty in Daisy's
eyes. Its tail was of such fine threads of glass that it waved
with the least breath.

"How pretty it is! You may take it away, June, for I am afraid
it will get broken; and now bring me my Chinese puzzle, and
set my cathedral here. You can bring it here without hurting
it, can't you?"

"Where is your puzzle, Miss Daisy?"

"It is in the upper drawer of my cabinet," — so Daisy called a
small chest of drawers which held her varieties — "and the
cathedral stands on the top, under the glass shade. Be very
careful, June."

June accomplished both parts of her business. The "cathedral"
was a beautiful model of a famous one, made in ivory. It was
rather more than a foot long, and high, of course, in
proportion. Every window and doorway and pillar and arcade was
there, in its exact place and size, according to the scale of
the model; and a beautiful thing it was to look upon for any
eyes that loved beauty. Daisy's eyes loved it well, and now
for a long time she lay back on her pillow watching and
studying the lights among those arcades, which the rich colour
of the ivory, grown yellow with time, made so very pleasant to
see. Daisy studied and thought. The Chinese puzzle got no
attention. At last she cried, "June, I should like to have my
Egyptian spoon."

"What is that, miss Daisy?"

"My Egyptian spoon; it is a long, carved, wooden thing, with
something like a spoon at one end; it is quite brown. Look for
it in the next drawer, June, you will find it there. It don't
look like a spoon."

"There is nothing like it in this drawer, Miss Daisy."

"Yes, it is. It is wrapped up in paper."

"Nothing here wrapped in paper," said June, rummaging.

"Aren't my chessmen there? and my Indian canoe? and my
moccasins? —"

"Yes, Miss Daisy, all them's here."

"Well, the spoon is there too, then; it was with the canoe and
the moccasins."

"It ain't here, Miss Daisy."

"Then look in all the other drawers, June."

June did so; no spoon.

Daisy half raised herself up for a frightened look towards her
"cabinet." "Has anybody done anything to my drawers while 1
have been away?"

"No, Miss Daisy, not as I know of."

"June, please, look in them all — every one."

" 'Taint here, Miss Daisy."

Daisy lay down again and lay thinking. "June, is mamma in her
room?"

"Yes, Miss Daisy."

"Ask her — tell her I want to speak to her very much."

Mrs. Randolph came.

"Mamma," said Daisy, "do you know anything about my Egyptian
spoon?"

"Do you want it, Daisy?"

"Oh, yes, mamma! I do. June cannot find it. Do you know where
it is?"

"Yes — it is not a thing for a child like you, Daisy, and I
let your aunt Gary have it. She wanted it for her collection.
I will get you anything else you like in place of it."

"But, mamma, I told aunt Gary she could not have it. She asked
me, and I told her she could not have it."

"I have told her she might, Daisy. Something else will give
you more pleasure. You are not an ungenerous child."

"But, mamma! it was _mine_. It belonged to me."

"Hush, Daisy; that is not a proper way to speak to me. I allow
you to do what you like with your things in general; this was
much fitter for your aunt Gary than for you. It was something
beyond your appreciation. Do not oblige me to remind you that
your things are mine."

Mrs. Randolph spoke as if half displeased already, and left
the room. Daisy lay with a great flush upon her face, and in a
state of perturbation.

Her spoon was gone; that was beyond question, and Daisy's
little spirit was in tumultuous disturbance — very uncommon
indeed with her. Grief, and the sense of wrong, and the
feeling of anger strove together. Did she not appreciate her
old spoon? when every leaf of the lotus carving and every
marking of the duck's bill had been noted and studied over and
over, with a wondering regard to the dark hands that so many,
many years and ages ago had fashioned it. Would Mrs. Gary love
it as well? Daisy did not believe any such thing. And then it
was the gift of Nora and Mr. Dinwiddie, and precious by
association; and it was _gone_.

Daisy lay still on her pillow, with a slow tear now and then
gathering in her eyes, but also with an ominous line on her
brow. There was a great sense of injustice at work — the
feeling that she had been robbed; and that she was powerless
to right herself. Her mother had done it; in her secret
thought Daisy knew that, and that she would not have done it
to Ransom. Yet in the deep-fixed habit of obedience and awe of
her mother, Daisy sheered off from directly blaming her as
much as possible, and let the burden of her displeasure fall
on Mrs. Gary.

She was bitterly hurt at her mother's action, however; doubly
hurt, at the loss and at the manner of it; and the slow tears
kept coming and rolling down to wet her pillow. For a while
Daisy pondered the means of getting her treasure back; by a
word to her father, or a representation to Preston, or by
boldly demanding the spoon of Mrs. Gary herself. Daisy felt as
if she must have it back somehow. But any of these ways, even
if successful, would make trouble; a great deal of trouble;
and it would be, Daisy had an inward consciousness all the
time, unworthy of a Christian child. But she felt angry with
Mrs. Gary, and as if she could never forgive her. Daisy,
though not passionate, was persistent in her character; her
gentleness covered a not exactly yielding disposition.

In the midst of all this, Dr. Sandford came in, fresh from his
morning's drive, and sat down by the bedside.

"Do you want to go downstairs, Daisy?"

"No, sir; I think not."

"Not? What's the matter? Are you of a misanthropical turn of
mind?"

"I do not know, Dr. Sandford; I do not know what that is."

"Well, now you have got back to human society and fellowship,
don't you want to enjoy it?"

"I should not enjoy it to-day."

"If I do not see you downstairs, you will have to stay up till
another day."

"Yes, sir."

"What is the matter, Daisy?" And now the doctor bent over and
looked hard in her face. The wet spot in her pillow no doubt
he had seen long ago. Daisy's eyes drooped.

"Look up here, and give me an answer.

"I can't very well tell you, sir."

"Why do you not want to go downstairs?"

"Because, Dr. Sandford, I am not good."

"Not good!" said he. "I thought you always were good."

Daisy's eye reddened, and her lip twitched. He saw that there
was some uncommon disturbance on hand; and there was the wet
spot on the pillow.

"Something has troubled you," he said; and with that he laid
his hand — it was a fresh, cool hand, pleasant to feel — upon
Daisy's forehead, and kept it there; sometimes looking at her,
and as often looking somewhere else. It was very agreeable to
Daisy; she did not stir her head from under the hand; and
gradually she quieted down, and her nerves, which were all
ruffled, like a bird's feathers, grew smooth. There were no
lines in her forehead when Dr. Sandford took away his hand
again.

"Now tell me," said he, smiling, "what was the matter? Shall I
take you down to the library now?"

"Oh, no, sir, if you please. Please do not, Dr. Sandford! I am
not ready. I am not fit."

"Not fit?" said the doctor, eyeing her, and very much at a
loss what to make of this. "Do you mean that you want to be
more finely attired before you make your appearance in
company?"

"No, sir," said Daisy. It struck her with a great sorrow, his
saying this. She knew her outward attire was faultless; bright
and nice as new silver was every bit of Daisy's dress, from
her smooth hair to her neat little slippers; it was all white
and clean. But the inward adorning which God looked at — in
what a state was that? Daisy felt a double pang; that Dr.
Sandford should so far mistake her as to think her full of
silly vanity, and, on the other hand, that he should so much
too well judge of her as to think her always good. The
witnessing tinge came about Daisy's eyelids again.

"Dr. Sandford, if people tell you their private affairs, of
course it is confidential?"

"Of course," said the doctor, without moving a muscle.

"Then I will tell you what I meant. I am not good. I am
dressed well enough; but I have anger in my heart."

Dr. Sandford did not say how much he was surprised; for Daisy
looked as meek as a lamb. But he was a philosopher, and
interested.

"Then I am sure you have had reason, Daisy."

"I think I had," sail Daisy, but without looking less
sorrowful.

"Do you not consider that one has a right to be angry when one
has a reason?"

"But one shouldn't stay angry," said the child, folding her
hands over her heart.

"How are you going to help it, Daisy?"

"There is a way, Dr. Sandford."

"Is there? But you see I am in the dark now. I am as much
abroad about that, as you were about a journey of three
hundred years to the sun. When I am angry I never find that I
can help it. I can maybe help using my horsewhip; but I cannot
manage the anger."

"No —" said Daisy, looking up at him, and thinking how
terrible it must be to have to encounter anger from his blue
eye.

"What then, Daisy? how do you make out your position."

Daisy did not very well like to say. She had a certain
consciousness — or fear — that it would not be understood, and
she would be laughed at — not openly, for Dr. Sandford was
never impolite; but yet she shrunk from the cold glance of
unbelief, or of derision, however well and kindly masked. She
was silent.

"Haven't we got into a confidential position yet?" said the
doctor.

"Yes, sir, but —"

"Speak on."

"Jesus will help us, Dr. Sandford, if we ask Him." And tears,
that were tears of deep penitence now, rushed to Daisy's eyes.

"I do not believe, Daisy, to begin with, that you know what
anger means."

"I have been angry this morning," said Daisy, sadly. "I am
angry now, I think."

"How do you feel when you are angry?"

"I feel wrong. I do not want to see the person — I feel she
would be disagreeable to me, and if I spoke to her I should
want to say something disagreeable."

"Very natural," said the doctor.

"But it is wrong."

"If you can help it, Daisy. I always feel disagreeable when I
am angry. I feel a little disagreeable now that you are
angry."

Daisy could not help smiling at that.

"Now, suppose we go downstairs."

"Oh, no, sir. Oh, no, Dr. Sandford, please! I am not ready — I
would rather not go downstairs to-day. Please don't take me!"

"To-morrow you must, Daisy. I shall not give you any longer
than till then."

Away went Dr. Sandford to the library; kept Daisy's counsel,
and told Mrs. Randolph she was to remain in her room to-day.

"She thinks too much," he said. "There is too much self-
introversion."

"I know it! but what can we do?" said Mr. Randolph. "She has
been kept from books as much as possible."

"Amusement, and the society of children."

"Ay, but she likes older society better."

"Good-morning," said the doctor.

"Stay! Dr. Sandford, I have great confidence in you. I wish
you would take in hand not Daisy's foot merely, but the
general management of her, and give us your advice. She has
not gained, on the whole, this summer, and is very delicate."

"Rather —" said the doctor. And away he went.


CHAPTER XXIII.

THE MAP OF ENGLAND.


Meanwhile Daisy turned away from her beautiful little ivory
cathedral, and opened Mr. Dinwiddie's Bible. Her heart was not
at all comforted yet; and indeed her talk with Dr. Sandford
had rather roused her to keener discomfort. She had confessed
herself wrong, and had told him the way to get right; yet she
herself, in spite of knowing the way, was not right, but very
far from it. So she felt. Her heart was very sore for the hurt
she had suffered; it gave her a twinge ever time she thought
of the lotus carving of her spoon handle, and those odd
representations of fish in the bowl of it. She lay over on her
pillow, slowly turning and turning the pages of her Bible, and
tear after tear slowly gathering one after another, and
filling her eyes, and rolling down to her pillow to make
another wet spot.

There was no harm in that, if that had been all. Daisy had
reason. But what troubled her was, that she was so strongly
displeased with her aunt Gary. She did not want to see her or
hear her, and the thought of a kiss from her was unendurable.
Nay, Daisy felt as if she would like to punish her, if she
could; or at least to repossess herself of her stolen property
by fair means or by foul. She was almost inclined to think
that she must have it at all events. And at the same time, she
had told Dr. Sandford that she was not right. So Daisy lay
slowly turning the pages of her Bible, looking for some word
that might catch her eye and be a help to her.

There were a good many marks in the Bible, scattered here and
there, made by its former owner. One of these stopped Daisy's
search, and gave her something to think of. It stood opposite
these words: "I, therefore, the prisoner of the Lord, beseech
you that ye walk worthy of the vocation wherewith ye are
called." Daisy considered that. What "vocation" meant, she did
not know, nor who was "the prisoner of the Lord," nor what
that could mean; but yet she caught at something of the sense.
"Walk worthy," she understood that; and guessed what
"vocation" stood for. Ay! that was just it, and that was just
what Daisy was not doing. The next words, too, were plain
enough. "With all lowliness and meekness, with long-suffering,
forbearing one another in love."

"Forbearing one another" — easy to read, how hard to do! Mrs.
Gary's image was very ugly yet to Daisy. Could she speak
pleasantly to her aunt? could she even look pleasantly at her?
could she "forbear" all unkindness, even in thought? Not yet!
Daisy felt very miserable, and very much ashamed of herself,
even while her anger was in abiding strength and vigour.

She went on, reading through the whole chapter; not because
she had not enough already to think about, but because she did
not feel that she could obey it. Some of the chapter she did
not quite understand; but she went on reading, all the same,
till she came to the last verse. That went through and through
Daisy's heart, and her eyes filled so full that by the time
she got to the end of it she could not see to read at all.
These were the words: "And be ye kind one to another, tender-
hearted, forgiving one another, even as God for Christ's sake
hath forgiven you."

That quite broke Daisy's heart. She rolled herself over upon
her open Bible, so as to hide her face in her pillow, and
there Daisy had a good cry. She standing out about a little
thing, when Jesus was willing to forgive such loads and loads
of naughtiness in her! Daisy would have no friendship with her
resentment any more. She turned her back upon it, and fled
from it, and sought eagerly that help by which, as she had
told Dr. Sandford, it might be overcome. And she had said
right. He who is called Jesus because He saves His people from
their sins, will not leave anybody under their power who
heartily trusts in Him for deliverance from them.

Daisy received several visits that day, but they were all
flying visits; everybody was busy. However, they put to the
proof the state of her feeling towards several persons. The
next day, the first person she saw was the doctor.

"How do you do, Daisy? Ready to go downstairs to-day?"

"Yes, sir."

"Have you got the better of your anger?"

"Yes, sir."

"Pray, at what hour did your indignation take flight?" said
the doctor, looking at the gentle little face before him.

"I think — about three hours after you were here yesterday,"
said Daisy, soberly.

The doctor looked at her, and his gravity gave way, so far at
least as to let the corners of his lips curl away from some
very white teeth. Dr. Sandford rarely laughed. And there was
nothing mocking about his smile now, though I have used the
word "curl;" it was merely what Daisy considered a very
intelligent and very benign curve of the mouth. Indeed she
liked it very much.

"Have you seen the offending party since that time, Daisy?"

"Yes, sir."

"And did you feel no return of displeasure?"

"No, sir."

There was something so exceedingly sweet in Daisy's expression
of face, so unruffled in its loving calm and assurance, that
Dr. Sandford received quite a new impression in his views of
human character.

"I shall have an account to settle with that young Preston one
of these days," he remarked, as he took Daisy's little form in
his arms.

"Oh, he did nothing!" said Daisy. "It wasn't Preston at all.
He had nothing to do with it!"

"He had not?" said the doctor.

"Not at all; nor any other boy."

"Beyond my management, then!" said the doctor; and he moved
off.

He had stood still to say that word or two; Daisy's arm was
round his neck to help support herself; the two looked into
each other's faces. Certainly that had come to pass which at
one time she had thought unlikely; Daisy was very fond of the
doctor.

He carried her now down to the library, and laid her on a
sofa. Nobody at all was there. The long windows were standing
open; the morning sweet air blew gently in; the books, and
chairs, and tables which made the room pretty to Daisy's eyes,
looked very pleasant after the long weeks in which she had not
seen them. But along with her joy at seeing them again was
mixed a vivid recollection of the terrible scene she had gone
through there, a few days before her accident. However,
nothing could make Daisy anything but happy just now.

"You must remain here until I come again," said the doctor;
"and now I will send some of the rest of the family to you."

The first one that came was her father. He sat down by the
sofa, and was so tenderly glad to have her there again, that
Daisy's little heart leaped for joy. She put her hand in his,
and lay looking into his face.

"Papa, it is nice," she said.

"What?"

"Oh, to be here, and with you again."

Mr. Randolph put his lips down to Daisy's, and kissed them a
good many times.

"Do you know we are going to Silver Lake with you as soon as
you are strong enough?"

"Oh, yes, papa! Dr. Sandford says he can manage it. But I
don't know when."

"In a week or two more."

"Papa, who is going?"

"Everybody, I suppose."

"But I mean, is anybody to be invited?"

"I think we must ask Dr. Sandford."

"Oh, yes, papa! I wish he would go. But is anybody else to be
asked?"

"I do not know, Daisy. Whom would you like to have invited?"

"Papa, I would like very much to have Nora Dinwiddie. She has
come back."

"Well, tell your mother so."

Daisy was silent a little; then she began on a new theme.

"Papa, what is a 'vocation'?"

"What is what, Daisy?"

"Vocation, papa."

"Where did you get that word?"

"I found it in a book."

"It means commonly a person's business or employment."

"Only that, papa?"

"There is another sense in which it is used, but you would
hardly understand it."

"Please tell me, papa."

"Why?"

"Papa, I like to know the meanings of things. Please tell me."

"Daisy, it means a 'calling' — in the idea that some persons
are particularly appointed to a certain place or work in the
world."

Daisy looked a little hard at him, and then said, "Thank you,
papa."

"Daisy, I hope you do not think you have a 'vocation,' " said
Mr. Randolph, half smiling.

"Papa," said the child, "I cannot help it."

"No, perhaps not," said Mr. Randolph, stooping again to
Daisy's lips. "When you are older and wiser you will know
better. At present your vocation is to be a good little
daughter. Now what are you going to do to-day? Here is Preston
— if you want him; or I will do for you what you please."

"Yes, Daisy, what shall we do?" said Preston.

"Oh, are you at leisure?"

"All your own, Daisy, for this morning at any rate. What shall
we do?"

"Preston, would you mind getting my tray for me; and let us go
on with the battle of Hastings?"

"With what?" said Mr. Randolph, laughing.

"The battle of Hastings, papa — English history, you know.
Captain Drummond and I got just there, and then we stopped.
But Harold was killed — wasn't he, papa?"

"I believe he was, Daisy."

"Good for him, too," said Preston. "He was nothing but a
usurper. William the Conqueror was a great deal more of a
man."

"But he was just as much of a usurper, wasn't he?" said Daisy.

"You must mind your ethics, Preston," Mr. Randolph said,
laughing. "Daisy is on the Saxon side."

"Preston, will you get the tray, please? June will give it to
you."

Preston did not quite understand the philosophy of the tray;
however, Daisy must be humoured. It was brought. By Daisy's
order it had been carefully protected from dust and danger;
and the lineaments of England, as traced by the captain some
time ago, were fresh and in good order.

Daisy hung over the map with great interest, renewing her
acquaintance with various localities, and gradually getting
Preston warmed up to the play. It was quite exciting; for,
with every movement of William's victorious footsteps, the
course of his progress had to be carefully studied out on a
printed map, and then the towns and villages which marked his
way noted on the clay map, and their places betokened by
wooden pins. Daisy suggested that these pins should have
sealing-wax heads of different colours to distinguish the
cities, the villages, and the forts from each other. Making
these, interrupted doubtless the march of the Conqueror and of
history, but in the end much increased Daisy's satisfaction,
and if the truth be told, Preston's too.

"There, — now you can see at a glance where the castles are;
don't their red heads look pretty! And, Oh, Preston! we ought
to have some way of marking the battle-fields; don't you think
so?"

"The map of England will be nothing but marks then, by and
by," said Preston.

"Will it? But it would be very curious. Preston, just give me
a little piece of that pink blotting paper from the library
table; it is in the portfolio there. Now I can put a little
square bit of this on every battle-field, and pressing it a
little, it will stick, I think. There! — there is Hastings. Do
you see, Preston? That will do nicely."

"England will be all pink blotting paper by and by," said
Preston.

"Then it will be very curious," said Daisy. "Were new kings
_always_ coming to push out the old ones?"

"Not like William the Conqueror. But yet it was something very
like that, Daisy. When a king died, two of his children would
both want the place; so they would fight."

"But two men fighting would not make a battlefield."

"Oh, Daisy, Daisy!" cried Preston; "do you know no better than
that?"

"Well, but who else would fight with them?"

"Why, all the kingdom! Part would fight for the right, you
know, as the Saxons did with Harold; and part would fight to
be the best fellows, and to get the fat places."

"Fat places?" said Daisy. At which Preston went off into one
of his laughs. Daisy looked on. How could she be expected to
understand him?

"What is the matter, my dear? What are you doing?" Daisy
started. "We are studying English history, aunt Gary."

"_History_, my dear? And what is all this muss, and these red
and black spots? does your mamma allow this in the library?"

"Just the place to study history, I am sure, mamma," said
Preston; "and you cannot have less muss than this where people
are fighting. But I really don't know what you mean, ma'am;
there cannot be a cleaner map, except for the blood shed on
it."

"Blood?" said Mrs. Gary. "My dear" — as Preston burst into
another laugh — "you must not let him tease you."

Daisy's look was so very unruffled and gentle that perhaps it
put Mrs. Gary in mind of another subject.

"Did you know, Daisy, that I had robbed you of your old-
fashioned spoon?"

"I found it was not among my things," said Daisy.

"My dear, your mother thought you would not value it; and it
was very desirable to my collection. I took it with her
consent."

"I am willing you should have it, aunt Gary."

"Were you very angry, my dear, when you found where it had
gone?"

"I am not angry now, aunt Gary."

Certainly Daisy was not; yet something in the child's look or
manner made the lady willing to drop the subject. Its very
calm gentleness did not testify to anything like unconcern
about the matter; and if there had been concern, Mrs. Gary was
not desirous to awaken it again. She kissed Daisy, said she
was a good girl, and walked off. Daisy wondered if her aunt
had a fancy for trilobites.

"What was all that about, Daisy?" Preston asked.

"Oh, never mind — let us go on with William the Conqueror."

"What spoon of yours has she got?"

"My Egyptian spoon."

"That old carved thing with the duck's bill?"

"Yes. Now, Preston, what comes next?"

"Didn't you say she could not have it?"

"No matter what I said, if I say that she can have it now."

"Did you give it to her?"

"Preston, that has nothing to do with William the Conqueror.
Please let us go on."

"Daisy, I want to know. Did you give it to her?"

"I am willing she should have it. Now, Preston, go on."

"But, I say, did you give my mother that spoon."

"Preston," said Daisy, "do you think it is quite proper to
question me in that manner about what you see I do not wish to
have you know?"

Preston laughed, though he looked vexed, and kissed her,
nobody being in the library; he was too big a boy to have done
it if anybody had been looking on. And after that he played
the historico-geographical play with her for a very long time;
finding it, with Daisy's eagerness and freshness, a very good
play indeed. Only he would persist in calling every cause of
war, every disputed succession, every rivalry of candidates,
an _Egyptian spoon_. Daisy could not prevent him.

She had a very happy morning; and Dr. Sandford was well
satisfied with her bright face when he came, towards night,
and carried her up stairs again.

But Daisy was getting well now. It was only a few days more,
and Dr. Sandford permitted her to walk a little way herself on
her own feet. A little way at first, across the floor and
back; no more that day; but from that time Daisy felt whole
again. Soon she could walk to please herself, up and down
stairs, and everywhere; though she was not allowed to go far
enough to tire her foot while it was yet unused to exercise.

Now all her home ways fell again into their accustomed order.
Daisy could get up, and be dressed; nobody knows what a luxury
that is unless he has been hindered of it for a good while.
She could stand at her window and look out; and go down on her
own feet to join the family at breakfast. Her father procured
her a seat next himself now, which Daisy did not use to have;
and she enjoyed it. She knew he enjoyed it too; and it made
breakfast a very happy time to Daisy. After breakfast she was
at her own disposal, as of old. Nobody wished her to do
anything but please herself.

At this moment nothing pleased Daisy better than to go on with
English history. With Preston, if she could get him; if not,
alone, with her book and her tray map. Poring over it, Daisy
would lie on the sofa, or sit on a little bench with the tray
on the floor; planting her towns and castles, or going back to
those already planted with a fresh interest from new
associations. Certain red-headed and certain black-headed and
certain green-headed pins came to be very well known and
familiar in the course of time. And in course of time, too,
the soil of England came to be very much overspread with
little squares of pink blotting-paper. To Daisy it grew to be
a commentary on the wickedness of mankind. Preston remarked on
the multitude there was of Egyptian spoons.

"What do you mean by that, Preston?" said his aunt.

"Causes of quarrel, ma'am."

"Why do you call them Egyptian spoons?"

"Causes of trouble, I should say, ma'am."

"And again I say, why do you call them Egyptian spoons?"

"I beg your pardon, aunt Felicia. Egypt was always a cause of
trouble to the faithful; and I was afraid little Daisy had had
just a spoonful of it lately."

"Daisy, what have you been saying to your cousin?"

"Nothing, mamma, about that; only what Preston asked me."

"I am sure you did not say what I asked of you, Daisy. She
told me nothing at all, aunt Felicia, except by what she did
not tell me."

"She behaved very sweetly about it, indeed," said Mrs. Gary.
"She made me feel quite easy about keeping it. I shall have to
find out what I can send to Daisy that she will like."

"What are you and Preston doing there?" Mrs. Randolph asked
with a cloudy face.

"Studying, mamma; I am. English history."

"That is no way of studying; and that tray — what have you got
in it?"

"England, mamma!"

Preston laughed. Mrs. Randolph did not join him.

"What have you got in that thing, Daisy? sand?"

"Oh, no, mamma — it's something — it's prepared clay, I
believe."

"Prepared!" said Mrs. Randolph. "Prepared for something
besides my library. You are hanging over it all day, Daisy — I
do not believe it is good for you."

"Oh, mamma, it is!"

"I think I shall try whether it is not good for you to be
without it."

"Oh, no, mamma." Daisy looked in dismay. "Do ask Dr. Sandford
if he thinks it is not good for me."

"There he is, then," said Mrs. Randolph. "Doctor, I wish you
would see whether Daisy is occupying herself, in your
judgment, well, when she is hanging over that thing half the
day."

Dr. Sandford came up. Daisy was not afraid of his decision,
for she knew he was on her side. Mrs. Randolph, on the other
hand, did not wish to dispute it, for she was, like most other
people, on the doctor's side. He came up and looked at the
tray.

"What is this?"

"The map of England, sir."

"Pray, what are you doing with it?"

"Making it, sir, and studying English history."

"What are these pins? armies? or warriors? they are in
confusion enough."

"Oh, there is no confusion," said Daisy. "They are castles and
towns."

"For instance? —"

"This is Dover Castle," said Daisy, touching a redheaded pin;
"and this is Caernarvon, and Conway; and these black ones are
towns. There is London — and Liverpool — and York — and Oxford
— don't you see?"

"I see, but it would take a witch to remember. What are you
doing?"

"Studying English history, sir; and as fast as we come to a
great town or castle we mark it. These bits of paper show
where the great battle-fields are."

"Original!" said the doctor.

"No sir, it is not," said Daisy. "Captain Drummond taught it
to me."

"What, the history?"

"No; but this way of playing."

Preston was laughing and trying to keep quiet. Nothing could
be graver than the doctor.

"Is it interesting, this way of playing."

"Very!" said Daisy, with a good deal of eagerness, more than
she wished to show.

"I wish you would forbid it, Dr. Sandford," said Daisy's
mother. "I do not believe in such a method of study, nor wish
Daisy to be engrossed with any study at all. She is not fit
for it."

"Whereabouts are you?" said the doctor to Daisy.

"We are just getting through the wars of the Roses."

"Ah! I never can remember how those wars began — can you?"

"They began when the Duke of York tried to get the crown of
Henry the Sixth. But I think he was wrong — don't you?"

"Somebody is always wrong in those affairs," said the doctor.
"You are getting through the wars of the Roses. What do you
find was the end of them?"

"When the Earl of Richmond came. We have just finished the
battle of Bosworth Field. Then he married Elizabeth of York,
and so they wore the two roses together."

"Harmoniously?" said the doctor.

"I don't know, sir. I do not know anything about Henry the
Seventh yet."

"What was going on in the rest of the world while the Roses
were at war in England?"

"Oh, I don't know, sir!" said Daisy, looking up with a sudden
expression of humbleness. "I do not know anything about
anywhere else."

"You do not know where the Hudson River was then."

"I suppose it was where it is now?"

"Geographically, Daisy; but not politically, socially, or
commercially. Melbourne House was not thinking of building;
and the Indians ferried their canoes over to Silver Lake,
where a civilised party are going in a few days to eat chicken
salad under very different auspices."

"Were there no white people here?"

"Columbus had not discovered America, even. He did that just
about seven years after Henry the Seventh was crowned on
Bosworth Field."

"I don't know who Columbus was," Daisy said, with a glance so
wistful and profound in its sense of ignorance, that Dr.
Sandford smiled.

"You will hear about him soon," he said, turning away to Mrs.
Randolph.

That lady did not look by any means well pleased. The doctor
stood before her looking down, with the sort of frank, calm
bearing that characterised him.

"Are you not, in part at least, a Southerner?" was the lady's
first question.

"I am sorry I must lose so much of your good opinion as to
confess myself a Yankee," said the doctor, steadily.

"Are you going to give your sanction to Daisy's plunging
herself into study, and books, and all that sort of thing, Dr.
Sandford?"

"Not beyond _my_ depth to reach her."

"I do not think it is good for her. She is very fond of it,
and she does a great deal too much of it when she begins; and
she wants strengthening first, in my opinion. You have said
enough now to make her crazy after the history of the whole
world."

"Mrs. Randolph, I must remind you that though you can hinder
a tree from growing, in a particular place, you cannot a
fungus; if the conditions be favourable."

"What do you mean?"

"I think this may be a good alternative."

The lady looked a little hard at the doctor. "There is one
book I wish you could hinder her from reading," she said,
lowering her tone.

"What is that, madam?"

"She is just the child not to bear it; and she is injured by
poring over the Bible."

"Put the Bibles out of her way," suggested the doctor.

"I have, as much as I can; but it is not possible to do it
perfectly."

"Then I counsel you to allow her the use of this medicine,"
said Dr. Sandford, glancing towards the tray, which no longer
held Daisy's attention. For, together with her mother's
lowering of voice, the one word "Bible" had come to her
consciousness.

Daisy was at no loss to guess what it meant. The low tones of
the speakers gave her sufficient information. Thus far; that
her Bible was reckoned an undesirable treasure for her by her
mother. Was her own dear little particular Bible in danger?
the one that Mr. Dinwiddie had given her? Daisy was alarmed.
She did not enjoy any more battle-fields, nor enter with good
heart into her history work from that time, until she could
get up stairs again and see that it was safe, and contrive
some way or place to keep it safe in time to come. Where could
such a place be? It was a puzzle, because all Daisy's things
were, of course, open to her mother. Perhaps Daisy's fears
were needless; but, after the affair of her Egyptian spoon,
she looked with jealous eyes not only on her Bible, but on her
trilobite.

She sat down with a dismayed little face, to think where she
could find a hiding-place. She thought of putting the Bible
under her bed or pillow; but the bed was turned over every
morning, and the servants would find it. None of her bureau
drawers or cabinet drawers were secure. Daisy pondered all
manner of impossible places. At last fixed upon a spot of the
floor covered by an ottoman. The ottoman was hollow and not
very heavy, and never moved after the room was put in order
every day. Till the room was put in order Daisy hid her Bible
in a drawer; then took it out, and consigned it to the
obscurity of the ottoman.

She was greatly afraid, then, of being found reading it. She
had not heard the words which passed between the doctor and
her mother; only the word "Bible;" but the low tones made her
well enough aware that the matter of their talk was somehow
adverse; it boded nothing kindly to her and the Bible. So
Daisy was in another perplexity; and resolved that to be as
safe as she could, she would read with locked doors for the
future. And as doors must not be locked at times when her
mother might be coming and going, Daisy chose early morning
and late evening for her Bible-reading. She used to let June
undress her, and finish all her duties of dressing-maid; then
she sent her away, and locked her doors, and read in comfort.
This lasted a little while; then one unlucky night Daisy
forgot to unlock her doors. The morning came, and June with
it; but June could neither get in nor dare knock loud enough
to make Daisy hear; she was obliged to come round through her
mistress's dressing-room. But Daisy's door on that side was
locked too! June was going softly away.

"What do you want?" said her mistress.

"If you please, ma'am," said June, stopping very unwillingly —
"I thought it was time to wake Miss Daisy."

"Why do you not go in, then?"

"Ma'am — the door is locked," said June, in a scarce audible
undertone.

"Locked? — knock." June went back and knocked.

"Louder," said Mrs. Randolph, who was under her maid's hands;
"you would not waken a cat at that rate. Make yourself heard."

June's taps, however, continued so fearfully gentle, that Mrs.
Randolph arose and came to the door herself. One or two of the
touches of her imperative fingers brought a little figure in
white night-dress and just-awakened face, to open the door.

"Daisy," said her mother, "what is your door fast for?"

"Mamma — I wanted it fast for a few minutes."

"Did you lock it last night or this morning?"

"Last night — I thought — I meant to have opened it."

"Both your doors?"

"Yes, mamma."

"All night locked! Now, Daisy, I forbid you ever to turn the
key in your door again, night or day."

"Oh, mamma! — I want it shut sometimes."

"Hush. Go and let June dress you."

June was vexed enough with herself to have inflicted some
punishment on her awkward tongue and head, when she saw that
Daisy was for some reason or other deeply grieved. The tears
gathered and fell, quietly, all through the process of
dressing; and a sort of sob heaved from the child's breast now
and then, without words and most involuntary. Juanita's
cottage was a palace to Melbourne House, if peace made the
furniture. But June did not know what to say; so she was
silent too.

When June was gone, Daisy went to her beloved window, and
stood there. She did not like to kneel, because her mother
might come in, or even June, while she was doing so. She stood
at the sweet open window, and prayed that the Lord would take
care of her, and help her to pray however she could. And then
the thought of those words came to Daisy: — "Thou, therefore,
endure hardness, as a good soldier of Jesus Christ." She
remembered very well how Captain Drummond had described the
way a good soldier takes things — hard and disagreeable
things, as well as others. It is part of his business to
endure them; he expects them, and minds them not at all in
comparison with the service in which he is engaged. And a
soldier of Jesus Christ has only to obey Him, and take
willingly whatever comes in the line of his service. What
matter? The only thing was to obey orders, and do the work she
was set upon. Hardships did not seem much like hardships when
she thought of them in this way. And then it occurred to
Daisy, that, if she _could_ not fasten her doors, she had better
just kneel down as usual with them open. She could not do
without praying; and if she must be intruded upon, why, it was
a little hardship that she had better not mind. And when she
had thought that, Daisy kneeled down; and she never had any
more trouble about it. She did fancy, even that first morning,
that she heard the lock of her door turn; but she did not move
to see, and hearing nothing more, she soon forgot it. Nobody
wore such a bright and fresh face at the breakfast-table as
Daisy; such a glad and uncareful face; and Mrs. Randolph,
seeing it, was reassured; though she had just seen her little
daughter at her prayers, on her knees, by the window. She
looked so happy now, that the lady was inclined to hope her
religion was a childish folly, which would pass away and be
forgotten in time.

But for the present Daisy was a soldier; and meditating much
on a service which she had to perform. That very day, if you
had been there, and worn an invisible cap, you might have gone
into her room, and seen what she was about. On the ottoman
aforesaid Daisy's writing-desk was placed; and before it, on a
cricket, sat Daisy, with a face, oh, how grave and busy! A
very weight of care of some sort seemed to lie under her
childish little brow. She was opening her desk and looking out
paper; some she felt and rejected — it was too thin or too
blue, or something; she tried her pen on another kind; it did
not go well. At last a thick little sheet of note paper was
chosen; and Daisy began to write. Or rather, sat over the
paper with her pen in her fingers, thinking how to write. She
looked very anxious; then took bits of paper and a pencil, and
tried different forms of a sentence. At last, with slow care,
and fingers that trembled, a line or two was inscribed on the
beautiful thick little sheet of English note-paper.


"Dear papa, won't you think about being a Christian? Do not be
displeased with

"DAISY."


It was written all out, as fair as she could; and then you
might have seen Daisy's little round head go down on her hands
on the desk. It did not move for a good while. When it was
lifted up, she sought out an envelope rather hurriedly,
directed it, folded and put in her note, and sealed it.

Daisy shut her desk then, and with a manner not quite as calm
and careless as usual, went to her father's dressing table,
and stood considering where she should put the note. Under the
cushion, it might be seen first by a servant, and then
delivered to Mr. Randolph in the midst of company. Under his
dressing-box, the same fate threatened it. Daisy peered about,
and thought, and trembled for several minutes. She had a fancy
that she did not want him to get it before the next morning,
when he would be quietly dressing here alone. He would
certainly be opening his dressing-box before that. The only
place Daisy could be sure would not be invaded before that,
was the place she chose; she took off the cover of his box of
shaving soap, and with some trouble squeezed the note in so
that it would lie safely hid; then put on the cover, and put
the box in its place, and went away with light hands and a
heavy heart. — Heavy, that is, with a burden of doubt mingled
with fear. Would Mr. Randolph be angry? Daisy could not feel
sure that that would not be the consequence of her proceeding.
Perhaps he would be very much displeased, and think it very
disrespectful and improper that his little daughter should
take so much upon herself. Daisy knew quite well all that. But
who else in the world would take the responsibility if she did
not? No one; and Daisy with all her fear did not once think of
going to get her note away again before it should be read.

Her heart yearned towards her father. He was so very gentle
and tender in his manner with her, more than ever, Daisy
thought; she felt that the love between them was growing,
strong and deep, even beyond what it used to be. And while he
knew nothing of the joy that filled her own heart, and while
he refused obedience to the laws that she knew were binding on
him as well as on her, he must be also, she knew, without the
favour and blessing of God. He had no part in it; nothing to
do with it; and Daisy's heart swelled with childish sorrow and
longing. She had thought a great deal about it, and concluded
that she must bear "the message," even plainly in words, to
her father, before she could feel satisfied. Little hands
might take the message, Juanita had said; so humbly Daisy's
took it; and then she prayed that it might not be for nothing.

She knew all her hands could do was not much. All the
remainder of that day, Daisy never forgot her note in the box
of shaving soap. She knew it was extremely unlikely that the
box would be opened sooner than the next morning;
nevertheless, whenever Mr. Randolph came near where she was,
Daisy looked up with something like a start. There was nothing
in his face to alarm her; and so night came, and Daisy kissed
him twice for good night, wondering to herself whether he
would feel like kissing her when they met again. Never mind,
the message must be delivered, cost what it might. Yes, this
was soldier's service. Daisy was going into the enemy's
country.

Mr. Randolph had felt the lingering touch of Daisy's lips, and
the thought of it came to him more than once in the course of
the evening — "like the wind that breathes upon a bank of
violets" — with a breath of sweetness in the remembrance.
Nevertheless, he had pretty well forgotten it, when he pulled
off the cover of his box of shaving soap the next morning. He
was belated, and in something of a hurry. If ever a man
suddenly forgot his hurry, Mr. Randolph did, that morning. He
knew the unformed, rather irregular and stiff handwriting in a
moment; and concluded that Daisy had some request to make on
her own account which she was too timid to speak out in words.
That was what he expected when he opened the paper; but Eve
could not have been much more surprised when the serpent spoke
to her in the garden of Eden, than was Mr. Randolph at finding
that his little lamb of a child had dared to open her mouth to
him in this fashion.

"Mr. Randolph, you will be late," said the lady who owned that
name, coming to his door. And, seeing her husband standing
still, with his elbow leaning on his dressing-table, she
walked in.

"You will assuredly be late! what have you got there?"

The little sheet of English note-paper lay spread out on the
dressing-table. Mr. Randolph was looking at it. He did not
answer, and the lady bent nearer for a moment and then stood
upright.

"Daisy!" — exclaimed Mrs. Randolph.

Her husband made an inarticulate sort of a noise, as he turned
away and took up his neglected shaving soap.

"What is this?" said the lady, in astonishment.

"What you see —" said Mr. Randolph.

"Where did it come from?"

"The signature tells you."

"But where did you get it?"

"Here — this moment."

"The impertinent little minx!"

"Hush. She does not mean to be impertinent, Felicia."

"Do you like misbehaviour that is not meant, Mr. Randolph?"

"Better than that which is meant."

"I told you the child would get ruined in that place," said
Mrs. Randolph, after musing a few minutes over the little
sheet of note-paper.

Mr. Randolph made a lather, and applied it. That might be the
reason why he made no answer.

"I call it impertinence," the lady went on, "and very well-
grown impertinence too — from a child like that! It is the
trick of all religious people, to think themselves better and
wiser than the rest of the world; but I think Daisy has learnt
the lesson early!"

Still silence on Mr. Randolph's part, and steady attention to
his toilet duties.

"What notice do you mean to take of this?"

"I think, none at all."

"Mr. Randolph, Daisy is ruined!"

"I do not quite see it yet."

"I wish you would see it. She is full of stupid stiff ways,
which will be habits fixed as iron in a little time, if we do
not break them up. She does not act like a child."

"She is very like a child to me," said Mr. Randolph.

"You do not see. Do you observe her way whenever she sits
down to table? She covers her face, and remains in silent
prayer, I suppose, a minute or so." A slight laugh came from
Mrs. Randolph with the words.

Mr. Randolph could not well laugh, for he was shaving. He
remarked that he had never seen it.

"I wish you would remember and take notice. She does it
regularly. And she is not a docile child any longer, I give
you warning. You will find it very difficult to do anything
with her in the way of breaking up this religious stiffness of
hers."

Mr. Randolph was silent a while, and Mrs. Randolph looked
vexed. At length he remarked that indirect ways were the best.

"It will take both," said his wife; "direct and indirect." And
after that they went down to breakfast.

Mr. Randolph was the last, and he was not early; but this
morning Daisy was later still. Her father watched for her
coming, and did not see it after all; Daisy stole in so
quietly, she was in her seat by his side before he had noticed
her. Then, perceiving the gentle, sweet, quiet little face
beside him, and recognising the timid feeling which made Daisy
afraid to meet his eye, he could not refrain; — he bent down
and gave her a kiss. He was very much touched by the little
fluttering start and glance which Daisy returned to this
salutation, and he saw that a pink flash of pleasure came into
her cheeks. Perhaps all this put the subject of watching her
out of Mr. Randolph's head; he certainly did not see the
minute, a few minutes later, when Daisy's hand stole to her
brow, and her eyes were for a short space hidden and her hand
moveless. Mrs. Randolph saw it, and saw that he did not. Daisy
had forgotten that anybody could see her. The thanksgiving of
her heart had more burden to-day than the ordinary gifts of
the morning which she was wont to remember. Her father was not
angry with her! It took a load off Daisy's heart; and she
looked so happy all breakfast time that Mr. Randolph was very
much inclined to slight his wife's fears.

Juanita's constant habit of thankfulness and of expressing her
thankfulness, during the weeks Daisy had spent with her, had
gone down into the child's heart. With every meal, though
taken by herself all alone, Daisy had seen the old woman
acknowledging gratefully from whose hand she got it. And with
other things beside meals; and it had seemed sweet and
pleasant to Daisy to do so. At home, when she was suddenly
transferred to her father's stately board, — where every
beauty and luxury were gathered together, and an array of
friends to help each other enjoy it; and no one remembered, no
one acknowledged that any gratitude was due to the hand that
had supplied the board and given the friends, — Daisy's heart
was pained by a great sense of want. Not thank God for all
these things? give no acknowledgment of praise to Him? She
could not bear to have it so.

She thought nobody would notice her, or know what she was
doing if they did notice her; and she used to put her hand
over her brow, and comfort her own heart with giving the
thanks she wanted to express. She soon forgot to be afraid
anybody would notice her. But Mrs. Randolph marked it all, and
now never missed the minute when Daisy's face was shielded.


CHAPTER XXIV.

THE PIC-NIC PARTY.


The thing on hand now was the expedition to Silver Lake.
Daisy's foot and ankle were getting sufficient strength to
bear all the work that need be asked of them; and it was best
to go while the hot weather still lingered. It was early in
September, and the day was fixed. Quite a party was going.
There were no visitors at Melbourne House now except Mrs. Gary
and her children; but that brought the home party up to seven.
Dr. Sandford was going, of course. Then some other neighbours.
Mrs. Stanfield had promised to go, with her little daughter
Ella, and her older daughter Theresa. Mrs. Fish was coming
from another quarter of the country, with her children,
Alexander and Frederica. Mr. Fish and Mr. Stanfield were to go
too; and Mr. and Mrs. Sandford, the doctor's brother and
sister-in-law. However, though this was to be such a strong
muster, Daisy thought of only two or three of the number that
concerned her personally. Preston and Ransom, of course;
Alexander Fish; though the two latter she thought of as likely
to make disturbance more than anything else; and Daisy liked a
most lady-like quietness and propriety in everything in which
she was engaged. But, besides these, there was only Ella
Stanfield whose age would bring her into contact with Daisy;
and Daisy, very much of late accustomed to being alone or with
older people, looked with some doubtfulness at the prospect of
having a young companion to entertain. With that exception,
and it hardly made one, nothing could look brighter in the
distance than Silver Lake.

Several days passed between Daisy's giving the note to her
father and the one fixed on for the expedition. In all that
time Daisy was left to guess whether or not it had been seen
and read by him. No sign or token told her; there was none;
and Daisy could only conclude that he _must_ have seen it,
because he could not very well help doing so. But she was not
at all discouraged. Rather the contrary; seeing that certainly
her father was not displeased with her.

In all these days too, Mr. Randolph had ample time and chance
to observe Daisy's action which had so disturbed her mother at
meal times. Yet hitherto he had never spoken of it. In fact it
was so quietly done that often the moment escaped him; and at
other times, Daisy's manner so asked for a shield rather than
a trumpet, and the little face that looked up from being
covered with her hand was so bright and sweet, that perhaps
his heart shrank from saying anything that would change the
expression. At any rate, Daisy had been safe thus far.

Great preparations were making for the Silver Lake day.
Thursday it was to be. Wednesday evening, Dr. Sandford was at
Melbourne. Daisy was considering the arrangements of a little
packed basket of her own.

"Are you expecting to have a good time to-morrow, Daisy?" he
asked.

Daisy smiled as she said yes.

"But you will have to keep quiet. I shall not let you run
about like the rest."

"I can sit quiet and look at the lake," said Daisy; with so
absolutely contented a face, that the doctor smiled.

"But in parties of pleasure, do you know, my friend, it
generally happens that people cannot do what they expected to
do."

"Then I can do something else," said Daisy, looking very
fearless of anything disagreeable.

"Will you let your old friend, Nora Dinwiddie, join the
party?"

"Nora! Oh, is Nora coming?" exclaimed Daisy.

"Mrs. Sandford commissioned me to make the enquiry, Mrs.
Randolph, whether one more would be too many? Her little
relation, Daisy's friend I believe, has returned to her for
the rest of the season."

"Certainly!" Mrs. Randolph said, — "there was room for
everybody."

The lady's manner told nothing; but, nevertheless, Daisy did
not venture to show her joy. She did not say another word
about Nora. The hour of meeting was determined, and the doctor
withdrew. Daisy looked over the contents of her basket again
with fresh satisfaction, made sure that all was right and
everything there; and went to bed happy.

Thursday morning broke fair as eye could see. The September
sun rose in a haze of warm rays; promising, as Mrs. Randolph
said, that the heat would be stifling by and by. Daisy did not
care, for her part. They had breakfast earlier than usual; for
the plan was to get on the other side of the river before the
sun should be too oppressive. They had scarcely risen from the
table when the Sandford party drove up to the door. These were
to go in a boat with the party from Melbourne House. Mr. and
Mrs. Fish, from higher up the river, were to cross in their
own boat, and join the rest at the spot appointed on the
opposite shore. The Stanfields were to do the same, starting
from a different point; friends having arrived that would
swell their numbers beyond the original four.

Of all this, Daisy cared just for one thing; — that Nora was
come, and was to go in the boat with her, and no other. The
meeting between the two children, on the steps at Melbourne,
was most joyous. "Oh, Nora! I'm so glad you have come!" — and,
"Oh Daisy! I'm so glad to be here!" — and a small host of
small questions and answers, that indeed meant a great deal,
but would not read for much.

"Oh, Nora, isn't it nice!" said Daisy, as they stood on the
steps, while the carriages waited below before the door.

"It's grand," said Nora. "Why, aunt Frances says we shall be
gone all day."

"To be sure, we shall," said Daisy. "Papa is going to fish;
and so is Preston, and Dr. Sandford, and other people, I
suppose; and some of the men take their tackle along too.
There is nice fish in the Lake."

"What men do you mean?" said Nora.

"Oh, the men that manage the boat, and carry the baskets;
there are ever so many baskets to go, you know; and the men
must carry them; because the path won't let a wagon go."

"Who is going to carry you?" said Dr. Sandford coming out
behind them.

"Me?" said Daisy.

"Yes."

"Why, I do not want anybody to carry me, Dr. Sandford."

"Don't you? I do. And I shall want two men to do it. Whom will
you have? I have arranged a mountain chair for you, Daisy."

"A chair!" said Daisy. How could that be? And then she saw in
Dr. Sandford's wagon, a chair to be sure; a common, light,
cane-bottomed arm-chair; with poles sticking out before and
behind it very oddly. She looked up at the doctor, and Nora
demanded what that was?

"Something like the chairs they use in the mountains of
Switzerland, to carry ladies up and down."

"To carry me?" said Daisy.

"For that purpose. Now see whom you will have to do it."

Daisy and Nora ran away together to consult her father. The
matter was soon arranged. James the footman, and Michael the
coachman, were to go to carry baskets, and help manage the
boat; James being something of a sailor. Now Logan and Sam
were pressed into the service; the latter to take James's
business, as porter, and leave the latter free to be a chair-
bearer.

"I don't see how the boat is to carry all the people," Nora
remarked.

"Oh, yes," said Daisy, "it is a big boat; it will hold
everybody, I guess; and it goes with a sail, Nora. Won't that
be nice? Papa knows how to manage it."

"It will want a very large boat to take us all," Nora
persisted. "I went out with Marmaduke in a sail-boat once — he
knows how to manage a sail-boat too; — and I am sure it
wouldn't have held half as many people as we have got here.
No, nor a quarter as many."

"Oh, yes, but our boat is bigger, I suppose," said Daisy.
"Don't you like to go in a boat, Nora?"

"I like it if it don't lean over too far," said Nora. "I
thought it was going to turn over once or twice, when I was
out with Marmaduke that time. I was afraid."

"I am not afraid with papa," said Daisy. "I know he can manage
it."

"Why, so can Marmaduke manage it," said Nora; "and he said I
needn't be afraid; but I was."

The carriages took the whole party down to the shore in a few
minutes. There lay the sail-boat all ready, her sails shaken
out; and James and Sam, on board already, received basket
after basket from the hands of Logan and the coachman, and
stowed them away in what seemed to be a place of ample
accommodations.

Daisy and Nora, hand in hand, stood on the shore looking at
all that was done, and with eager eyes. The summer breeze just
played lightly and rippled the water, on which the morning sun
made a warm glow, early in the day as it was.

"What _could_ so many baskets be wanted for?" said Nora.

"Why, to carry all the things. You know there will be a great
many people to eat dinner at Silver Lake."

"Dinner?" said Nora; "do people eat dinner when they go to a
pic-nic?"

"Why, yes. What do you think they do?"

"I thought it was just a pie-nic."

"What is that?" said Daisy, curiously.

But just then there was a stir; the ladies and gentlemen were
getting into the boat, and the children had to be ready for
their turn. It came; and Mr. Randolph handed one after other
safe over the gunwale of the big sail-boat, and placed them
happily beside each other in the middle space, where they
could have an excellent time for talking. But they wanted no
talking at first.

When all were aboard and ready, the boat was cast loose from
the shore, and her sail trimmed to catch the soft northerly
air that came blowing down the river. Slowly the sail caught
the breeze — would it be strong enough to take her? the
children thought — slowly, very slowly, the boat edged its way
out from the shore — then the breeze filled the sail full,
took good hold, and began to push the little vessel with a
sensible motion out towards the river channel. Steady and
sweet the motion was, gathering speed. The water presently
rippled under the boat's prow, and she yielded gently a little
to the pressure on the sail, tipped herself gracefully a
little over, and began to cleave her way through the rippling
water in good earnest. Then how the waves sparkled! how cheery
the movement was! how delicious the summer air over the water!
although the sun was throwing down his beams with great power
already, and the day promised to be sultrily hot.

"It is going to be intense," said Mrs. Randolph.

"Melting!" — said Mrs. Gary.

"You will have enough of it before the end of the day —"
remarked Mr. Sandford.

Mr. Sandford was a good-humoured looking gentleman, with a
sensible face and black whiskers; but he was a gentleman, and
Daisy approved of him. He was very unlike his brother. His
wife was a very plain person, in feature, and not very
talkative; letting her husband do that for her; but kindly and
pleasant, nevertheless; and Daisy approved of her too.

"At what hour do you expect the day _will_ end, practically?"
inquired Mrs. Randolph of her husband.

He smiled. "I should say — judging from present tokens — not
till the sun gets well down on his western way."

"First-rate!" said Preston, aside. "We'll have a good time for
fishing."

"But that will make it very late crossing the river, Mr.
Randolph? will it not?"

"It may."

"There is a moon," said Mrs. Sandford.

"Moon! I hope we are not to be beholden to the moon's good
offices!" exclaimed the other lady. "It is only ten o'clock
now — not that. We shall be tired to death of the woods before
we have done with them."

"You must try fishing, aunt Felicia," said Preston.

"Yes — a good idea," remarked Mr. Sandford. "I do not know how
the ladies can get along without some sport — ha, ha! There is
a boat on the lake — isn't there?"

"They say so," Mr. Randolph returned. "I have not been there
for a long time."

"Then I shall take the charge of your entertainment, Mrs.
Randolph," Mr. Sandford went on. "I shall persuade you to put
yourself under my guidance, and let me initiate you into the
mysteries of pickerel catching."

"I do not think you can persuade me out of the shade — if once
I get in it again —" said the lady.

"Why, mamma," said Ransom, "pickerel-fishing is splendid!"

Mr. Randolph looked at Daisy. No heat nor shadow too much for
her! With one hand clasped in Nora's, her little face was a
pattern of perfect content; nay, it was full of delighted joy.
Mr. Randolph thought he could endure his portion of the heat.

"Nora," said Daisy, "isn't it nice?"

"It goes nicely now," said Nora.

"But isn't it pleasant?"

"Yes. It is a great deal pleasanter than in a little boat.
This one is good and large."

"Isn't the water pretty?"

"I like the green grass better," said Nora.

"Oh, yes! but then I like this too. I like it very much. Nora,
what did you mean by a pic-nic?"

"A pic-nic?" said Nora.

"Yes; you said you thought people did not eat dinner, but it
was a pic-nic."

"Well, I thought they didn't."

"What did you mean by a pic-nic?"

"Why I meant just that. You know what a pic-nic is."

"We always have dinner when we go on a pie-nic," said Daisy.

"Then I don't think it is a pic-nic."

"What is it?"

"I don't know. Daisy, are you going to ride in that queer
chair?"

"I suppose so. My ankle isn't quite strong yet, you know.
Wasn't it nice of Dr. Sandford to prepare it for me?"

"I don't know. _I_ don't think he is nice," said Nora. — Which
expression of opinion was so very startling to Daisy that it
took her some time to recover from it. She sought out the
doctor with her eye where he was sitting forward of the mast,
somewhat hid from her by a piece of the sail; she scanned his
countenance, with its calm nobleness of feature, and
steadfast, reserved, beautiful blue eyes. Doubtless, he was
not everything Daisy wished him; nevertheless, to her he was
very "nice" indeed. Her eye came back satisfied.

At the other end of the boat the party were talkative and gay.
Mr. Randolph held the main sheet in his own hand; Mr. Sandford
had the rudder; neither of them had much to do; for the wind
was gentle and fair, and the boat kept her straight course for
the opposite shore. The river was wide, however, at this
place; the other shore was an object in view for a good while
before they reached it. Slowly and steadily the little skiff
skimmed over; they got to the middle of the river; then the
trees before them on the other side, with the cleared fields
in one or two spots, began to show in more distinct forms and
colours. The sun was very hot! So hot, that it seemed to kill
the breeze. As they drew near their place of disembarkation,
the motion of the vessel grew slack; the sail fluttered now
and then; the propelling force just lasted till they got to
shore, and then nobody said anything more of any air felt to
be stirring.

"I think we had better stay on the water," said Mrs. Gary. "It
is positively stifling here."

"It will be better when we get in the woods," suggested Mr.
Sandford.

"No, — begging your pardon," Mr. Randolph answered.

"No? — will it be worse, Mr. Randolph?" said his wife.

"I hope not — for I think you could broil a beefsteak here in
another hour; when the sun gets on the meridian."

"Then do let us move away from here at once! it is oppressive.
I do not know how we are going to walk, but I suppose we shall
find out. We may hope there will be a little freshness by the
lake."

Mr. Stanfield's boat however had to be waited for a few
minutes. It got to shore just as Mr. Fish's skiff appeared in
sight coasting down on the same side, from behind a point. The
whole party were soon together, exchanging shakes of the hand
and puffs of condolence on the state of the atmosphere. There
was presently a division of forces. All the boys, Preston,
Ransom, and Alexander Fish, compared notes and fishing tackle.
The ladies and gentlemen, with one or two elder girls,
Frederica Fish and Theresa Stanfield and Eloise Gary,
congregated into a moving mass of muslins and parasols. While
Daisy and Nora were joined by Ella Stanfield; and a great
constraint fell upon all three. Ella was a comparative
stranger; a nice-looking child, thoughtful and old beyond her
years. She looked like gravity; Nora liked gaiety; while Daisy
was most like the thing that bears her name.

They stood like little pinks of propriety, without saying
anything to each other. This constraint was soon broken up by
the preparations for the march. On enquiry it was found I that
there were two or three ways to the lake. One was short and
easy — in comparison — but very narrow; a mere footpath
through the woods. Another had a wider track; but it had also
a rough footing of rocks and stones, and was much longer;
taking a circuit to reach the place. Another still was only
used by eager lovers of the picturesque, though it was said to
reward them.

As soon as all this was explained to the understanding of the
company, the larger division set off immediately for the
easiest and quickest road to the lake; no other recommendation
was worth a moment's considering. With quick disappearance one
after another muslin dress and gay parasol was lost within the
edge of the woods which their chosen path immediately entered.
They vanished from the shore. Every one of them was presently
out of sight. Mr. Randolph had seen that Dr. Sandford was
putting Daisy into her travelling conveyance; and thinking no
attention of his own could be needful, he had gone on in
advance of the party with Mrs. Stanfield. The very last of
them, muslins and parasols and all, was swallowed up in the
enclosing woods, almost before Daisy was established in her
chair. Her bearers lifted it then to receive instructions from
Dr. Sandford as to their method of playing their part. They
were Logan and Sam; James was devoted to his own particular
charge.

"Why, where are Nora and Ella?" Daisy suddenly exclaimed.

"Everybody seems to have gone on," answered the doctor.
"Except the boys. Now Daisy, are you comfortable? is it all
right?"

"It is nice, Dr. Sandford!" — But at the same time Daisy
wondered much, and grieved not a little that her companions
should have left her to go alone. Was that kindness? or good
manners?

"Did they know which way I was going?" she said.

"I fancy so," said the doctor; "they have done as everybody
else does — gone with the crowd. Now, you fellows, you know
the way."

"Yes, sir."

"When you come to a house, remember, you must turn sharp to
the right. Boys, you must go with the chair as a body-guard."

"Why must we?" said Ransom.

"You would not have your sister go alone?"

"You are going that way."

"You are mistaken. I am not."

"She has got Logan and Sam to take care of her. Girls always
have to be taken care of!" exclaimed Ransom, in disgust.

"I am astonished at your want of gallantry. Preston, I shall
depend on you to see that the chair is properly attended."

"Which way are you going, sir?"

"By myself — to see if I can get a shot at something."

Preston did not look delighted, Daisy saw, though he accepted
the charge the doctor gave him. The doctor himself strode off
with his gun, disappearing in the woods at the nearest point.
Daisy was left with her two bearers and her three attendants.

"Well, boys, we may as well get along," said Ransom,
discontentedly. "There is no occasion that we should keep
poking on behind this concern."

They passed it and took the lead. Preston as he passed asked
Daisy how it went, and if she were comfortable. It went very
nicely, and she was very comfortable; and receiving this
assurance, Preston sprang forward to regain Alexander Fish's
company, with whom he was holding an animated discourse on the
making and using of artificial flies. The three boys trudged
along in advance; the motions of their busy heads, and of
their active feet, telling that there was no lack of interest
or excitement there.

The chair followed steadily with its little burden. It went
nicely; she was very comfortable; it was a new and most
pleasant mode of getting over the ground; and yet — there was
something at work in Daisy's heart that was not pleasure. She
was sadly disappointed. She was left alone. It had tried her a
good deal that Nora and Ella should have run after the larger
party with so cavalier an abandonment of her, when they knew
her chair must go another road. Then she was very sorry that
the doctor had seen good to forsake her; and felt that from
the thoughtfulness or unselfishness of boys she had little to
hope for. Look at them! there they went before her, putting
more and more distance between them and the chair every
minute. Perhaps they would entirely forget their little
convoy? and be out of sight in a trifle more time. And in all
that big party of pleasure, everybody engaged with somebody
else, she was left with no one to speak to her, and no company
at all but that of Logan and Sam. Daisy two or three times put
up her hand stealthily to her face to get rid of a tear that
had found its way there.

Daisy thought at first that she would not have done so to her
friends, as they had done to her; but then presently she
reflected what reason she had to know better and to do better,
that they had not; and instead of anything like resentment, a
very gentle and tender feeling of pity and kindness arose in
Daisy's mind toward them.

Her hurt sense of unfriendliness quite soothed itself away;
and now Daisy began to enjoy herself and the day and the party
of pleasure. — Her share of it, at least. Her chair was under
shadow of the tall woods now. It is true, it was very hot
there. No air seemed moving. The chair-bearers often raised an
arm to their brows to wipe away the heated moisture that stood
there and ran down their faces. But Daisy had no exertion to
make; and instead of that, her own motion seemed to give a
little life to the lifeless air. Then she was at leisure to
look and enjoy; not having even to take care of her own
footing. The depth of green leafage over her head when she
looked up; the depth of green shade on either hand of her,
pierced by the endless colonnade of the boles of trees; how
wildly beautiful it was!

Daisy thought of a good many things she would like to ask Dr.
Sandford — if she had the liberty; but he did not talk about
wonderful things to her now that she was well, and had her own
means of amusement.

Now and then Daisy had the sight of a red squirrel, running
along a tree bough, or scampering over the ground from one
rock to another. What jumps he would make to get out of her
way! And birds were singing too, sometimes; and mosses were
spread out in luxuriant patches of wood carpeting in many
places; and rocks were brown and grey, and grown with other
mosses and ferns; and through all this fairy work of beauty,
Daisy's chair went at an easy, quiet pace, with a motion that
she thought it very pleasant to feel.

It was a wild old wood, which nobody had ever meddled with.
Things were just as nature's work had made them. The path the
little party were travelling was a wood road merely, where
country wagons had made a track; or more properly, where the
country people had made a track for their wagons. It was but a
rough way; stumps of trees that had been cut down stood right
in the middle of it; and rocks and stones were in some places
very thickly strewn over it. After some time of wandering over
level ground, the path took a turn and began to get among the
hills. It wound up and down, and was bordered now by steep
hillsides and sharp-rising rocks. It was all the wilder and
prettier. The house Dr. Sandford spoke of had been passed; the
turn had been taken; there was nothing to do now but follow on
till they found the lake; but there were no signs of it yet,
nor any sound of voices to be heard in the distance. Even the
boys were gone on out of sight; the stillness of summer noon
was all through the deep woods, for it is a time of day when
the birds do not feel like singing much. Daisy enjoyed it. She
thought no one of all their company was having a better time
probably than she.

Suddenly Sam, who was foremost of the bearers, gave a great
shout; and at the same instant dropped his end of Daisy's
chair and sprang to one side. Then stood still.

"What for air ye playing capers like that?" inquired Logan,
with an ail of great disgust and a strong Scotch accent.

Sam stood still, drawing his countenance into all manner of
grimaces.

"Speak then, can't ye! What ails ye? Don't stand there like a
Merry Andrew, boy!"

"I've hurted myself!" Sam groaned.

"And how did ye hurt yourself? When ye were walking along,
couldn't ye go for'rard quietly? Where's the hurt?"

"My foot!" said Sam, bending down to it. "I can't stir it.
Oh!"

"Did ye hurt yourself before or after ye gave such a loup?"
Logan grunted, going over, however, now to bring his own
wisdom to bear on Sam's causes of trouble. "Whatever possessed
ye, boy, with the end of the chair in your hand?"

"I see a sarpent —" said Sam, submissively.

"A sarpent!" echoed Logan — "it's not your pairt to be
frighted if you see a sarpent. What hurt would the sight of
the brute do ye? There's no harm come to ye, boy, but the
start."

"I can't move it —" repeated Sam, under his breath.

"Logan, perhaps he has sprained his ankle," said Daisy from
her chair; where at first she had been pretty well frightened.

"Weel — I don't see it," replied Logan, slowly and
unbelievingly.

"How does it feel, Sam?" Daisy asked.

"It don't feel without I stir it, Miss Daisy — and then, it's
like a knife."

"He has sprained it, I am afraid, Logan," said Daisy, getting
out of her chair and coming to the consultation. "I think it
is swelling now."

Sam had bared his unfortunate ankle. Logan looked up from it
to the little speaker whose words were so quietly wise, with
unspoken admiration.

"Can't ye walk then, Sam?" he urged. "Here is Miss Daisy in
the middle of the road, and wanting to be at the Lake — and
how much further it may be to the Lake is a subject unknown to
me. Can't ye bear your foot surely?"

Sam's reply was sorrowful but decided; he could not bear it at
all, with any weight upon it.

"Never mind, Logan," said Daisy; "I can wait. You had better
go forward and see if you can find the boys. They can take
care of me."

Logan felt the justness of this proposition, and at once put
his long legs in swift motion to overtake the advance party;
exercising a good strong voice too presently in hallooing to
them. Daisy was left with Sam. The thought crossed her mind
that this was getting to be an odd party of pleasure; but her
real concern was for the sprained ankle. That, she was very
sorry for. Her own delay and disappointment she took
patiently.

Logan's halloos brought the boys to a stand. They waited till
he came up to them, not deeming it necessary on their part to
go back to see what was the matter. When they heard his news
there was a disagreeable pause. What was to be done?

"Daisy can walk the rest of the way," was the decision of her
brother.

"How far is it?" said Preston.

"I don't know! — it's no great things of a walk anyhow. Girls
are always getting into trouble!"

"But what has got to be done with Sam?" said Preston.

"He can take care of himself," said Sam's young master

"He can't move, sir, on his own feet," said Logan.

"You'll have to carry him, then. I suppose we cannot leave him
in the woods, for humanity."

"There's Miss Daisy, sir."

"What a plague!" exclaimed Ransom. "Daisy can walk. She must,
at any rate; and you can bring her chair along to make
firewood. Boys, we ought to be there this minute — at the
Lake. We shall be cheated out of all our fishing before
dinner. That's along of mounting guard on a girl! And after
dinner there won't be two inches of time."

"Hush, Ransom!" said Preston.

At this point the consultation was enlarged, and its character
somewhat modified by the coming of Dr. Sandford upon the
scene. From a height not far off, where he was roaming with
his gun, he had perceived the group, discerned that something
was wrong, and come down with a quick step to reach them. His
eye rather than his voice asked what was the matter. He was
answered in various styles by the different members of the
group.

"Here is a muss!" said Ransom.

"Miss Daisy, sir — she is left standing in the middle o' the
forest!" — said Logan.

"Sam has very stupidly sprained his ankle," said Preston, "and
cannot move."

The doctor without a word turned in the direction from which
Logan had come. "Follow me, young gentlemen," said he, looking
over his shoulder, — "I shall need your help." So, unwillingly
enough, the boys, fishing tackle and all, turned back upon
their steps, and followed. They soon came to Daisy's emptied
chair, where she stood mounting guard over Sam.

The ankle was badly sprained; there was no doubt of that. Sam
not only could carry nobody; he must himself be carried. The
doctor ordered that Logan should take him on his back and
convey him as far as the poor little house they had passed on
the way. A good lift it was, for Sam was a well grown, stout
fellow; but Logan was a long-limbed, sinewy, brawny Scotchman,
and he made no difficulty of the job. The doctor in the first
place deposited his gun against a tree, and did what was
needful for the hurt ankle.

"Now," said he to Daisy, "how are you going to get forward?"

"I can walk the rest of the way," said Daisy.

"Pardon me. Not with my leave. Boys, which of you will take
the honour of being chair-bearers? I have my gun to care for."

"I will be one," said Preston.

"And Ransom will be the other. Come, sir!"

"Honour!" — said Ransom, as he moved sullenly forward. "I
think girls ought to stay at home when there is anything going
on. They are plaguily in one's way!"

"That is a very womanish speech," said the doctor; "in so far
as that it is very unmanly."

Ransom's temper nowise improved by this reply, he took up
sulkily his ends of the chair-poles; and once more the party
set forward. It was not quite so pleasant now for Daisy; her
chair was no longer carried smoothly. Preston, who was in
advance, did his part perfectly well; but Ransom, behind her,
let the chair go up and go down and sway about very
unsteadily, besides that every step was with a jolting motion.
It kept Daisy in constant uneasiness. Dr. Sandford walked on
just before with his gun; Alexander Fish came after, laughing
and jesting with the other boys.

"How does it go, Daisy?" said the doctor, stopping after a
while to inquire.

"Mayn't I get out and walk, Dr. Sandford?"

"What for?"

"I should like it very much!"

"Do you not ride easily."

"Not quite," said Daisy. "It throws me about a good deal."

"Ah! Did it do so when Logan and Sam carried you?"

"I did not feel it then," said Daisy, unwillingly.

"Your porters are unskilled."

The doctor took his station by Ransom's hand, remarking that
he would see that he did his work well. And he was as good as
his word. He kept a constant eye on the management of the
chair; and when Ransom neglected his duty, gave him a word of
admonition or advice, so keen and contemptuous in its rebuke,
though slight and dry, that even Ransom's thickness of
apprehension felt it, and sheered off from meeting it. The
last part of the distance Daisy was thoroughly well cared for,
and in silence; for the doctor's presence had put a stop to
all bantering between the boys. In furious silence on Ransom's
part this last portion of the way was accomplished.

At the lake at last! And in Daisy's breast at least,
everything but pleasure was now forgotten. A very beautiful
sheet of water, not very small either, with broken shores, lay
girdled round with the unbroken forest. Close to the edge of
the lake the great trees rose up and flung their arms over;
the stems and trunks and branches were given back again in the
smooth mirror below. Where the path came out upon the lake, a
spread of greensward extended under the trees for a
considerable space; and this was spotted and variegated now
with the scattered members of the pleasure party. Blue and
pink and white and green, the various light muslins contrasted
with the grey or the white dresses of the gentlemen; while
parasols were thrown about, and here and there a red shawl lay
upon the ground, for somebody's reclining carpet. To add to
all this, which made already a very pretty picture under the
canopy of the great trees, a boat lay moored at a little point
further on; baskets and hampers congregated with great promise
in another quarter under guard of James and one or two of his
helpers; and upon it all the sunlight just peeped through the
trees, making sunny flecks upon the ground. Nobody wanted more
of it, to tell the truth; everybody's immediate business upon
reaching the place had been to throw himself down and get
cool. Daisy and Dr. Sandford were the two signal exceptions.

Nora and Ella came running up, and there was a storm of
questions. "Oh, Daisy, isn't it beautiful?" "How came you to
be so long getting here?" "Did you have a nice ride?" "Oh,
Daisy, what are we going to do, you and Ella, and I? Everybody
else is going to do something."

"What are they going to do?" said Daisy.

"Oh, I don't know! everything. Mr. Randolph is going out in
the boat to fish, and all the ladies are going with him. —
Mrs. Sandford and Mrs. Stanfield and your mother; only Mrs.
Fish isn't going; but Mr. Sandford is. And Eloise, your
cousin, is going to see about having the dinner ready; and
Theresa Stanfield is in that too; I think they have got the
most fun; but nobody is doing anything yet. It's too hot. Are
you hot, Daisy?"

"Not very."

"Oh, Daisy," said Ella Stanfield, "couldn't we fish?"

"There are so many boys —" said Daisy; "I do not believe there
will be any fishing tackle for us."

"Can you fish, Daisy?" asked the doctor, who stood near,
looking after his gun.

"No, sir. I did catch a fish once — but it was only my line
caught it."

"Not your hand at the end of the line?"

"My hand was not there. The line was lying on the bank and my
hook in the water."

"Oh! that was it!"

Away went the doctor with his gun, and the boys sped off with
their fishing rods. The heat was too great for anybody else to
move. Nevertheless, what are parties of pleasure for _but_
pleasure? they must not let the whole day slip away with
nothing done but lying in the shade of the trees. There was a
little island in the lake, well wooded like its shores. It was
proposed that the ladies' fishing party should row over to the
island, and there, under another shady grove, carry on their
designs against the pickerel. Daisy's wish was to go with that
party in the boat and watch their sport; especially as Mr.
Randolph was the leader and manager of it. She was not asked
to go — there was no room for the little people; so they stood
on the shore and saw the setting off, and watched the bright
dimples every stroke of the oars made in the surface of the
lake.

The people were pretty well scattered now. Nobody was left on
the ground but Mrs. Gary and Mrs. Fish, sitting under a tree
at some distance, talking; and Eloise and Theresa, who were
charged to superintend the laying of the cloth. Having nothing
particular to do, the three children became hangers-on, to
watch how this business would be conducted; ready to help if
they got a chance.

It was found a difficult business to arrange places for so
many people on the grass; and the girls finally and wisely
gave it up. They determined to set out the eatables only, on a
tablecloth spread to receive them; but to let everybody eat
where he felt disposed, or where he could find the best bit of
shade. Shade was the best thing that day, Theresa Stanfield
declared. But the first thing of all was to light a fire; for
coffee must be boiled, and tea made. The fire was not a
troublesome thing to have, for dead wood was in plenty for the
gathering. James and Logan, who had come to the scene of
action, soon had that going; and the children forgot that it
was hot, in the beauty and the novelty of the thing, and
laughed at Theresa's red cheeks as she stooped over the coals
with her coffee-pot. About coffee Daisy was ignorant. But tea
had been made in her behalf by Juanita too many times for her,
not to have the whole proceeding fixed in her memory.

"Oh, Eloise, you must not make that tea now!" she exclaimed.

"Mustn't I!"

"No. It will be spoiled."

"Some other things have had the same fate," said Eloise.

"It will not be good for anything, Eloise," Daisy persisted,
gently. "It should not be made but just before you want it —
just a few minutes."

"You are wise, Daisy," returned her cousin. "I do not know so
much as you do, you see."

Daisy fell back a little. Eloise and Theresa went to unpacking
the hampers; and James, acting under their direction, carried
and placed the various articles they took out, placed and
replaced; for as new and unlooked-for additions were made to
the stock of viands, the arrangement of those already on the
tablecloth had to be varied. There was a wonderful supply; for
a hamper had come from every house that had sent members to
the party.

"What shall we do with it all?" said Eloise. "Find out what
people like — or are expected to like. Just look at the cold
chickens! and the ham! I am so thankful for that red lobster,
to make a variety. There are three boxes of sardines — and
what is that?"

"Anchovy paste."

"Well! — and look at the other things! We want an army to eat
them. There is a dog, to begin with."

Theresa said it with comical coolness; but Eloise screamed, as
a little spaniel was perceived to be snuffing round the
tablecloth.

"It's Ransom's dog! Run, Daisy, run, and keep him off. Just
stay there and keep watch of him, or he'll be all over
everything. Daisy, run!"

Daisy left the hampers, and walked, or indeed obeyed orders
and ran, to where the little spaniel was threatening a rout
among the whole army of cold chickens. Daisy called him off,
and then stood by to take care of him. It was very amusing to
see Eloise and Theresa unpack the hampers; and Ella and Nora,
finding it so, made no move to join Daisy in her distant
watch. The men were busy running to and fro with the unpacked
eatables, and keeping up the fire, and setting piles of plates
everywhere, and laying glasses all round the tablecloth — for
they would not stand up — and putting wine in coolers, that is
to say, in pails of ice water. Daisy felt alone again, left
out of the play. She looked at Nora and Ella in the distance —
that is, just far enough away to be out of her society,
eagerly standing over the hampers; and for a moment felt not
very well pleased, either with them or her cousin Eloise. But
then she remembered that she was tired, and sat down with her
back against a tree; resolved to take all things patiently, if
she could; and she very soon found enough to do, and amusing
enough, in ordering the arrangement of the dishes on the
tablecloth. Logan was sure to set a thing down in the wrong
place, if he set it anywhere; and even James was confused in
such a very novel state of his department. Daisy found
exercise for all her wisdom, and full content came with full
employment, naturally.

You can make pleasure out of almost anything, if you set about
it. In the intervals, she rested, and watched the distant
figures of the fishing party on the island; and gladdened
herself with the beauty and the sweet air of the wood, and the
flecks of sunshine and moving shadow on the ground beneath the
trees. I am afraid nobody else found the air sweet, unless it
were the doctor. He was hardy, and besides had a philosophical
way of looking at things. Daisy watched for his coining,
afraid that he might wander off beyond luncheon time; but he
did not come. The three boys, however, a less welcome sight,
had recollected that there was something forward besides
fishing; and came strolling along through the trees towards
the tablecloth. Preston was stopped to speak to his mother;
the other two approached Daisy.

"Hollo!" said Ransom, "here we are! now where's everybody
else? I'm furious as a lion."

"A hungry lion," said Alexander Fish. "I wish we had got some
fish for the people to cook. That's fun. I tell you, Ransom,
it's fun to see the work they make with it."

"Fish is no count, I think," said Ransom. "Its only good to
catch. I can stand a lobster salad, though. But I can't stand
long without something. What's the use of waiting? They aren't
coming back yonder till night. They haven't stirred yet."

Ransom's eyes indicated the party on the island. And acting
upon his announced opinion, Ransom paid his respects in a
practical form, not to cold chicken and bread, but to a dish
of cream cakes which stood conveniently near. And having eaten
one, in three mouthfuls, he stretched out his hand, and took
another. Happily then, some meringues attracted his attention;
and he stood with a cream cake in one hand, and a meringue in
the other, taking them alternately, or both together. The
meringues began to disappear fast. Daisy warned him that the
only dish of those delicacies in all the entertainment was the
one into which he was making such inroads. Ransom paid her no
heed, and helped himself to another.

"Ransom, — that is not fair," said his sister. "There are no
more but those, and you will have them all gone. Just look,
now, how the dish looks!"

"How the dish looks!" said Ransom, mockingly. "None of your
business."

"It is not right. Don't, Ransom!" Daisy said, as his hand was
extended for a fourth meringue.

"Want 'em for yourself?" said Ransom, sneeringly. "I say,
Alexander — here's a game! Here's something just fit for a
man's luncheon in a summer day — something nice and light and
nourishing. Here's a lark pie — I know what it is, for I saw
Joanna making it. Now we'll have this and be off."

"You must not, Ransom," Daisy urged, anxiously.

But Ransom seized the pie from its place, and proceeded to cut
into it, seeing that nobody was near to hinder him.

"Ransom, you ought not to do it," pleaded Daisy. "You ought to
wait your turn. You are worse than Fido."

"Am I?" said Ransom, fiercely. "Take that! Mind your own
affairs, and let mine alone. You are not queen here yet, if
you think you are."

A tolerably smart box on the ear was the accompaniment to this
speech. Nobody was near. Alexander, after joining his friend
in a meringue or two with a cream cake, not feeling quite
comfortable in the connection, had moved off. So did Ransom
now, but he carried his pie with him, and called the other two
boys to bear him company in making lunch of it. Preston was
much too gentlemanly a fellow to take part even of a lark pie
in such circumstances; he walked off in disdain, leaving
Ransom and Alexander to do what they liked. And they liked the
pie, so well that I am bound to say nothing of it remained
very soon excepting the dish. Even the bones were swallowed by
Fido.

Daisy was left alone under the tree with her occupation gone;
for Fido was after the lark bones. Her ear rang a few minutes
from the application of Ransom's hand; but that effect had
passed off long before Daisy's mind was quieted. For, gentle
as she was, Daisy was a little lady who had a very deep and
particular sense of personal dignity; she felt wronged as well
as hurt. Her father and mother never indulged in that method
of punishment; and if they had, Ransom's hand was certainly
not another one to inflict it.

Daisy was quite as much stung by the insult as by the
unkindness; but she felt both. She felt both so much that she
was greatly discomposed. Her watch over the feast was entirely
forgotten; luckily Fido had gone off with his master, and
chickens were no longer in immediate danger. Daisy rubbed away
first one tear and then another, feeling a sort of bitter fire
hot at her heart; and then she began to be dissatisfied at
finding herself so angry. This would not do; anger was
something she had no business with; how could she carry her
Lord's message, or do anything to serve Him, in such a temper?
It would not do; but there it was, offended dignity and pride,
hot at her heart. Nobody would have thought perhaps that Daisy
was proud; but you never can tell what is in a person's heart
till it is tried; and then the kinds of pride are various. It
does not follow because you have none of one sort that you
have not plenty of another sort. However, finding this fire at
her heart quite too much for her to manage, Daisy went away
from her watching-place; crept away among the trees without
any one's observing her; till she had put some distance
between her and the party, and found a further shelter from
them in a big moss-grown rock and large tree. There was a bed
of moss, soft and brown, on the other side of the rock; and
there Daisy fell down on her knees and began to remember —
"Thou therefore endure hardship, as a good soldier of Jesus
Christ."


CHAPTER XXV.

A SHOWER.


Certainly the sun was very hot that day. The fishers on the
island found it so, notwithstanding that they had sought out
every one for himself the shadiest, freshest nook that could
be found. Nothing was fresh; and if the trees did hinder the
sunshine from falling on some parts of the ground, they kept
off none of it from the water; and the glare from that was
said to be unendurable. Even where there was not much glare
strictly speaking; people were not particular in their speech
that day. At last they voted that holding lines in the water
was of no use; fish could not be expected to leave their cool
depths below to seek the sunny regions near the surface of the
water; — "they would be fools if they did," one of the ladies
remarked. Fish never were supposed to be very wise creatures,
Mr. Sandford informed her; but, nevertheless, it was resolved
not to reckon upon their want of wisdom at this time, but to
put up and go back to shore, and try what cold chicken would
do. So just about the hour when the sun's work for the day
verges towards the hottest, the little boat was seen again
stealing over the sunny surface of the lake, back to where the
tablecloth lay spread for the tired people.

A little while before it reached that place, Dr. Sandford
arrived upon the scene. He locked a little warm in the face;
but his white shooting coat did not seem less affected by the
state of the weather than the doctor's temper. Mrs. Gary and
Mrs. Fish he found sunk in somnolency at the foot of the tree
where they had been talking. The young ladies were sitting by
the emptied hampers, deep in confab. The boys and Fido, over
against the outspread feast, were arranging fishing-tackle,
and watching the return of the boat; with eyes of
anticipation. To them came the doctor.

"Where is your sister, Ransom?"

"I don't know." The tone meant, "I don't care."

"I do not see her anywhere."

"No more do I," said Ransom, without raising his eyes from his
fishing line.

"Where is she?"

"I told you, I don't know."

"Did she go with the fishing party?"

"No, sir; she was here when we came," Alexander Fish spoke up.

"Yes, I remember she was here," said Preston. "I remember
seeing her. She cannot be far off. It's hot enough to keep
people from straying far."

The doctor, being not absolutely satisfied with this
reasoning, and having nothing better to do, occupied himself
with a search after the missing Daisy. It lasted some time,
and he was beginning to be not quite easy in his mind; when,
being a sportsman, his eye detected something at a distance
which was not moss nor stone. In two minutes the doctor came
up with it. It was Daisy, fast asleep on her moss bed behind
the rock. Her head lay on her arm which was curled up under
it; and profound slumber had left the little pale face as
serene as usual. The doctor was warm by this time. He sat down
on the moss beside her; and putting his arm under Daisy's
shoulders lifted her up, by way of waking her, speaking to her
at the same moment. But to his amusement, Daisy no sooner got
her eyes well open than she shook herself free of him, and sat
as demure as possible opposite to him on the moss.

"Dr. Sandford! — I believe — I got asleep," she said, in a
bewildered kind of way.

"How did you get _here_, Daisy?"

"I came here, sir."

"What for did you come here?"

Daisy looked troubled; glanced at the doctor's face, and then
rested her head on her hand.

"Who has been vexing you now?" said he at haphazard.

"I am not vexed," said Daisy, in the gentlest of all possible
tones.

"Tired?"

"I think I am tired."

"Honour bright, Daisy! — has not some one been vexing you?"

"I ought not to have been vexed," said Daisy, slowly.

"I will wager that you are wrong there, and that you ought to
have been vexed. Who was it, Daisy?"

"Never mind, please, Dr. Sandford! It is no matter at all
now."

She put her little hand confidingly in the doctor's as she
spoke, and looked very earnest. He could not resist her.

"I wish I had come sooner," he said. "I shall be suspicious of
everybody, Daisy. Come — you and I must go to dinner, or there
will be a hue and cry after us."

Indeed by this time the whole party were gathered, and in
impatient expectation that the dinner would make up to them in
some degree for the various disappointments of the morning.

All were gathered and had arranged themselves conveniently
upon the grass, around the feast which was spread out upon the
tablecloth, before anybody knew that two of their number were
wanting. The cry was just raised, "Where is the doctor?" —
when the doctor hove in sight, with Daisy by his side.
Everybody was placed already; and it was very natural that the
doctor, keeping hold of Daisy's hand, led her with him to the
spot that seemed to be left for his occupancy, and seated her
there beside him. On the other side of Daisy was Mrs.
Stanfield. She was very well satisfied with this arrangement,
seeing that her father was surrounded by people, and busy
besides; and that Nora and Ella were with Alexander and
Ransom.

What a gay tableful they were! all talking and laughing,
though everybody declared himself exceeded by the heat, and
bored by the fishing, and generally tired of everything but
eating and drinking. But iced champagne was now at the parched
lips, and boned turkey and jellied ham were waiting attention,
and a good time had come.

It was some while, of course, before Daisy could be served.
She waited, feeling very happy and amused; for a party of
people taking a cold dinner out of doors do not look nor act
exactly like the same people taking a hot dinner in the house.
Daisy never dreamed that anybody was noticing her. She had a
disagreeable surprise.

"Daisy," said Mrs. Randolph, from a little distance, and
across several people, — "Daisy, what did you do that for?"

"Mamma!" — said Daisy. "What, mamma?"

"Have you a headache?"

"Oh, no, mamma."

"What did you put up your hand to your brow for?"

"Mamma?" — said Daisy, very much bewildered. For she knew
nothing was the matter, and she could not guess what her
mother was thinking of. Moreover, somehow, Mrs. Randolph's
words or manner had acted to stop the voices of all the
company in her neighbourhood; and everybody was waiting and
looking to see what the subject of interest might be. Mrs.
Randolph's words could come now with their usual calm
distinctness; and Daisy's answers, no matter how softly
spoken, could be well heard. In a good deal of wonder Daisy
repeated, "Mamma?"

"You put up your hand and sat with your eyes covered — did you
not, just now?"

"Yes, mamma." —

No need to bid anybody look and listen now; the rosy flush
that had spread itself all over Daisy's pale cheeks
sufficiently aroused curiosity.

"I notice that you do so before every meal — is it not the
case?"

"Yes, mamma."

Dr. Sandford could hear the caught breath. He did not look,
except by a glance, but he listened.

"What does that mean, Daisy?"

"Mamma?" — said the child in distress.

"I ask you, what that means? what is it for?"

"Mamma — may I come round there and speak to you?"

"Certainly not. Sit still in your place and answer."

But Daisy was silent, very flushed.

"Do you hear, Daisy? what does that action mean? I wish to
know."

"Mamma, may I speak to you in private and tell you?"

"Are you ashamed of it? are you ashamed to tell me?"

"No, mamma."

"Then, do it at once."

But everybody waited in vain to hear the answer. It did not
come.

"I shall not ask you again, Daisy."

"Mamma," said the child, low and modestly, but with
steadiness, — "I was praying."

"Praying! were you! Why do you choose that particular time for
your private devotions?"

It was almost too much. The tears started in Daisy's eyes; but
presently she answered, — "Because God is good to us, mamma."

"He is always good," said Mrs. Randolph. "That is a very silly
practice of yours, Daisy, and very unbecoming. There is a
proper way of doing everything."

The lady's manner said that the subject was dismissed, and her
guests returned to their ordinary conversation. — Except the
doctor and Daisy. She was overwhelmed, and he was gravely
unsocial.

Was it silly? — that bound her heart had made up to the feet
of her King? That joyful thanksgiving, and expression of love,
and pledge of obedience, and prayer for help? It was something
better than the meal often to Daisy; something sweeter and
happier. Was it silly? and must she do so no more except when
she was alone?

Daisy had quite forgotten that eating and drinking was part of
the present matter in hand, when Dr. Sandford softly asked her
what she would like to have. Daisy said anything he pleased;
not caring herself, and indeed in too much confusion of mind
yet to know or think about the business. And her appetite was
gone. Dr. Sandford provided for her with kind care, what she
liked too; but nothing was good to Daisy. She broke bread and
swallowed milk mechanically; the more substantial food she
refused utterly. Bread and milk and grapes were Daisy's
dinner.

"It's good to be somebody's favourite," Ransom said to her
after the meal was over. "Nobody got any grapes but you."

"Nobody? Why, Ransom, I thought everybody had them."

"_I_ didn't, — nor Preston, nor Alexander — not a berry; and
Nora and Ella Stanfield didn't. You are the favourite."

"Oh, Nora," said Daisy, "didn't you have any grapes? I'm
sorry!"

"I had peaches," said Nora. "I like peaches a great deal the
best. Daisy, what shall we do now?"

"Suppose we sit down, and have a talk."

"A talk?" said Nora. "Suppose we have a game of hide and seek?
It's such a good place."

"Or forfeits?" said Ella. "It is too hot to play hide and
seek."

"I don't think it is hot," said Nora. "The sun don't shine
now."

"Daisy, don't you want to go out with me in the boat?" said
Preston, coming up. "We'll get in the shade, and see if you
can catch a pickerel as well as you did a trout."

"Oh, I should like that!" said Daisy, eagerly. She saw the
kindness of Preston's meaning. He wanted to make her forget
her vexations.

"And may we go too?" Nora asked.

"Certainly; but Daisy and I are going to do the fishing. You
must be content to look on. We will go round to the other side
of the island, Daisy; it is pretty there, I know. And we shall
have a better chance for the pickerel, for the sun is gone
under a cloud."

So the sun had; but at that very moment the cloud passed off
and the brilliant hot beams fell with what seemed renewed
brilliancy on the lake, and on all the ground which they could
touch.

"It will go under again," said Preston. "We do not mind
trifles. Come, Daisy."

"Daisy, you must not go," said Dr. Sandford, looking round. He
was just moving away to see some one else, and was gone in a
minute.

"The doctor is all very well when one is sick," said Preston;
" but I never heard he had a right to command people when they
are well. Daisy, we will not mind him."

"I must," said Daisy, meekly. "But you can go without me, if
you want to."

"Nonsense, dear little Daisy! you are not obliged to do what
_everybody_ says," her cousin urged. "Dr. Sandford has no more
business to say what you shall do than what I shall do. I will
not let him rule you so. Come! we will go try for the
pickerel. Go, Nora and Ella, run away with the baskets to the
boat. Come, Daisy, come!"

"No, Preston, I cannot."

"Because of what that stupid man says? or don't you want to
go!"

"I would like to go very much, thank you, Preston."

"Then you shall!"

"No. I cannot."

"Daisy, you might as well obey me as Dr. Sandford."

"I do not think so."

"Nora and Ella are going. You will be left alone."

"I hope you will catch some pickerel," said Daisy, steadily.

But Preston was vexed. He did not like it that his word should
not have as much weight with his little cousin as any other
person's, after her father and mother. Like other boys, and
men, for the most part, he was fond of having his own way even
in little things; though he sought it in a polite fashion. And
Daisy was very fond of him, and always followed his lead; but
now he could not move her. He went off at a bound, and soon
was out upon the water, with the girls, and Alexander and
Ransom also who had joined him.

Daisy would have liked the shelter of her mossy hiding-place
again. She stood in the shade of a tree looking after the
boat; feeling very much left alone and greatly disposed to
have a good crying time; but that was not her way of meeting
trouble. What a strange day of pleasure this Silver Lake
business had turned out! Yet Daisy had enjoyed many things in
it; but her mother's attack upon her at luncheon had sobered
her completely. It was such a sign of what she might expect.
Daisy presently fell to considering what she should do; and
then remembered her old refuge, prayer; and then concluded
that she was a very happy little girl after all. And instead
of being hurt that Nora had been with her so little that day,
it was very natural, Daisy said to herself. Of course, Nora
wanted to go in the boat with Preston after fish; it was too
good an opportunity to be lost; and of course she had liked
the walk in the morning with the larger and gayer party. It
was all right, Daisy decided, although not what she herself
would have done ill the circumstances. Would her note to her
father have been reckoned "silly" too? Very likely. Daisy
turned her wistful eyes to where he was; sitting in a group of
ladies and gentlemen, talking. Daisy could not go to him.
Further along, Mrs. Gary was fighting the heat under a tree by
herself. No attraction there. Still further — the doctor was
standing talking to the two young ladies. As Daisy looked, he
quitted them and came towards her.

"Have I spoiled all your pleasure, Daisy?"

"No, sir."

"Are you angry with me?"

The answer this time was given with such an affectionate
bright smile that the doctor must have been hard not to feel
it.

"You do not seem to have much pleasure on hand just now," said
he; "would you like to take a little walk with me, and see if
we can find any wonderful things?"

Daisy's face was quite answer enough, it was so full of
content. The doctor had no intention to tire her; he strolled
along the borders of the lake, which was wild and lovely all
the more as they got further away from the picnic ground. Firs
and oaks stood thick all along, with many other trees also;
the ground was carpeted with layers of moss; great rocks rose
up by the water's edge, grey and brown with lichens. It was
not so hot now. The sun's glare was shielded off. On a mossy
carpet beside the water's edge the doctor and Daisy sat down.

Undoubtedly the doctor had never taken so much trouble with a
child before; but Daisy was a study to him.

"We do not find the wonderful things, Daisy," he remarked,
throwing himself back upon the moss with his hands under his
head. His cap fell off; his blue eyes looked at her with a
sort of contented laziness; never sleepily.

Daisy smiled at him. "I do," she said.

"You do! What have you found?"

"I think everything is wonderful."

"A profound truth," said the doctor; "but you are very young
to find it out. Instance, Daisy."

"But you want to go to sleep, sir."

"How dare you say so? No, I don't. I want to have a talk with
you about something wonderful."

Daisy thought he looked a little sleepy, for his eyelids
drooped well over his eyes; nevertheless, the eyes saw keenly
enough the start of pleasure into hers. And they had seen the
pale, subdued look of the face that it had worn before.
Nevertheless, in spite of that start, Daisy remained as quiet
as a mouse, looking at him.

"Don't you think I can talk while I am enjoying myself in this
fashion?" said the doctor.

"I think you can talk any way," said Daisy; "but you look a
great deal more like sleeping, sir."

"None of that. Go on, Daisy. Only do not say anything about
the sun, now that it has gone under a cloud. Let us forget it
for a little while."

"What shall I take, then?"

"I don't care. Something green and refreshing."

Daisy looked around her. On every side she saw things that she
had no doubt would be very interesting to talk about; she did
not know which to choose. There were the trees; the firs and
hemlocks, and the oaks and maples, growing thick on every
hand. No doubt those beautiful structures had uses and
characters of wonder; she had a great mind to ask the doctor
to tell her about them. But the great boulder beside which
they were hid from view, divided her attention; it was very
large, and rounded off on all sides, lying quietly on the
ground; and Daisy was curious to know how it came to be so
grown over with green things; mosses and ferns draped it all
over; how could they grow on the bare rock?

"Well, Daisy?" said her friend, watching how Daisy's
countenance woke up from its subdued expression.

"Dr. Sandford, how could these things grow on the rock? these
green things?"

"What green things?"

"Why, ever so many sorts. Here is moss, a great deal of it, of
different kinds; and there is beautiful brake at the top, like
plumes of feathers. How can they grow there?"

"Why not?"

"I thought everything wanted some earth to grow in."

"Have they none?"

"I don't know. I thought not. They must have very little
indeed, Dr. Sandford."

"Very little will do, I suppose."

"But I do not see how any earth got there," said Daisy. "It
was only a bare rock at first, of course."

"At first," repeated the doctor. "Well, Daisy, I suppose it
was no more. But there is something else growing there, which
you have not spoken of."

"Is there?" said Daisy. "I do not see anything else."

"Pardon me — you do see it."

"Then I do not know what it is," said Daisy, laughing.
Absolutely, the sober, sober little face had forgotten its
care, and the eyes were alight with intelligence and
curiosity, and the lips were unbent in good honest laughter.
The doctor raised himself up to a sitting posture.

"What do you call those grey and brown patches of colour that
hide your rock all over?"

"Grey and brown?" said Daisy, wistfully — "those are just the
colours of the rock, aren't they?"

"No. Look close.

"Why, Dr. Sandford, what is it? It is not the rock — some of
it is not — but here is a spot of yellow that is nothing else,
I think."

"You must learn not to trust your eyes, Daisy. That is
something that grows; it is not rock; it is a vegetable. If I
had my pocket lens here I would show you; but I am afraid —
yes, I have left it at home."

"Why, it is!" cried Daisy. "I can see now — it is not rock.
What is it, Dr. Sandford?"

"Lichen."

"What is that, sir?"

"It is one of the lowest forms of vegetable life. It is the
first dress the rocks wear, Daisy."

"But what does it live on?"

"Air and water, I suppose."

"I never knew that was a vegetable," said Daisy, musingly. "I
thought it was the colour of the rock."

"That goes to prepare soil for the mosses, Daisy."

"Oh, how, Dr. Sandford?"

"In time the surface of the rock is crumbled a little by its
action; then its own decay furnishes a very little addition to
that. In favourable situations a stray oak leaf or two falls
and lies there, and also decays, and by and by there is a
little coating of soil or a little lodgment of it in a crevice
or cavity, enough for the flying spores of some moss to take
root and find home."

"And then the moss decays and makes soil for the ferns?"

"I suppose so."

Daisy stood looking with a countenance of delighted
intelligence at the great boulder, which was now to her a
representative and witness of natural processes she had had no
knowledge of before. The mosses, the brakes, the lichen, had
all gained new beauty and interest in her eyes. The doctor
watched her, and then scrambled up to his feet and came to her
side.

"Look here, Daisy," said he, stooping down at the foot of the
rock, and showing her where tufts of a delicate little green
plant clustered, bearing little umbrella-like heads on tiny
shafts of handles.

"What is that, Dr. Sandford?"

"Something wonderful."

"Is it? It is pretty. What is it, sir?"

"It is a plant somewhere between the mosses and the lichens in
its character — it is one of the liverworts, and they are some
of the first plants to go in advance of superior vegetation.
This is called _Marchantia_."

"And is it wonderful, Dr. Sandford?"

"If I could show it to you, you would think so. Look here,
Daisy — on the surface of this leaf do you see little raised
spots here and there?"

"Yes, I see them."

"Those are, when they are finished, little baskets."

"Baskets?" exclaimed Daisy, delightedly. "I can't see anything
like a basket now."

"No, it is too small for you to see; you must take it on my
word, who have seen it. They are baskets, and such baskets as
you never dreamed of. The shape is elegant, and round the
edge, Daisy, they are cut into a fringe of teeth, and each
tooth is cut again into teeth, making a fringe around its tiny
edge.

"I wish I could see it," said Daisy.

"Now if you were my little sister, and lived with me, I could
show you these things in the evenings."

Daisy responded to this with a very grateful and somewhat
wistful smile, but immediately went on with the business in
hand.

"Do these little baskets hold anything, Dr. Sandford?"

"Yes. Baskets are always made to hold something."

"What do they hold?"

"They hold what are called _spores;_ that is, little bits of
things which, whenever they get a chance, begin to grow and
make new plants."

"Seeds?" said Daisy.

"They answer the purpose of seeds."

"How do they get out of the basket? Do the winds blow them
out."

"Or the rain washes them out. If they lie long enough in the
basket, they will take root there, and then there is a new
plant seen growing out of the old one."

"How wonderful it is!" said Daisy.

"There is another wonder about it. It does not matter which
way these little spores lie on the ground or in the basket;
but the side that happens to be exposed to the light, after a
time, prepares itself to expand into the surface of a frond,
while the dark side sends down a tiny root."

"And it does not matter which side lies uppermost?"

"No, not in the beginning."

"What is a _frond_, Dr. Sandford?"

"This sort of seed-bearing leaf is called so."

"How pretty it is!" said Daisy. "What are these little things
like umbrellas?"

"These carry the real seed vessels of the plant."

"Other seeds. Dr. Sandford, is _everything_ wonderful?"

"What do you think about it?"

"I do not know but a very little," said Daisy; "but I never
should have thought this little green moss — or what did you
say it was?"

"Liverwort. Its name is Marchantia."

"This liverwort; I never should have supposed it was anything
but pretty, and of course good for something; but now I never
heard anything so wonderful."

"More than the sun?" said Dr. Sandford, smiling.

"It is more surprising, I think," said Daisy.

"Pray, what makes you conclude so securely that this little
Marchantia is _good for something?_"

Daisy gave him a quick look of wisdom and suspicion mingled.
The doctor was getting a very good amusement himself, and
quite entered into the matter. He waited for Daisy's answer.
It came diplomatically.

"_Isn't_ everything good for something, sir?"

" 'Pon my word, I don't know," said the doctor. "My enquiry was
for the grounds of your opinion, Daisy."

"It was not an opinion. I do not think I am old enough to have
an opinion."

"What was it, Daisy?"

The doctor was still crouching down by the side of the rock,
examining carelessly whatever he found there. Daisy looked at
him, and waited, and felt at last that good manners required
her to speak.

"You said, sir, that baskets were made to hold something."

"So your remark was an inference from mine."

"No, sir."

"Go on, Daisy."

"I only said it, sir, because I knew it was true."

There was an odd contrast between the extreme modesty of
Daisy's manner and the positiveness of her words.

"It is said to be a great philosophical truth, Daisy; but what
I want to know is how you, not being a philosopher, have got
such firm hold of it?"

He faced Daisy now, and she gave way as usual before the
searching blue eyes. One soft look, and her eyes fell away.

"I only thought it, Dr. Sandford, because in the beginning —
when God had made everything — the Bible says he saw that it
was all good."

"Daisy, how came you to be such a lover of the Bible?"

Daisy did not speak at once, and when she did it was a
departure from the subject.

"Dr. Sandford, I felt a drop of rain on my face!"

"And here is another," said the doctor, getting up. "This is
what I have expected all day. Come, Daisy — you must be off in
your chaise-à-porteurs without delay."

"But Nora, and Ella, and the boys! — they are away off on the
lake."

"They will scuttle home now," said the doctor, "but I have
nothing to do with them. You are my business, Daisy."

Accordingly he carried her back to the lunching-place, not
indeed in his arms, but with a strong hand that made her
progress over the stones and moss very rapid, and that gave
her a great flying leap whenever occasion was, over any
obstacle that happened to be in the way. There was need enough
for haste. The light veil of haze that had seemed to curtain
off the sunlight so happily from the lake and the party,
proved now to have been only the advancing soft border of an
immense thick cloud coming up from the west. No light veil
now; a deep, dark covering was over the face of the sky,
without break or fold; the drop or two of rain that had been
felt were merely the outriders of an approaching storm. Low,
threatening, distant mutterings of thunder from behind the
mountains, told the party what they might expect before long.

There was sudden confusion. Nobody wanted to be out in the
storm, and to avoid it seemed a difficult problem. Hastily the
ladies caught up their scarfs and bags, and set off upon a
scattering flight through the woods to the shore, those who
were nearest or first ready not stopping to wait for the
others. Quickly the luncheon-ground was deserted; fast the
blue and white flutter of muslins disappeared in the
enveloping woods; hastily the remainder of the packing went on
to get the hampers again in readiness to move. In the midst of
all this, who was to carry Daisy's chair?

"You say there is a house somewhere on the way," said Mr.
Randolph to the doctor. "If you will go forward with Daisy at
once, I will stay to look after those children in the boat.
They are coming now as fast as they can."

"Can you carry my gun?"

"Certainly. Doctor, I will take that office, if you will stay
behind till the boat gets to land."

"Thank you — it is better arranged the other way. The storm
will be upon us before the ladies get to the shore, I fear."

"Then they had better take the other route."

Mr. Randolph in haste despatched one of the men to recall the
fleeing members of the party, and bring them round by the
other road to the house. But before that, the doctor had put
Daisy in her chair, and with Logan at the other end of it, had
set off to reach shelter. It grew very dark; and it was
sultrily still in the woods. Not a leaf trembled on its stem.
The steps of the two chair-bearers sounded ominously in the
entire hush of everything. The gloom still deepened. The
doctor and Logan with swift, steady strides carried the chair
along at a goodly rate; not as it had come in the morning. In
the midst of this, and after it had gone on some time in
silence, Daisy twisted herself round to look at the doctor and
give him a smile.

"You do not seem concerned, Daisy, in the view of getting
wet?"

"Why, no," said Daisy, twisting round again, "it is nice. I am
only sorry for the people who are so frightened."

"What is nice? getting wet?"

"Oh, no," said Daisy. "Maybe I shall not get wet — you go so
fast."

But at this moment there came a nearer growl of thunder, and
the leaves in the tops of the trees rustled as if a breath had
passed over them. Then were still.

"Can you mend your pace, Logan?" said the doctor.

"Ay, sir!" — came in the deep, cheery utterance of Logan's
Scotch voice.

"Hold fast, Daisy" — said the doctor; and the two chair-
bearers changed their pace for a swinging trot. It was needful
to hold on now indeed, for this gait jolted the chair a good
deal; but it got over the ground, and Daisy found it
excessively amusing. They passed the thick-standing tree-stems
in quick succession now; the rocks uprising from the side of
the path were left behind one after another; they reached the
sharp bend in the road; and, keeping up the swinging trot with
a steadiness which showed good wind on the part of both the
chair-bearers, at last the little house where Sam had been
left hove in view. Time it was; — full time. One and another
sough of the wind had bowed the tree-tops with a token of what
was coming; one and another bright flash of lightning had
illumined the woody wilderness; and now, just as the chair
stopped, drops began to fall which seemed as large as cherry-
stones, mingled with hail a good deal larger. Their patter
sounded on the leaves a minute or two; then ceased.

"That will do, Logan," said the doctor. "Bring the chair in
under shelter if you can; and come in yourself. This will be a
shower." And he led Daisy into the house.

If ever you saw a dark-looking place, that was the room into
which the house-door admitted them. Two little windows seemed
at this instant to let in the darkness rather than the light;
they were not very clean, besides being small — a description
which Daisy would have said applied to the whole room. She
stood still in the middle of the floor, not seeing any place
to sit down, that she could make up her mind to take. The
doctor went to the window. Logan took a chair. Sam was sitting
disconsolately in a corner. It was hard to say to what class
of people the house belonged; poor people they were of course;
and things looked as if they were simply living there because
too poor to live anywhere else. A slatternly woman stared at
the intruders; a dirty child crawled over the hearth. Daisy
could not endure to touch anything, except with the soles of
her shoes. So she stood upright in the middle of the floor;
till the doctor turned round.

"Daisy! — are you going to stand there till the shower is
over?"

"Yes, sir," — Daisy answered, patiently. A smile curled the
doctor's lips. He opened the door and lifted in the chair with
its long poles, which indeed half filled the little room; but
Daisy sat down. The woman looked on in astonishment.

"Be she weakly, like?" she asked at length of the doctor.

"Has been —" he answered.

"And what be that thing for?"

"It is for going up and down mountains."

"Have you come from the mountings!" she asked, in great
surprise. The doctor was in for it. He was obliged to explain.
Meanwhile the darkness continued, and the rain did not yet
fall. A breath of wind now and then brushed heavily past the
house, and sunk into silence. The minutes passed.

"It will be a happiness if they get here before it begins,"
said Dr. Sandford; "it will come when it comes!"

"Be there _more_ comin'?" said the woman.

"A housefull. We are only the beginning."

She moved about now with somewhat of anxiety to get sundry
things out of the way, which yet there seemed no other place
for; a frying-pan was set up in a corner; a broom took
position by the fire place; a pail of water was lifted on the
table; and divers knives and forks and platters hustled into a
chimney cupboard. Little room enough when all was done. At
last the woman caught up the sprawling baby and sat down with
it opposite the broom, on the other side the fire, in one of
the three chairs the place contained. Sam had another. Logan
was on a box. The woman's eyes said, "Now I am ready to see
all that comes."


CHAPTER XXVI.

DAISY'S SUPPER.


It was some time first, and the rain still did not fall. It
was very black, and flashes from distant lightning with
mutterings of the thunder were frequent and threatening; still
no rain unless a few ominous drops. At last voices and
fluttering muslins came down the road; the flutter came near,
and in poured a stream of gay people at the door of the poor
little room. Gay as to their dress and attire, that is; for
gaiety was not to be found at present in their words and
behaviour. The woman in the chimney corner hugged up closer
her dirty baby with the delight of so unwonted a feast to her
eyes.

"Is there nothing better than _this_ to be had?" said Mrs. Fish.
And her tone was indescribable.

"How long have we got to remain here, doctor?" said a more
cheery voice.

"Mrs. Stanfield, until the rain has come, and gone."

"It would be better to be out in it," whispered Theresa to her
mother.

"My love, there is no other shelter on this side the river."

"There will not be standing room for us all presently —" said
Eloise Gary.

Pretty nearly so; for when the second detachment of the party
arrived, in a minute more, people looked at each other across
a throng of heads. They got in; that was all. To sit down or
to move much was out of the question.

"Daisy, you can't have this big chair of yours in here," said
Ransom in an energetic whisper. "Don't you see there is no
room for it?"

Daisy saw there was very little. She got up patiently and
stood, though feeling very tired; while her chair was got out
of the door with a good deal of difficulty.

"Are you tired, my darling?" said her father, bending down to
the pale little face.

"A little, papa," said Daisy, sighing.

No more words, but Mr. Randolph lifted Daisy in his arms and
gave her a resting place there. Daisy was afraid she was too
heavy for him, but it was very comfortable to sit there, with
her arm on his shoulder. Her face looked its content; the only
face in which such an expression could be seen at present;
though the gentlemen took the thing coolly, and Mr. Randolph
and the two Sandfords looked as usual. But now the delayed
storm drew near. The thunder notified with every burst the
fact that it was coming speedily; the lightning became vivid
and constant. A premonitory sweep of the wind — and the clouds
gave out their treasures of rain and hail with tremendous
fury. The lightning was terrible now, and the darkness of the
intervals between so great that the company could scarcely see
each other's faces. This was more than some of the party had
bargained for, and there was a degree of confusion. Screams
from a few of the ladies and exclamations of terror from
others were mixed now and then with words that sounded very
like an oath to Daisy's ear, though they were not spoken in
levity. She bent her head round to look in the face of the
lady who had last used them, as if to assure herself what was
meant; and then her head went down on Mr. Randolph's shoulder
and her face was hidden.

"Daisy —" whispered her father.

"Yes, papa."

"Are you afraid?"

"No, papa — not for myself."

"What? Look up here, Daisy."

She lifted her face; it was wistful and troubled.

"Are you concerned about the storm, my darling?"

"No, papa; not myself."

"How then, Daisy?"

She shuddered. "Papa, I wish they would not scream so!"

"Why does that trouble _you?_" said Mr. Randolph, smiling.

But Daisy's face was unutterably grave, as a new brilliant
band of forked lightning glittered outside the windows, and
the burst of the thunderbolt sounded as if at their very feet,
making a renewal of the same cries and exclamations.

"Why does it trouble you, Daisy?" said Mr. Randolph,
soothingly, feeling the quiver of the child's frame.

"Papa," said Daisy, with intense expression, — "they do not
love Jesus!" — And her head went down again to be hid on her
father's shoulder.

Mr. Randolph did nothing to bring it up again; and Daisy lay
quite still, while the storm raged in full fury, and the
screams and ejaculations of the ladies were joined now and
then by a word of impatience from one of the gentlemen, or a
"Hech, sirs!" in Logan's smothered Scotch brogue. Once Mr.
Randolph felt Daisy's lips pressed against his face, and then
her other arm came round his neck, and nestling there closely
she was after that as still as a mouse. The storm lasted a
long time. The lightning and thunder at last removed their
violence some distance off; then the wind and the rain did
their part, which they had not fully done before. And all the
while the poor party of pleasure sat or stood as thick as bees
in a hive, in the miserable shelter of the cottage. —
Miserable, yet welcome. Very tired and impatient the people
became as they grew less frightened. Daisy had long been fast
asleep. The day waned and drew near its ending. When sunset
was, nobody could tell by the light; but that night was at
hand was at last evident from the darkness.

"Your arms must be weary, Mr. Randolph," said Dr. Sandford.
"Let me relieve you of your burden."

"I cannot let you do that."

"I will," said the doctor. "Daisy being my charge as well as
yours, gives me a right." And the transfer was actually made
before Daisy was aware of it. She waked up however, with a
feeling of some change and a doubt upon her mind as to what
custody she was in; but she was not sure, till the woman of
the house lit a miserable dip candle, which threw a light that
mocked the darkness over the weary company. Daisy did not like
the arrangement at all.

"Dr. Sandford!" she exclaimed. "I shall tire you. Please put
me on the floor and let me stand."

"No, you cannot," said the doctor, decidedly. "Be a good
child, Daisy. Lay your head down and go to sleep again."

And greatly to Daisy's astonishment the doctor's moustache
brushed her lip. Now Daisy had always thought to herself that
she would never allow anybody that wore a moustache to kiss
her; here it was done, without leave asked; and if the doctor
was so independent of rules as that, she thought she had best
not provoke him. Besides, she remembered that her father must
be tired with carrying her so long; and moreover, if Dr.
Sandford liked her well enough to kiss her, maybe he would not
care for the trouble of holding her for a while. At any rate
Daisy submitted peaceably to the necessity; put her arm over
the doctor's shoulder to support herself, and laid her head
down; though not to sleep. She watched everything that was
going on now. What a roomful of weary and impatient people
they were! packed like cattle in a pen, for closeness; and how
the rain poured and beat outside the house! The shelter was
something to be thankful for, and yet how unthankful everybody
looked. Some of the gentlemen showed calm fortitude under
their trials; but the poor ladies' chagrined faces said that
days of pleasure were misnamed. Alexander Fish had gone to
sleep; Ransom looked cross; Preston as usual gentlemanly,
though bored. From one to another Daisy's eye roved. Nora and
Ella were sitting on the table; in full confab. Other people
were sitting there too; the table was full.

"The storm is slackening —" Mr. Randolph remarked to the
doctor.

"It will be over in a little while more."

"What do you think of it, Daisy?" said her father, noticing
her look.

"Of what, papa?"

"Parties of pleasure in general."

"Papa, — I have had a very nice time."

"You have had a nice sleep," said her father, laughing; "and
that colours your views of things. The rest of us have not had
that advantage."

"Daisy, I am surprised to hear you say what you do," the
doctor remarked as Mr. Randolph turned away. He spoke softly.

"Why, sir?"

"I thought your day had not been _altogether_ agreeable?"

"Do you think anything is apt to be altogether agreeable, Dr.
Sandford?" Daisy said, with a demure waiving of the subject
which was worthy of much older years. The quaintness of this
remark was infinite.

"What has been the agreeableness to-day, for instance?"

"Oh, a great deal; my ride in the chair, — that was nice! and
all our walk, and what, you were telling me; and coming over
the river —" Daisy paused.

"And what do you think of being carried in the arms of
gentlemen," said Mrs. Gary, who had overheard a few words, —
"while other little girls have to get along as they can? as
tired as you are, I dare say."

"I cannot help it, aunt Gary," said Daisy. But the remark
served to justify her view of things; for what had in truth
been altogether agreeable up to that minute was so no longer.
Daisy was uneasy.

"Dr. Sandford," she whispered after a few moments, "I am
rested — I can stand now. I am tiring you. Please set me
down."

"No. Be quiet, Daisy," said her friend, peremptorily. And as
the little head went down again obediently on his shoulder, he
gave again a gentle kiss to her lips. Daisy did not mind Mrs.
Gary after that.

The storm slackened off now rapidly. The patter of the rain
lessened and grew still; a sweet reviving air blew in at the
windows. Of course the road was drenched with wet and every
tree dripping; nevertheless the journey must be made to the
boats, and the poor ladies were even glad to set out to
undertake it. But it would not be an easy journey either, on
the whole. Some time before this the doctor had despatched
Logan on an errand. He now declared he must wait for his
return; and desired Mr. Randolph to go forward and help take
care of the rest of the party and have no concern about Daisy;
he would keep her in charge.

"Shall I do that, Daisy?" said Mr. Randolph, fearing it might
trouble her.

But Daisy said, "Yes, papa" — with no hesitation; and the plan
was acted upon. Gathering up their floating muslin dresses,
tying handkerchiefs over their heads, with shrinking and yet
eager steps, one by one they filed out at the door of the
little hut. Just as the last one went, Logan came; he had been
to the boats and brought thence the doctor's cloak, which,
with more providence than the rest of the party who were less
used to travelling, he had taken the precaution to bring. Now
this, by the doctor's order, was spread over Daisy's chair,
which having been pushed out of doors, had got wet; she was
placed in it then, and the folds of the cloak brought well
round and over her, so that nothing could be more secure than
she was from the wet with which every leaf and bough was
dripping overhead, and every foot of soil loaded underneath.
Dr. Sandford took one end of the poles and Logan the other,
and the last of the party they set forth. Why Dr. Sandford had
made this arrangement, was best known to himself. Perhaps he
preferred it to having Mrs. Fish on his arm, who was a very
fine lady; perhaps he preferred it to the attentions he might
have had to pay to the younger damsels of the party, who would
all three have been on his hands at once, very likely. At all
events he did prefer to be one of the chair-bearers, and Daisy
was very glad of it.

The rest of the party were well in advance, out of sight and
hearing. Tramp, tramp, the steady regular footfall of her
bearers, and the light plashing of rain drops as they fell,
and the stir of the wind in the leaves, were all the sounds
that Daisy heard. No rain fell now; on the contrary the heaven
was clear as a bell, and light enough came through the woods
to show the way with comfortable certainty. Overhead, the
stars were shining down with wonderful brilliancy, through the
air which the storm had cleansed from all vapours; the moon
was coming up somewhere, too. The smell of the trees and other
green things was exceedingly sweet after the rain; and the
delicious soft air was very delicious after the sultry day.
Never in her life after did Daisy forget that night's work.
This ride from the cottage to the shore was something she
enjoyed with all her might. It was so wild and strange as well
as sweet. Rocks and tree-trunks, and the turnings of the road
had all such a mysterious new look, different from what
daylight showed them; it was an endless pleasure. Till the
walk ended. It came out at last upon the shore of the river
and into the moonlight. High in the eastern sky the moon hung,
shedding her broad light down all over the river, which
crisped and sparkled under it; and there by the water's edge
the members of the party of pleasure were huddled together
preparing to embark. Over their heads the sails of Mr.
Randolph's boat stood up in the moonlight. The doctor and
Logan set down their burden and waited. The Fish's were
getting on board their little vessel, which was moved by oars
alone.

"Mrs. Stanfield, you had better come with us," Mr. Randolph
said. "There is plenty of room. Your boat is too small. You
would find it unpleasantly rough in mid-channel."

"Oh, is it rough?" exclaimed the lady.

"For your little row-boat — I am afraid you would find it so.
The wind has roughened the water considerably, and it has not
had time to get quiet. Come with us, and we will all take
supper together at Melbourne."

It was arranged so. The party were stowed away in the large
sail-boat, which held them all well enough; the children being
happy at finding themselves seated together.

"What are we waiting for?" said Mrs. Gary when all had been in
their places some minutes, and conversation was the only thing
moving. "What are we staying here for?"

"Sam."

"Where's Sam?"

"He is yonder — in our late place of shelter. James and
Michael have gone to fetch him with Daisy's chair."

"Sam! Why, he might have stayed there till to-morrow and no
hurt. Have we got to wait till the men go there and bring him
back? We shall be late at supper!"

"The river will be all the quieter, Mrs. Gary," said Mr.
Randolph, mischievously.

"The river? You don't mean to say it is not quiet?"

"It was not quiet a while ago, I assure you."

"Well, I do think, if ever there was a misnamed thing, it is a
party of pleasure," said the lady, disconsolately.

"They are very pleasant when they are over, sister Gary," said
Mr. Randolph.

"Daisy," Nora whispered, "are you afraid?"

"No."

"Your father says it is rough."

"He knows how to manage the boat," said Daisy.

"It isn't rough, I don't believe," said Ella Stanfield. "It
isn't rough now."

"I wish we were at the other side," said Nora.

"Oh, Nora, I think it is nice," said Daisy. "How bright the
moonlight is! Look! — all over the river there is a broad
strip. I hope we shall sail along just in that strip. Isn't it
wonderful, Nora?"

"No. What?" said Nora.

"That there should be something like a looking-glass up in the
sky to catch the sunlight and reflect it down to us when we
cannot see the sun itself."

"What looking-glass?"

"Well, the moon catches the sunlight just so, as a looking-
glass would."

"How do you know, Daisy? _I_ think it shines."

"I know because I have been told. It does not shine, any more
than a looking-glass."

"Who told you?"

"Dr. Sandford," Daisy whispered.

"Did he! Then why don't we have the moon every night?"

"Because the looking-glass, if you can imagine that it is a
looking-glass, does not always hang where it can catch the
sun."

"Don't it? I don't like to think it is a looking-glass," said
Nora. "I would a great deal rather think it is the moon."

"Well, so it is," said Daisy. "You can think so."

"Daisy, what should we do if it should be rough in the middle
of the river?"

"_I_ like it," said Ella Stanfield.

"Perhaps it will not be very rough," said Daisy.

"But suppose it should? And where the moon don't shine it is
so dark!"

"Nora," said Daisy, very low, "don't you love Jesus?"

Nora at that flounced round, and turning her face from Daisy.
and the moonlight, began to talk to Ella Stanfield on the
other side of her. Daisy did not understand what it meant.

All this while, and a good while longer, the rest of the
people were waiting with various degrees of patience and
impatience for the coming of Sam and the men. It was pretty
there by the shore, if they had not been impatient. The
evening breeze was exceedingly fragrant and fresh; the light
which streamed down from the moon was sparkling on all the
surface of the water, and laid a broad band of illumination
like a causeway across the river. In one or two places the
light showed the sails of a sloop or schooner on her way up or
down; and along the shore it grew daintily hazy and soft. But
impatience was nevertheless the prominent feeling on board the
sail-boat; and it had good time to display itself before
Michael and James could go all the distance back to the house
and bring Sam away from it.

"Here he is!" "There they are at last!" were the words of hail
with which their appearance was greeted. "Now off" — and with
all haste the three were received on board and the vessel
pushed out into the stream. Immediately her sail caught the
breeze which came fair down the river, and careening a little
as she took it, her head began to make good speed across the
causeway of moonlight. But then the ladies began to scream;
for in mid-channel the wind was fresh and the waters had not
quite forgotten yet the tumult of the late storm, which had
tossed them well. The sail-boat danced bravely, up and down,
going across the waves. Among the frightened people was Nora,
who, grasping Daisy's dress with one hand and some part of the
boat with the other, kept uttering little cries of "Oh Daisy —
" "Oh! Daisy," — with every fresh lurch of the vessel. Ella
Stanfield had thrown herself down in her mother's lap. Daisy
was very much tried.

"Nora," she said, "I wish you would not cry so!"

"But I am afraid!"

"I wish you would be comforted, and not cry out so," sighed
Daisy. "Papa says there is no danger — didn't you hear him?"

"But, oh, I am afraid!" re-echoed Nora.

Daisy folded her hands, and tried to bide patiently the time
of smooth water. It came, partially at least, as they neared
the opposite bank. The boat went steadily; spirits revived;
and soon the passage was brought to an end and the sail-boat
laid alongside the little jetty, on which the party, men,
women and children, stepped out with as sincere a feeling of
pleasure as had moved them all day. Carriages were in waiting;
a few minutes brought the whole company to Melbourne House.

Here they were to stay supper; and the ladies and gentlemen
dispersed to various dressing rooms to prepare for it. Soonest
of all ready and in the drawing-room were the three children.

"I am so hungry!" said Nora.

"So am I!" said Ella Stanfield.

"We shall have supper presently," said Daisy.

"Oh, Daisy, weren't you afraid in the boat, when it went up
and down so?"

"I do not think I was afraid," said Daisy, "if other people
had not been so disturbed."

"I don't see how they could help being disturbed," said Ella
Stanfield. "Why, the boat didn't sail straight at all."

"But _that_ does not do any harm," said Daisy.

"How do you know?" said Nora. "_I_ think it does harm; I do not
think it is safe."

"But you know, Nora, when the disciples were in the boat, and
thought it was not safe — the wind blew so, you know — they
ought to have trusted Jesus, and not been afraid."

Nora and Ella both looked at Daisy for a minute after this
speech, and then by some train of association Nora started
another subject.

"Daisy, have you got my Egyptian spoon yet?"

Now was Daisy in a great difficulty. She flushed; the little
face which had been pale enough before, became of a delicate
pink hue all over. Not knowing what to say, she said nothing.

"Have you got it yet?" repeated Nora, curiously.

"No, Nora. I have not."

"You have not? What have you done with it?"

"Nothing."

"My Egyptian spoon! that Marmaduke gave me to give to you! You
have not kept it! What did you do with it, Daisy?"

"I did nothing with it."

"Did you break it?"

"No."

"Did you give it away?"

"Oh, Nora, I loved it very much," said poor Daisy; "but I
could not keep it. I could not!"

"Why couldn't you? I would not have given it to you, Daisy, if
I had thought you would not have kept it."

"I wanted to keep it very much — but I could not," said Daisy,
with the tears in her eyes.

"Why 'could not'? why couldn't you? Did you give it away,
Daisy? — that spoon I gave you?"

"Nora, I could not help it! Somebody else wanted it very much,
and I was obliged to let her have it. I could not help it."

"I shall tell Marmaduke that you did not care for it," said
Nora in an offended tone. "I wish I had kept it myself. It was
a beautiful spoon."

Daisy looked very much troubled.

"Who has got it?" Nora went on.

"It is no matter who has got it," said Daisy. "I couldn't keep
it."

"She is right, Nora," said Preston, who came up just then, at
the same time with the doctor. "She could not keep it, because
it was taken away from her without any leave asked. I mean she
shall have it back, too, one of these days. Don't you say
another word to Daisy! — she has behaved like a little angel
about it."

Preston's manner made an impression, as well as his words.
Nora was checked.

"What is all that, Nora?" the doctor asked.

Now Nora had a great awe of him. She did not, dare not answer.

"It is about a spoon I gave Daisy, that she gave away."

"She did not, I tell you!" said Preston.

"A spoon?" said the doctor. "Silver?"

"Oh, no! A beautiful, old, very old, carved, queer old spoon,
with a duck's bill, that came out of an old Egyptian tomb, and
was put there ever so long ago."

"Did your brother give it to you?"

"Yes, to give to Daisy, and she gave it to somebody else."

"Nora, I did not give it as you think I did. I loved it very
much. I would not have let anybody have it if I could have
helped it."

"Who has got it, Daisy?" asked the doctor.

Daisy looked at him, looked perplexed, flushed a little,
finally said with demure gentleness, "Dr. Sandford, I think I
ought not to tell."

The doctor smiled, took Daisy's hand, and led her off to the
supper room, whither they were now invited. So it happened
that her seat at the table was again by his side. Daisy liked
it. Just then she did not care about being with Nora.

The people gathered, bright and fresh, around the supper
table, all seeming to have forgotten their fatigues and
frights; and every face looked smiling or gracious. The day
was over, the river was crossed; the people were hungry; and
the most dainty and perfectly arranged supply of refreshments
stood on the board. Coffee and tea steamed out their grateful
announcements; ice cream stood in red and white pyramids of
firmness; oysters and cold meats and lobster salad offered all
that hungry people could desire; and everybody was in a
peculiar state of gratified content and expectation.

Daisy was no exception. She had let slip her momentary trouble
about the Egyptian spoon; and in her quiet corner, quite
unnoticed as she thought, looked at the bright scene and
enjoyed it. She liked being under the doctor's care too, and
his care of her was very thoughtful and kind. He did not
forget the little quiet mouse at his elbow; but after he had
properly attended to the other people whose claims came first,
he served her nicely with whatever was good for her. Was Daisy
going to omit her usual giving of thanks? She thought of her
mother's interference with a moment's flash of hesitancy; but
resolved to go on just as usual. She did not think she would
be noticed, everybody was so busy; and at any rate there was a
burden of gladness in her little heart that must speak. While
the talking and laughing and click of knives and forks was
thick all around her, Daisy's little head bent in a moment's
oblivion of it all behind her hand.

She had raised her head and just taken her fork in her fingers
when she heard her own name. She looked up.

"Daisy —" said her mother, quietly — "come here."

Daisy left her seat, and went round to her mother's side.

"You may go up stairs," said Mrs. Randolph.

"Mamma?"

"Go — and remain till I send for you."

Daisy slipped away quietly, before anybody could notice that
she was gone or going. Then slowly went up the stairs and
along the passages to her own room. It was empty and dark,
except for the moonlight without; June had not expected her to
be there, and had not made preparation. Daisy went, and
kneeled down in her old place by her window; her eyes filled
as full of tears as they could hold. She bent her little head
to brush them away, but they came again. Daisy was faint and
tired; she wanted her supper very much; and she had enjoyed
the supper-table very much; it was a great mortification to
exchange it for the gloom and silence of her moonlit room. She
had not a bit of strength to keep her spirits up. Daisy felt
weak. And what was the matter? Only — that she had, against
her mother's pleasure, repeated her acknowledgment of the hand
that had given her all good things. How many good things that
day! And was she not to make such acknowledgment any more?
Ought she to please her mother in this? Had she really done
wrong? Daisy could not tell; she thought not; she could not
wish she had not done what she did; but at the same time it
was very miserable to have Mrs. Randolph at odds with her on
such a point as this.

Daisy shed some tears about it; yet not a great many, and
without the least bitterness in them. But she felt faint and
tired and disappointed. Here, however, at her own room-window,
and alone, there was no bar to thanksgivings; and Daisy had
them in her heart, as well as prayers for the people who had
them not. She was too tired to pray at last; she only knelt at
the window with her arms on the sill, — Daisy was raised up on
an ottoman — and looked out at the moonlight, feeling as if
she was going into a dream.

"Miss Daisy!" — said the smothered voice of June behind her —
"are you there, Miss Daisy?"

June's accent was doubtful and startled. Daisy turned round.

"Miss Daisy! — I thought you was in the supper-room."

"No, June — I'm here."

"Will you go to bed, Miss Daisy?"

"I wish, June, you would get me something to eat, first," said
Daisy, languidly.

"Didn't you get your supper, Miss Daisy?"

"No, and I'm hungry. I haven't had anything since the dinner
at the lake. I wish you'd make haste, June."

June knew from Daisy's way of speaking, as well as from the
facts of the case, that there was some trouble on foot. She
went off to get supper, and as she went along the passages the
mulatto woman's hand was clenched upon itself, though her face
showed only its usual wrinkles.

Small delay was there before she was back again, and with her
June had brought a supply of very nearly everything there had
been on the supper-table. She set down her tray, prepared a
table for Daisy, and placed a chair. The room was light now
with two wax candles. Daisy sat down and took a review.

"What will you have now, Miss Daisy? Here's some hot oysters —
nice and hot. I'll get you some ice-cream when you're ready to
eat it — Hiram's got it in the freezer for you. Make haste,
Miss Daisy — these oysters is good."

But Daisy did not make haste. She looked at the supper tray
thoughtfully.

"June," she said, with a very gentle pure glance of her eyes
up at the mulatto woman's face — "I am very much obliged to
you — but I don't think mamma means me to eat these things to-
night — Will you just get me some milk and some bread? I'll
take some bread and milk!"

"Miss Daisy, these oysters is good for you," said June.

"I'll take some bread and milk to-night — if you will please
make haste. Thank you, June."

"Miss Daisy, then, maybe take a sandwich."

"No — I will have nothing but bread and milk. Only quick,
June."

June went off for the bread and milk, and then very
unwillingly carried her supper-tray down stairs again. Going
through one of the passages she was met by her master.

"Where is that coming from, June?" he asked her, in surprise.

"From Miss Daisy's room, sir."

"Has she been taking supper up there?"

"No, sir — Miss Daisy wouldn't touch nothing."

"Is she unwell?" — Mr. Randolph asked, in a startled tone.

"No, sir." June's tone was dry.

Mr. Randolph marched at once to the room in question, where
Daisy was eating her bread and milk.

"What are you doing, Daisy?"

"Papa!" — said the child, with a start; and then quietly, "I
am taking my supper."

"Were you not at the table down stairs?"

"Yes, papa."

"How came you not to have your supper there?"

"I had to come away, papa."

"Are you not well, Daisy?" said Mr. Randolph, tenderly,
bending down over her chair.

"Yes, papa — quite well."

"Then, why did you come away?"

Daisy's spoon lay still in her fingers and her eyes reddened.
"Mamma sent me."

If the child was to have any supper at all, Mr. Randolph saw,
he must forbear his questioning. He rose up from leaning over
her chair. "Go on, Daisy —" he said; and he left her, but did
not leave the room. He walked up and down the floor at a
little distance, while Daisy finished her bread and milk She
was too much in want of it not to do that. When it was done
she got out of her chair and stood on the floor looking at her
father, as gentle as a young sparrow. He came and wheeled her
chair round and sat down upon it.

"What is the matter, Daisy?"

"Mamma was displeased with me." The child dropped her eyes.

"What about?"

"Papa" — said Daisy, slowly, trying for words and perhaps also
for self-command — "mamma was displeased with me because — I —
"

"What?"

"Papa — because I did what she did not like at dinner."

"At dinner? what was that?"

The child lifted her eyes now to her father's face, a little
wistfully.

"Papa — don't you know? — I was only praying a minute."

Mr. Randolph stretched out his arm, drew Daisy up to him,
placed her on his knee, and looked down into her face.

"Did you have no supper downstairs?"

"No, sir."

"Do you like bread and milk better than other things?"

"No, papa."

"I met June with a great tray of supper things, and she said
you would not eat them. Why was that?"

"Papa," said Daisy, "I thought mamma did not mean me to have
those things to-night."

"She did not forbid you?"

"No, papa."

Mr. Randolph's arm was round Daisy; now he wrapped both arms
about her, bringing her up close to his breast, and putting
down his lips to her face, he kissed her over and over, with a
great tenderness.

"Have you had a pleasant day?"

"Papa, I have had a great many pleasant things," said Daisy,
eagerly. Her voice had changed and a glad tone had come into
it.

"Dr. Sandford took proper care of you?"

"Papa, he is _very_ good!' said Daisy, strongly.

"I rather think he thinks you are."

"He is nice, papa."

"Nice —" said Mr. Randolph. "He is pretty well. But now,
Daisy, what do you think of going to bed and to sleep?"

"Yes, papa."

"And to-morrow, if you have got into any difficulty, you may
come to me and talk about it."

Daisy returned a very earnest caress to her father's good-
night kiss, and afterwards had no difficulty in doing as he
had said. And so ended the day on Silver Lake.


CHAPTER XXVII.

RANSOM AND FIDO.


Daisy reflected the next morning as to what was her right
course with respect to the action that had troubled her mother
so much. Ought she to do it? In the abstract it was right to
do it; but ought _she_ in these circumstances? And how much of a
Christian's ordinary duty might she be required to forego? and
where must the stand be made? Daisy did not know; she had
rather the mind of a soldier, and was much inclined to obey
her orders, as such, come what might. That is, it seemed to
her that so she would be in the sure and safe way; but Daisy
had no appetite at all for the fighting that this course would
ensure. One thing she knew by experience; that if she drew
upon herself a direct command to do such a thing no more, the
order would stand; there would be no dealing with it
afterwards except in the way of submission. That command she
had not in this case yet received, and she judged it prudent
not to risk receiving it. She went down to breakfast as usual,
but she did not bow her little head to give any thanks or make
any prayers. She hoped the breakfast would pass off quietly.
So it did as to that matter. But another subject came up.

"What became of you last night at supper, Daisy?" her aunt
asked. "Dr. Sandford was enquiring for you. I think you
received quite your share of attention, for so young a lady,
for my part."

"Daisy had more than anybody else, yesterday," remarked
Eloise.

"A sprained or a broken ankle is a very good thing
occasionally," said Mr. Randolph.

"Yes," said Mrs. Gary — "I think Daisy had quite the best time
of anybody yesterday. A palanquin with gentlemen for her
porters, and friendly arms to go to sleep in — most devoted
care!"

"Yes, I was one of her porters," — said Ransom. "I think Dr.
Sandford takes rather too much on himself."

"Did he take _you?_" said Mr. Randolph.

"Yes, sir, — when there was no occasion."

"Why, Ransom," said Daisy, "there was no one else to carry my
chair but Preston and you."

"Did Preston feel aggrieved?" asked his uncle.

"Certainly not, sir," replied the boy. "It was a pleasure."

"It was not Ransom's business," said Mrs. Randolph.

"I suppose it was not the doctor's business either," said Mr.
Randolph — "though he made it so afterwards."

"Oh, I dare say it was a pleasure to him, too," said Mrs.
Gary. "Really, the doctor did not take care of anybody
yesterday, that I saw, except Daisy. I thought he admired
Frederica Fish — I had heard so — but there was nothing of it.
Daisy was quite queen of the day."

Mr. Randolph smiled.

Ransom seemed to consider himself insulted. "I suppose that
was the reason," he said, "that she called me worse than a
dog, because I took a meringue from the dinner-spread."

"Did you do that, Daisy?" asked her mother.

"No, mamma," said Daisy, low. Her face had flushed with
astonishment and sorrow.

"You did," said Ransom. "You said just that."

"Oh, no, Ransom — you forget."

"What _did_ you say, Daisy?" asked her mother.

"Mamma, I did not say _that_. I said something — I did not mean
it for anything like that."

"Tell me exactly what you did say — and no more delay."

"Wait till after breakfast," said Mr. Randolph. "I wish to be
present at the investigation of this subject, Felicia — but I
would rather take it by itself than with my coffee."

So there was a lull in the storm which seemed to be gathering.
It gave Daisy time to think. She was in a great puzzle. How
she could get through the matter without exposing all Ransom's
behaviour, all at least which went before the blow given to
herself, Daisy did not see; she was afraid that truth would
force her to bring it all out. And she was very unwilling to
do that, because in the first place she had established a full
amnesty in her own heart for all that Ransom had done, and
wished rather for an opportunity to please than to criminate
him; and, in the second place, in her inward consciousness she
knew that Mrs. Randolph was likely to be displeased with her,
in any event. She would certainly, if Daisy were an occasion
of bringing Ransom into disgrace; though the child doubted
privately whether her word would have weight enough with her
mother for that. Ransom also had time to think, and his brow
grew gloomy. An investigation is never what a guilty party
desires; and judging her by himself, Ransom had reason to
dread the chance of retaliation which such a proceeding would
give his little sister. So Daisy and Ransom wore thoughtful
faces during the rest of breakfast-time; and the result of
Ransom's reflections was that the investigation would go on
most pleasantly without him. He made up his mind to slip away,
if he had a chance, and be missing. He had the chance; for Mr.
and Mrs. Randolph were engaged with a call of some neighbours
immediately after breakfast; all thought of the children's
affairs seemed to be departed. Ransom waited a safe time, and
then departed too, with Preston, on an expedition which would
last all the morning. Daisy alone bided the hour, a good deal
disturbed in the view of what it might bring.

She was summoned at last to the library. Her father and mother
were there alone; but just after Daisy came in she was
followed by Dr. Sandford. The doctor came with a message. Mrs.
Sandford, his sister, he said, sent by him to beg that Daisy
might come to spend the day with Nora Dinwiddie, who much
desired her presence. In the event of a favourable answer, the
doctor said he would himself drive Daisy over, and would call
for that purpose in another hour or two. He delivered his
message, and Mrs. Randolph replied at once that Daisy could
not go; she could not permit it.

Mr. Randolph saw the flush of hope and disappointment on
Daisy's face and the witness of another kind in her eyes;
though with her characteristic steady self-control she neither
moved nor spoke, and suffered the tears to come no further.
Dr. Sandford saw it too, but he said nothing. Mr. Randolph
spoke.

"Is that decision on account of Daisy's supposed delinquency
in that matter?"

"Of course —" Mrs. Randolph answered, dryly.

"Can you explain it, Daisy?" her father asked, gravely, and
kindly drawing her up to his side. Daisy struggled with some
thought.

"Papa," she said, softly, "will mamma be satisfied to punish
me and let it go so?"

"Let it go how?"

"Would she be satisfied with this punishment, I mean, and not
make me say anything more about it?"

"I should not. I intend to know the whole. Can you explain
it?"

"I think I can, papa," Daisy said, but with a troubled
unwillingness, her father saw. He saw too that it was not the
unwillingness of a troubled conscience.

"Dr. Sandford, if you are willing to take the trouble of
stopping without the certainty of taking Daisy back with you,
I have some hopes that the result may be satisfactory to all
parties."

"_Au revoir_, then," said the doctor, and he strode off.

"Now, Daisy," said her father, still having his arms about her
— "what is it?"

Mrs. Randolph stood by the table and looked coldly down at the
group. Daisy was under great difficulty; that was plain.

"Papa — I wish Ransom could tell you!"

"Where is the boy?"

Mrs. Randolph rang the bell.

"It is no use, mamma; he has gone off with Preston somewhere."

"That is a mere subterfuge, Daisy, to gain time."

Daisy certainly looked troubled enough, and timid also; though
her meek look at her mother did not plead guilty to this
accusation.

"Speak, Daisy; the telling whatever there is to tell must come
upon you," her father said. "Your business is to explain the
charge Ransom has brought against you."

All Daisy's meditations had not brought her to the point of
knowing what to say in this conjuncture. She hesitated.

"Speak, Daisy!" her father said, peremptorily.

"Papa, they had put me — Eloise and Theresa Stanfield — they
had put me to watch the things."

"What things?"

"The dinner —the things that had been taken out of the hampers
and were spread on the tablecloth, where we dined."

"Watch for fear the fishes would carry them off?"

"No, sir, but Fido; Ransom's dog; he was running about."

"Oh! Well? —"

"I kept Fido off, but I could not keep Ransom —" Daisy said,
low. "He was taking things."

"And why should he not?" said Mrs. Randolph, coldly. "Why
should not Ransom take a sandwich, or a peach, if he wanted
one? or anything else, if he was hungry. There was enough
provision for everybody."

Daisy looked up at her mother, with a quick refutation of this
statement of the case in her mind, but something stayed her
lips. Mr. Randolph saw and read the look. He put his arm round
Daisy and drew her up to him, speaking with grave decision.

"Daisy, say all you have to say at once — do you hear me? and
spare neither for Ransom nor yourself. Tell all there is to be
told, without any shuffling."

"Papa, I should not have objected to his having a sandwich —
or as many as he liked. I should have thought it was proper.
But he took the meringues — and so many that the dish was left
very small; and then he carried off Joanna's lark pie, the
whole of it; and he did not mind what I said; and then, I
believe — I suppose that is what Ransom meant — I believe I
told him he was worse than Fido."

"Was Ransom offended at that?"

"Yes, papa. He did not like my speaking to him at all."

"Of course not," said Mrs. Randolph. "Boys never like to be
tutored by girls; and Daisy must expect her brother will not
like it if she meddles with him; and especially if she
addresses such language to him."

"I said only exactly that, mamma."

"Ransom put it differently."

A flush came up all over Daisy's face; she looked at her
mother appealingly, but said nothing and the next moment her
eyes fell.

"Did Ransom answer you at the time, Daisy?"

"Yes, sir," Daisy said, in a low voice.

"How?"

"Papa! —" said Daisy, confounded.

"What did he say to you?"

"He did not say much —" said Daisy.

"Tell me what his answer was?"

"Papa, he struck my ears," said Daisy. A great crimson glow
came all over her face, and she hid it in her father's breast;
like an injured thing running to shelter. Mr. Randolph was
lying on a sofa; he folded his arm round Daisy, but spoke
never a word. Mrs. Randolph moved impatiently.

"Boys will do such things," she said. "It is very absurd in
Daisy to mind it. Boys will do such things — she must learn
that it is not her place or business to find fault with her
brother. I think she deserved what she got. — It will teach
her a lesson."


"Boys shall not do such things in my house," said Mr.
Randolph, in his usual quiet manner.

"As you please!" said the lady, in a very dissatisfied way;
"but I think it is only what all boys do."

"Felicia, I wish to reverse your decision about this day's
pleasure. Seeing Daisy has had her lesson, do you not think
she might be indulged with the play after it?"

"As you please!" returned the lady, very dryly.

"Do you want to go, Daisy?"

"If you please, papa." Daisy spoke without showing her face.

"Is Mr. Dinwiddie at Mrs. Sandford's?" inquired Mrs. Randolph.

"Oh, no, mamma!" Daisy looked up. "He is not coming. He is
gone a great way off. I do not suppose he is ever coming here
again; and Nora is going away soon."

Mrs. Randolph moved off.

"Felicia —" said her husband. The lady paused. "I intend that
Ransom shall have a lesson, too. I shall take away the
remaining week of his vacation. To-morrow he goes back to
school. I tell you, that you may give the necessary orders."

"For this boy's freak, Mr. Randolph?"

"For what you please. He must learn that such behaviour is not
permitted here."

Mrs. Randolph did not share the folly with which she charged
Daisy; for she made no answer at all, and only with a slight
toss of her haughty head resumed her walk out of the room.
Daisy would fain have spoken, but she did not dare; and for
some minutes after they were left alone her father and she
were profoundly silent. Mr. Randolph revolving the behaviour
of Daisy as he now understood it; her willing silence and
enforced speech, and the gentleness manifested towards her
brother, with the meek obedience rendered to her mother and
himself. Perhaps his thoughts went deeper still. While Daisy
reflected with sorrow on the state of mind sure to be produced
now both in Ransom and Mrs. Randolph towards her. A matter
which she could do nothing to help. She did not dare say one
word to change her father's purpose about Ransom; she knew
quite well it would be no use. She stood silent by his sofa,
one little hand resting fondly on his shoulder, but profoundly
quiet. Then she remembered that she had something else to talk
about.

"Papa—" she said, wheeling round a little to face him.

"Well, Daisy?"

"Do you feel like talking?"

"Hardly — it is so hot," said Mr. Randolph. "Set open that
sash-door a little more, Daisy. Now come here. What is it?"

"Shall I wait till another time, papa?"

"No."

He had passed an arm round her, and she stood as before with
one hand resting on his shoulder.

"Papa — it was about — what last night you said I might talk
to you about."

"I remember. Go on, Daisy."

"Papa," said the child, a little in doubt how to go on — "I
want to do what is right."

"There is generally little difficulty in doing that, Daisy."

Daisy thought otherwise!

"Papa, I think mamma does not like me to do what I think is
right," she said, very low and humbly.

"Your mother is the best judge, Daisy. What are you talking
about?"

"_That_, papa — that you said I might talk to you about."

"What is it? Let us understand one another clearly."

"About — it was only that I liked to pray and give thanks a
minute at meal times." Daisy spoke very softly and as if she
would fain not have spoken.

"That is a mere indifferent ceremony, Daisy, which some people
perform. It is not binding on you, certainly, if your mother
has any objection to your doing it."

"But, papa," — Daisy began eagerly, and then checked herself,
and went on slowly — "you would not like it if you were to
give me anything, and I should not thank you?"

"Cases are not parallel, Daisy."

She wondered in her simplicity why they were not; but her
questions had already ventured pretty far; she did not dare
count too much upon her father's gentleness. She stood looking
at him with unsatisfied eyes.

"In one sense we receive everything we have from the bounty of
Heaven."

"Yes, papa."

"If your wish were carried out, we should be covering our
faces all the time — if that formality is needed in giving
thanks."

Daisy had thoughts, but she was afraid to utter them. She
looked at Mr. Randolph with the same unsatisfied eyes.

"Do you see, Daisy?"

"No, papa."

"Don't you!" said Mr. Randolph, smiling. "Difficulties still
unsolved. Can you state them, Daisy?"

"Papa, you said I might show you in the Bible things — do you
remember?"

"Things? What things?"

"Papa, if I wanted to do things that I thought were right —
you promised that if you thought they were in the Bible, I
might do as it said."

"Humph!" — said Mr. Randolph, with a very doubtful sort of a
grunt, between displeasure at his own word, and annoyance at
the trouble it might bring upon him. Nevertheless, he
remembered the promise. Daisy went on timidly.

"When you get up — by and by, papa, — may I show you what is
in the Bible?"

"You need not wait till I get up — show it to me now."

"I cannot lift that big Bible, papa."

Mr. Randolph rose up from the sofa, went to the shelves where
it lay, and brought the great Bible to the library table. Then
stood and watched Daisy, who kneeled in a chair by the table
and busily turned over the large leaves, her little face very
wise and intent, her little hands small to manage the big book
before her. Had such a child and such a book anything to do
with each other, Mr. Randolph thought. But Daisy presently
found her place, and looking up at him drew a little back that
her father might see it. He stooped over Daisy and read, "In
everything give thanks."

"Do you see it, papa?"

"Yes."

"Then here is another place — I know where to find it —"

She turned over more leaves, stopped again, and Mr. Randolph
stooped and read, "Giving thanks always for all things unto
God and the Father in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ."

Mr. Randolph read, and went and threw himself on his sofa
again. Daisy came beside him. A wistful earnestness in the one
face; a careless sort of embarrassment on the other.

"You are led astray, little Daisy, by a common mistake of
ignorant readers. You fancy that these words are to be taken
literally — whereas they mean simply that we should cultivate
a thankful spirit. That, of course, I agree to."

"But, papa," said Daisy, "is a thankful spirit the same thing
quite as giving thanks?"

"It is a much better thing, Daisy, in my opinion."

"But, papa, would not a thankful spirit like to _give_ thanks?"

"I have no objection, Daisy."

The tears came into Daisy's eyes. Her mother _had_.

"Papa —"

"Well? Let us get to the end of this difficulty if we can."

"I am afraid we cannot, papa. Because if you had told me to do
a thing so, you would mean it just so, and I should do it."

Mr. Randolph wrapped his arms round Daisy and brought her
close to his breast. "Look here, Daisy," said he — "tell me.
Do you really try to give thanks everywhere, and for all
things, as the word says?"

"I do not _try_, papa — I like to do it."

"Do you give thanks for _everything?_"

"I think I do, papa; for everything that gives me pleasure."

"For Mrs. Sandford's invitation to-day, for instance."

"Oh, yes, papa," said Daisy, smiling.

He brought the little head down within reach of his lips and
kissed it a good many times.

"I wish my little Daisy would not think so much."

"I think only to know what is right to do, papa."

"It is right to mind mamma and me, and let us think for you."

"And the Bible, papa?"

"You are quite growing an old woman a good while before the
time."

Daisy kissed him with good childlike kisses, laying her little
head in his neck and clasping her arms around him; for all
that, her heart was busy yet.

"Papa," she said, "what do you think is right for me to do?"

"Thinking exhausts me, Daisy. It is too hot to-day for such an
exercise."

Daisy drew back and looked at him, with one hand resting on
his shoulder. She did not dare urge any more in words; her
look spoke her anxious, disappointed questioning of her
father's meaning. Perhaps he did not care to meet such a gaze
of inquiry, for he pulled her down again in his arms.

"I do not want you to be an old woman."

"But, papa — that is not the thing."

"I will not have it, Daisy."

"Papa," she said with a small laugh, "what shall I do to help
it? I do not know how I came to be an old woman?"

"Go off and play with Nora Dinwiddie. Are you ready to go?"

"Yes, papa — except my hat and gloves."

"Do not think any more to-day. I will think for you by and by.
But, Daisy, why should you and I set ourselves up to be better
than other people?"

"How, papa?"

"Do you know anybody else that lives up to your views on the
subject of thanksgiving?"

"Oh, yes, papa."

"Who?"

Daisy softly said, "Juanita does, papa, I think."

"A poor ignorant woman, Daisy, and very likely full of
superstitions. Her race often are."

"What is a superstition, papa?"

"A religious notion which has no foundation in truth."

"Then papa, can it be superstition to do just what God tells
us to do?"

"You are too deep for me, Daisy," said Mr. Randolph,
languidly. "Go and get ready for Dr. Sandford. He will be here
presently."

So Daisy went, feeling very uncertain of the result of her
talk, but doubtful and discouraged. Mr. Randolph had a book in
hand when she returned to the library: she could not speak to
him any more; and soon indeed the doctor came, helped her into
his gig, and drove off with her.

Now it was pleasant. The fine gravelled roads in the grounds
of Melbourne were in beautiful order after the rain; no dust
rose yet, and all the trees and flowers were in a refreshed
state of life and sweetness. Truly it was a very hot day, but
Daisy found nothing amiss. Neither, apparently, did the
doctor's good horse. He trotted along without seeming to mind
the sun; and Daisy in a good deal of glee enjoyed everything.
It was private glee — in her own mind; she did not offer any
conversation; and the doctor, of Mr. Randolph's mind, perhaps,
that it was a warm day, threw himself back in his seat and
watched her lazily. Daisy on the contrary sat up and looked
busily out. They drove in the first place for a good distance
through her own home grounds, coming out to the public road by
the church where Mr. Pyne preached, and near which the
wintergreens grew. It looked beautiful this morning, with its
ivy all washed and fresh from the rain. Indeed all nature was
in a sort of glittering condition. When they came out on the
public way it was still beautiful; no dust, and fields and
grass and trees all shining.

The road they travelled now was one scarce known to Daisy; the
carriages from Melbourne never went that way; another was
always chosen at the beginning of all their excursions whether
of business or pleasure. No gentlemen's seats were to be seen;
an occasional farmhouse stood in the midst of its crops and
meadows; and more frequently a yet poorer sort of house stood
close by the roadside. The road in this place was sometimes
rough, and the doctor's good horse left his trot and picked
his way slowly along, giving Daisy by this means an
opportunity to inspect everything more closely. There was
often little pleasure in the inspection. About half a mile
from the church, Daisy's attention was drawn by one of these
poor houses. It was very small, unpainted and dreary-looking,
having a narrow court-yard between it and the road. As the gig
was very slowly going past, Daisy uttered an exclamation, the
first word she had uttered in a long while.

"Oh, Dr. Sandford! — what is that? Something is the matter!"

"No," said the doctor coolly, "nothing is the matter — more
than usual."

"But a woman was on her hands and knees on the ground? Wasn't
it a woman?"

"Yes. She cannot move about in any other way. She is a
cripple."

"She cannot stand up?" said Daisy, looking distressed and
horrified.

"No. She has no use of her lower limbs. She is accustomed to
it, Daisy; she never had the use of them, or never for a very
long while."

"Is she _old?_"

"Pretty old, I fancy. But she does not know her age herself,
and nobody else knows it."

"Has she got nice people to take care of her?"

The doctor smiled at the earnest little face. "She has
nobody."

"No one to take care of her?" said Daisy.

"No. She lives there alone."

"But, Dr. Sandford, how does she do — how does she manage?"

"In some way that would be difficult for you and me to
understand, I suppose — like the ways of the beavers and
wasps."

"I can understand those," said Daisy, "they were made to get
along as they do; they have got all they want."

Daisy was silent, musing, for a little time; then she broke
out again.

"Isn't she very miserable, Dr. Sandford?"

"She is a very crabbed old thing, so the inference is fair
that she is miserable. In fact, I do not see how she can avoid
it."

Daisy pondered perhaps this misery which she could so little
imagine; however, she let the subject drop as to any more
words about it. She was only what the doctor called "quaintly
sober," all the rest of the way.

"Why, she looks child-like and bright enough now," said Mrs.
Sandford, to whom he made the remark.

Daisy and Nora were exchanging mutual gratulations. The doctor
looked at them.

"At the rate in which she is growing old," said he, "she will
have the soul of Methuselah in a body of twenty years."

"I don't believe it," said Mrs. Sandford.

Nora and Daisy had a great day of it. Nothing broke the full
flow of business and pleasure during all the long hours; the
day was not hot to them, nor the shadows long in coming.
Behind the house there was a deep grassy dell through which a
brook ran. Over this brook in the dell a great black walnut
tree cast its constant flickering shadow; flickering when the
wind played in the leaves and branches, although to-day the
air was still and sultry, and the leaves and the shadows were
still too, and did not move. But there was life enough in the
branches of the old walnut, for a large family of grey
squirrels had established themselves there. Old and young,
large and small; it was impossible to tell, by counting, how
many there might be in the family; at least now, while they
were going in and out and running all over; but Nora said Mrs.
Sandford had counted fifteen of them at one time. That was in
cold weather, when they had gathered on the piazza to get the
nuts she threw to them. This kind of intercourse with society
had made the squirrels comparatively tame, so that they had no
particular objections to show themselves to the two children;
and when Nora and Daisy kept quiet they had great
entertainment in watching the gambols of the pretty grey
creatures. One in particular, — the mother of the family, Nora
said, — was bolder or more familiar than the rest; and came
often and came pretty near, to look at the children with her
bright little eyes, and let them see her beautiful feathery
tail and graceful motions. It was a great delight to Daisy.
Nora had seen them before, as she said, and did not care quite
so much about the sight.

"I wonder what use squirrels are?" said Daisy.

"I guess they are not of any use," said Nora.

"Oh, I guess everything is of use."

"Why, no, it isn't," said Nora. "Grass is not of any use."

"Oh, Nora! Think — what would the cows and horses do?"

"Well, then, stones are not of any use."

"Yes, they are — to build houses — don't you know?"

"Houses might be built of wood," said Nora.

"So they might. But then, Nora, wooden houses would not last
so long as stone ones."

"Well — people could build new ones."

"But houses might be wanted where there was not wood enough to
build them."

"I never saw such a place," said Nora. "I never saw a place
where there was not wood enough. And if there is such a place
anywhere, people could not live in it, because they would have
nothing to make fires with."

Daisy considered.

"But Nora, I think it cannot be so. I guess everything is made
for some use. Dr. Sandford told me yesterday what the use is
of those queer brown leaves that grow upon rocks — you know —
and the use of little mosses, that I never thought before were
good for anything. They are to begin to prepare a place on the
rocks where things can grow."

"Why, they grow themselves," said Nora.

"Yes, but I mean other things — ferns and flowers and other
things."

"Well, what is the use of _them?_" said Nora.

"Oh, Nora — just think how pretty they are."

"But prettiness isn't use."

"I think it is," said Daisy; "and I dare say they have other
uses that we do not know. And I think, Nora, that God would
not have taken such care to dress up the old rocks if the
rocks were no good."

"Did He do it?" said Nora.

"Why, certainly. He did everything, you know."

"Of course; but I thought they just grew," said Nora.

The children were silent a little, watching the squirrels.
Daisy began again abruptly.

"Nora, did you ever see that crippled woman that lives on the
mill road a little way from our church?"

"Old Molly Skelton, do you mean?"

"I do not know what her name is — she cannot walk; she creeps
about as if she had no legs."

"I've seen her. Isn't she horrid?"

"Did you ever see her near by?"

"No, I guess I haven't. I have heard Duke tell about her."

"What? do tell me."

"Oh, she's a horrid old thing — that is all I know."

"How, horrid?"

"Why, she is wicked, and she don't know anything. She would
hardly listen to Marmaduke when he wanted to talk to her."

"Has she got a Bible, I wonder?" said Daisy, in an awestruck
voice.

"She? She can't read. She don't know anything; and she is as
ugly and cross as she can be."

"Was she cross to Mr. Dinwiddie?"

"Yes, indeed. He said he never saw such a crabbed old thing.
Oh, she's horrid. I don't like to ride by that way."

The children were called in to dinner, and kept in the house
by Mrs. Sandford during the intensest heat of the day. But
when the afternoon was cooling off, or at least growing less
oppressive, the two children again sought the shade under the
walnut tree, where the gurgle of the water over the stones,
and the company of the squirrels in the tree, made the place
pleasant. And there they sat down in a great state of mutual
contentment. Nora's feet were swinging about for very jollity.
But Daisy sat still. Perhaps she was tired. Nevertheless it
could not be that which made her little face by and by take on
it as profound an expression as if she had been looking over
all Methuselah's years.

"Nora —" said Daisy, and stopped.

"What?" said Nora, kicking her heels.

"You know that poor old crippled woman — what did you call
her?"

"Molly Skelton."

"Suppose you were in her place — what do you think you would
wish for,"

"In her place!" said Nora. "I should wish for everything."

"Yes, but I mean, things that you could have."

"I should wish some doctor would come and make me straight,
the first thing; and then —"

"No, Nora, but I mean, things that might be possible, you
know. I do not mean things like a fairy tale."

"I don't know," said Nora. "I don't believe Molly Skelton
wishes for anything."

"But what would you wish for, in her place?"

"I should want to be straight, and stand and go about like
other people."

"Yes, Nora, but I say! I mean, what would you wish for that
would not be impossible?"

"Why, Daisy, how funny! Let me see. I should wish that
somebody would come and be good to me, I think."

"How?"

"Oh — tell me stories and read to me, and take tea with me —
and I don't know what!"

"Do you suppose nobody ever does take tea with her?" said
Daisy, upon whose fancy a new shadow of wretchedness darkened.

"I guess not," said Nora. "I don't believe anybody would. I
guess nobody likes her well enough, she is so bad."

"Who gets her tea for her then?"

"Why, nobody. She does it herself."

"How can she?"

"I don't know. Marmaduke says she keeps her house clean too,
though she only goes about on her hands and knees."

"Nora," said Daisy, "that isn't like the Bible."

"What isn't?"

"Don't you remember what the Bible says? that whatever we
would like other people to do to us, we should do so to them."

"What do you mean, Daisy?"

"I mean just so."

"But what isn't like the Bible?"

"Why — to let that poor old woman go without what we would
like if we were in her place."

"Why, Daisy! Molly Skelton! The Bible does not mean that we
ought to go and make visits to such horrid people as that."

"You said you would like it if you were in her place,"
observed Daisy, "and I know I should. I thought so when you
told me."

"But, Daisy, she is wicked!"

"Well, Jesus loves wicked people," said Daisy, calmly. "Maybe
she will wear a white robe in heaven, and have a crown of gold
upon her head."

"Daisy! — she is wicked," exclaimed Nora, indignantly. "Wicked
people do not go to heaven."

"Yes, but if Jesus gives them His white robe, they do," said
Daisy. "He came to save wicked people."

"I don't want to talk any more about Molly Skelton," said
Nora. "Look, Daisy! — there's the old mother squirrel peeping
out of her hole. Do you see? Now she is coming out — see her
black eyes! now there's her beautiful feather tail!"

This subject was to the full as interesting to Daisy as it was
to her friend; and in watching the grey family in the walnut
tree, and trying to induce them to come near and get some
almonds, the rest of the afternoon flew by. Only the "mother
squirrel" could be tempted near; but she, older in experience
and wisdom than her young ones, did venture into the
neighbourhood of the children, attracted by the nuts they
threw down; and getting pretty close to them, before she would
venture quite so far as where the nuts lay, she sat down on
her haunches to look and see whether all were safe; curling
her thick, light plume of a tail up along her back, or
whisking it about in various lines of beauty, while her bright
little black eyes took all the observations they were equal
to. It was unending amusement for the children; and then to
see Mrs. Bunny finally seize an almond and spring away with
it, was very charming. So the afternoon sped; nor ever brought
one moment of weariness, until the summons came to bid the
children into the house again to tea.


CHAPTER XXVIII.

MRS. GARY'S PRESENT.


After tea the doctor took Daisy in his gig and drove her home.
The drive was unmarked by a single thing; except that just as
they were passing the cripple's house Daisy broke silence and
asked, "Is that woman — Molly Skelton — is she very poor, Dr.
Sandford?"

"If to live on charity be poor. I do not suppose the
neighbours let her suffer."

"Is she cross to everybody, Dr. Sandford?"

"She has the name of it, I believe, Daisy. I really do not
remember whether she was cross to me or not."

"Then you know her?"

"Yes. I know everybody."

The family at Melbourne were found just taking their late tea
as the doctor and Daisy entered. They were met with complaints
of the heat; though Daisy thought the drawing room was
exceeding pleasant, the air came in at the long windows with
such gentle freshness from the river.

The doctor took a cup of tea and declared the day was
excellent if you only rode fifty miles through the heat of it.
"Coolness is coolness, after that," he said.

Daisy sat in a corner and wondered at the people. Hot? and
suffocating? she had no recollection of any such thing all
day. How delicious it had been in that green dell under the
walnut tree, with the grey squirrels!

"How has it been with you, Daisy?" said her aunt at last.

"Nice, aunt Gary."

Two or three people smiled; Daisy's favourite word came out
with such a dulcet tone of a smooth and clear spirit. It was a
syrup drop of sweetness in the midst of flat and acid
qualities.

"It has been satisfactory, has it?" said her aunt, in a tone
which did not share the character. "Come here, Daisy — I have
got something for you. You know I robbed you a little while
ago, and promised to try to find something to make amends. Now
come and see if I have done it. Preston, fetch that box here."

A neat wooden case of some size was brought by Preston and set
at his mother's feet. Mrs. Gary unlocked it, and went on to
take out of its enveloping coverings a very elegant French
doll; a real empress Eugénie. The doll's face was even
modelled into some likeness to the beauty she was named after;
a diadem sat gracefully on her head, and her robes were a
miniature imitation of royalty, but very exquisitely
fashioned. Everybody exclaimed at the perfection of the
beautiful toy, except Daisy herself who stood quite still and
quiet looking at it. Mrs. Gary had not done yet. The empress
had a wardrobe; and such variety and elegance and finish of
attire of all sorts rarely falls to the lot of a doll. A very
large wardrobe it was, and every article perfectly finished
and well made as if meant for actual wear. Mrs. Gary displayed
her present; Daisy looked on, standing by her father's knee
and with one hand resting on it.

"Have you nothing to say to express your pleasure, Daisy?" —
This was Mrs. Randolph's question.

Daisy at the word pronounced a sober "I thank you, aunt Gary."
But it was so very sober and passionless that Mrs. Randolph
grew impatient.

"I do not hear you express any pleasure, Daisy," she said,
meaningly.

Daisy turned her face towards her mother with a doubtful look,
and was silent.

"Speak!" said Mrs. Randolph.

"What, mamma?"

"Whatever you choose, to show your sense of your aunt's
kindness."

"Do not concern yourself, my dear," said her sister. "I am
sorry if I have failed in meeting Daisy's taste — that is
all."

"Daisy, speak, or leave the room" — said Mrs. Randolph.

"Mamma," said Daisy, pushed into a corner, "I would speak, but
I do not know what to say."

"Tell your aunt Gary she has given you a great deal of
pleasure."

Daisy looked again mutely at her mother, somewhat distressed.

"Tell her so, Daisy!" Mrs. Randolph repeated, in a tone of
command.

"I cannot, mamma —" the child answered, sorrowfully.

"Do you mean to tell your aunt that her exquisite present
gives you _no_ pleasure?"

"I did not intend to tell her so," Daisy answered, in a low
voice. Another storm rising! Storms seemed to get up very
easily in these days.

"My dear," said Mrs. Gary, "do not concern yourself. It is not
of the least consequence, as far as I am concerned. Preston,
remove this box. If Daisy chooses to receive it, perhaps it
will find more favour at another time."

Mrs. Gary got up and moved off.

"Mr. Randolph, I will trouble you to dismiss Daisy," said his
wife. "If she cannot behave properly she cannot be in the room
with me."

Daisy was still standing with her hand on her father's knee.
The other little hand came for a moment across her brows and
rested there; but she would not cry; her lip did not even
tremble.

"First let me understand," said her father; and he lifted
Daisy on his knee kindly. "Daisy, I never saw you uncivil
before."

"Papa, I am very sorry —" said the child.

"Can you explain it?"

"Papa, I would have been civil if I could; but I had nothing
to say."

"That is the very place where a person of good manners shows
himself different from a person who has no manners at all.
Good manners finds something to say."

"But, papa, there was nothing _true_."

"The doll gave you no pleasure?"

"No, papa," said Daisy, low.

"And you felt no obligation for the thoughtfulness and
kindness of your aunt in getting for you so elegant a
present?"

Daisy hesitated and flushed.

"Daisy, answer," said her father, gravely.

"No, papa," — Daisy said, low as before.

"Why not?"

"Papa," said Daisy, with a good deal of difficulty and
hesitation — "that is all passed — I do not want to say
anything more about it."

"About what?"

"About — papa, I do not think mamma would like to have me talk
about it."

"Go on, Daisy. — About what?"

"All that trouble we had, papa."

"What I want to know is, why you did not feel grateful for
your aunt's kindness just now, which she had been at some
pains to show you."

"Papa," said Daisy, wistfully, — "it was not kindness — it was
pay; and I did not want pay."

"Pay? For what?"

"For my Egyptian spoon, papa."

"I do not understand what you are talking of, Daisy."

"No, papa," said Daisy; so simply showing her wish that he
should not, as well as her knowledge that he did not, that Mr.
Randolph could not forbear smiling.

"But I mean to understand it," he said.

"It was my old Egyptian spoon, papa; the doll was meant to be
pay for that."

A little explanation was necessary in order to bring to Mr.
Randolph's mind the facts Daisy referred to, the spoon itself
and the time and occasion when it was bestowed on her.

"Did you give your Egyptian spoon to your aunt Gary?"

"I said she might have it, papa."

"Unwillingly?"

"No, papa — willingly."

"In exchange for this doll?"

"Oh, no, papa — not in exchange for anything. I did not want
any exchange."

"If I remember, Daisy," said Mr. Randolph, "your aunt Gary
desired to have that spoon the very day it was given to you;
and I thought you did not wish she should have it?"

"No, papa — so I didn't."

"Your mind changed afterward?"

"I do not think my mind changed," said Daisy, slowly — "but I
was willing she should have it."

"Daisy, this whole affair is a mystery to me yet. In this
case, why was it not kind in your aunt to bestow this French
doll upon you? It seems to me very kind."

"Yes papa — you do not understand."

"Make me understand. Daisy, I command you to tell me all that
you have not told me. You need not think of anything now,
except my command."

Daisy did, perhaps; for now her lip quivered slightly; and for
a moment she hid her face, in her father's bosom. Mr. Randolph
wrapped his arms round her and stooped his head to hear the
story which Daisy was obliged to give. She gave it fully, and
he heard it quite through in silence. And he made no
observation upon it when it was finished; he only asked her,
"Was there no resentment in your refusal of thanks to your
aunt just now?"

"No, papa" — said Daisy; with too sweet and artless utterance
for him to doubt her.

"But, then, Daisy, we come back to the cause of your mother's
displeasure. Good breeding requires that people should not be
rude, even by silence."

"Papa, I did not know how to be polite with truth."

"You could have said you were very much obliged to your aunt."

"But, I was _not_, papa."

"Not obliged to her?"

"No, sir."

"But, Daisy, that is a civil form of expression which it is
usual to avail oneself of upon such occasions. It does not
necessarily mean much."

"But, papa, would she not have thought I meant it, if I had
said so?"

"Very likely. That is the polite advantage gained."

"But papa, _I_ should have known that I did not mean it; and it
would not have been true."

"This is getting to be too deep a question for you to discuss
to-night — it is time for you to go to bed. But I cannot have
you rude."

Daisy kissed her father, who had been extremely gentle and
tender with her, and went off to her room. Mr. Randolph's brow
looked moody.

"Have you brought Daisy's ideas into order?" asked his wife,
who had been engaged in conversation with Dr. Sandford.

"She has rather brought confusion into mine," said the
gentleman.

"What is the matter?"

"Truth and Daisy, _versus_ civility and the world. And it is not
so easy to make a child comprehend some of the fine
distinctions we are accustomed to draw. White and black are
_very_ white and black, to such eyes, and no allowance is made
for a painter's lights and shades."

"She must make allowance for what your eyes see," said Mrs.
Randolph.

Mr. Randolph made no answer.

"Daisy is entirely changed," her mother went on, — "and is
become utterly obstinate and unmanageable. Perfectly self-
important too — she thinks there is no wisdom now but her own.
I may thank you for it, Dr. Sandford."

"You do me too much honour," said the doctor.

"It is an honour you share with Mr. Dinwiddie."

"I did not know I shared anything with Mr. Dinwiddie."

"He has infected the child with a set of perfectly fanatical
notions; and you persisted in keeping her under that
creature's care, where they had time to grow strong."

"I will do all I can to repair mischief done," said the
doctor. "Mrs. Benoit is a good nurse for the body, and you
will bear me witness it was for repairs of _that_ I was called
in. What is the other damage referred to?"

"Fanaticism."

"Rather young for that disease to take deep root," said the
doctor.

"Anything takes deep root in Daisy; whatever she takes up she
holds to."

"I advise you to let her be fanatical then a little while
longer," said the doctor, "till she has time to lay up some
strength."

And the doctor took his departure.

"I am sure that is wise counsel, Felicia," Mr. Randolph said.
But the lady made him no answer.

Ransom went off to school the next day, as his father had
promised. Mrs. Randolph looked very gloomy; Mrs. Gary looked
lot otherwise; and Daisy thought the mental and social horizon
foreboded stormy weather. But very happily, as it seemed to
her, before dinner there was an arrival of some expected
visitors, coming to stay for a time in the house. They had
been desired as well as expected; there was a famous lady and
a learned gentleman among them; and every eye and ear were
taken up with attending to their words or waiting upon their
movements. Daisy and her concerns were, she thought,
forgotten.

She enjoyed the feeling of this for a little while; and then
ordered her pony chaise. And presently you might have seen a
little figure in a white frock come out upon the front steps,
with a large flat on her head, and driving gloves on her
hands, and in one of them a little basket. Down the steps she
came and took her place in the chaise and gathered up the
reins. The black pony was ready, with another boy in place of
Sam; nobody interfered with her; and off they went, the wheels
of the little chaise rolling smoothly over the gravel, Loupe
in a gentle waddling trot, and Daisy in a contented state of
mind. It was very pleasant! Clear sunny air, yet not too hot,
and the afternoon shadows beginning to make all things look
lovely. Daisy took the way to the church, passed out upon the
high road, and turned the pony's head in the direction which
she had taken with Dr. Sandford the day before. She did not go
quite so fast, however; so that it was a little time before
she came in sight of the poor old house which she recognised
as Molly Skelton's. Daisy drew the reins then, and let Loupe
walk slowly up a slight ascent in the road which led to it.
But when the chaise was fairly opposite the house door, Daisy
drew the reins still more and brought Loupe to a standstill.
She peered forth then anxiously to see if the poor old inmate
of the house were to be seen anywhere.

As she looked, the house door opened; and with a very
straitened and touched heart Daisy watched the crippled old
creature come from within, crawl down over the door step, and
make her slow way into the little path before the house. A
path of a few yards ran from the road to the house door, and
it was bordered with a rough-looking array of flowers. —
Rough-looking, because they were set or had sprung up rather
confusedly, and the path between had no care but was only worn
by the feet of travellers and the hands and knees of the poor
inhabitant of the place. Yet some sort of care was bestowed on
the flowers themselves, for no weeds had been suffered to
choke them; and even the encroaching grass had been removed
from trespassing too nearly on their little occupation of
ground. The flowers themselves shot up and grew as they had a
mind. Prince's feather was conspicuous, and some ragged
balsams. A few yellow marigolds made a forlorn attempt to look
bright, and one tall sunflower raised its great head above all
the rest; proclaiming the quality of the little kingdom where
it reigned.

The poor cripple moved down a few steps from the house door,
and began grubbing with her hands around the roots of a bunch
of balsams. Daisy looked a minute or two, very still, and then
bade the boy hold her pony; while, without troubling herself
about his mystification, she got out of the chaise, and,
basket in hand, opened the wicket, and softly went up the
path. The neat little shoes and spotless white dress were
close beside the poor creature grubbing there in the ground
before she knew it, and there they stood still; Daisy was a
good deal at a loss how to speak. She was not immediately
perceived; the head of the cripple had a three-cornered
handkerchief thrown over it to defend it from the sun, and she
was earnestly grubbing at the roots of her balsam; the earth-
stained fingers and the old brown stuff dress, which was of
course dragged along in the dirt too, made a sad contrast with
the spotless freshness of the little motionless figure that
was at her side, almost touching her. Daisy concluded to wait
till she should be seen, and then speak, though how to speak
she did not very well know, and she rather dreaded the moment.

It came, when, in throwing her weeds aside, a glance of the
cripple saw, instead of stones and grass, two very neat and
black and well-shaped little shoes planted there almost within
reach of her hand. She drew herself back from the balsam, and
looked sideways up, to see what the shoes belonged to. Daisy
saw her face then; it was a bad face; so disagreeable that she
looked away from it instantly to the balsams.

"What are you doing to your flowers?" she asked, gently.

The gentle little child-voice seemed to astonish the woman,
although after an instant she made surly answer, "Whose
business is it?"

"Wouldn't it be easier," said Daisy, not looking at her, "if
you had something to help you get the weeds up? Don't you want
a fork, or a hoe, or something?"

"I've got forks," said the cripple, sullenly. "I use 'em to
eat with."

"No, but I mean, something to help you with the weeds," said
Daisy — "that sort of fork, or a trowel."

The woman spread her brown fingers of both hands, like birds'
claws, covered with the dirt in which she had been digging.
"I've got forks enough," she said, savagely — "there's what
goes into my weeds. Now go 'long! —"

The last words were uttered with a sudden jerk, and as she
spoke them she plunged her hands into the dirt, and bringing
up a double handful, cast it with a spiteful fling upon the
neat little black shoes. Woe to white stockings, if they had
been visible; but Daisy's shoes came up high and tight around
her ankle, and the earth thrown upon them fell off easily
again; except only that it lodged in the eyelet holes of the
boot-lacing and sifted through a little there, and some had
gone as high as the top of the boot and fell in. — Quite
enough to make Daisy uncomfortable, besides that the action
half frightened her. She quitted the ground, went back to her
pony chaise without even attempting to do anything with the
contents of her basket. Daisy could go no further with her
feet in this condition She turned the pony's head, and drove
back to Melbourne.


CHAPTER XXIX.

THE ROSE-BUSH.


"Will I take him to the stable, Miss Daisy?" inquired the boy,
as Daisy got out at the back door.

"No. Just wait a little for me, Lewis."

Upstairs went Daisy; took off her boots and got rid of the
soil they had brought home; that was the first thing. Then, in
spotless order again, she went back to Lewis and inquired
where Logan was at work. Thither she drove the pony chaise.

"Logan," said Daisy, coming up to him — she had left Loupe in
Lewis's care — "what do you use to help you get up weeds?"

"Maybe a hoe, Miss Daisy; or whiles a weeding fork."

"Have you got one here."

"No, Miss Daisy. Was it a fork you were wanting?"

"Yes, I want one, Logan."

"And will you be wanting it now?"

"Yes, I want it now, if you please."

"Bill, you go home and get Miss Daisy one o' them small hand
forks — out o' that new lot — them's slenderer."

"And Logan, I want another thing. I want a little rose-bush —
and if you can, I want it with a rose open or a bud on it."

"A rose-bush!" said Logan. "Ye want it to be set some place,
nae doute?"

"Yes, I do; but I want to set it out myself, Logan; so it must
not be too big a bush, you know, for I couldn't manage it."

"Perhaps Miss Daisy had better let me manage it. It's dirty
work, Miss Daisy."

"No; I only want the rose bush. I will take care of it, Logan.
Have you got one that I can have?"

"Ou, ay, Miss Daisy! there's a forest of rose bushes — ye can
just please yourself."

"Where is it?"

Seeing his little mistress was greatly in earnest and must be
presently satisfied, Logan cast a wistful glance or two at his
own proper work in hand which he was abandoning, and walked
away with Daisy. The flower garden and nursery were at some
distance; but Daisy trudged along as patiently as he. Her
little face was busy-looking now and eager, as well as wise;
but no tinge of colour would yet own itself at home in those
pale cheeks. Logan glanced at her now and then and was, as she
said, "very good." He thought he was about the best business,
after all, that could occupy him. He directed his steps to a
great garden that yet was not the show garden, but hid away
behind the plantations of trees and shrubbery. There were a
vast number of plants and flowers here, too; but they were not
in show order, and were in fact only the reserve stock, for
supplying vacancies or preparing changes, or especially for
furnishing cut flowers to the house; of which a large quantity
must every day be sent in. There was a very nursery of rose
trees, smaller and larger. Logan peered about, very particular
in his own line as to how every thing should be done; at last
he found and chose just the right thing for Daisy. A slender,
thrifty young plant, with healthy strong leaves and shoots,
and at the top a bud showing red, and a half opened sweet
rose. Daisy was quite satisfied.

"Now where is it going, Miss Daisy?" Logan inquired.

"I am going to plant it out myself, Logan; it is going in a
place — where I want it."

"Surely! but does Miss Daisy know how to plant a rose tree?"

"Won't you tell me how, Logan?"

"Weel, Miss Daisy, there must be a hole dug for it, in the
first place; you must take a trowel and make a hole for it —
But your dress will be the waur!" he exclaimed, glancing at
his little mistress's spotless draperies.

"Never mind; only go on and tell me exactly how to manage,
Logan."

"Does Miss Daisy intend to do it this afternoon?"

"Yes."

"Aweel, you must take a trowel and make a hole," said Logan,
nipping off some useless buds and shoots from the plants in
his neighbourhood as he was speaking — "and be sure your hole
is deep as it should be; and make the bottom soft with your
trowel, or throw in a little earth, well broken, for the roots
to rest on —"

"How shall I know when my hole is deep enough?"

"Weel, Miss Daisy, it depends on the haighth of the roots — ye
must even try and see till ye get it deep enough; but whatever
ye do, keep the crown of the plant above ground."

"And what is the crown of the plant, Logan?"

Logan stooped down, and put his fingers to the stem of a rose
tree.

"It's just called the crown o' the plant, Miss Daisy, here
where the roots goes one way and the stem springs up another.
Miss Daisy sees, there's a kind o' shouther there."

"No, I don't see," said Daisy.

Logan put in his spade, and, with a turn or two, brought up
the little rose bush he had chosen for her purpose; and
holding the ball of earth in his hand, showed her the part of
the plant he spoke of, just above the surface of the soil.

"It's the most tenderest pairt of the vegetable nature," he
said; "and it must be kept out of the ground, where it can
breathe, like; it won't answer to cover it up."

"I will not," said Daisy. "Then? —"

"Then, when ye have gotten the place prepared, ye must set in
this ball of earth, as haill as ye can keep it; but if it gets
broken off, as it's like it will! —then ye must set the roots
kindly in on the soft earth, and let them lie just natural;
and put in the soft earth over them; and when ye have got a
little in press it clown a bit; and then more, after the same
manner, until it's all filled up."

"Why must it be pressed down?"

"Weel, Miss Daisy, it must be dune; the roots is accustomed to
have the soil tight round them, and they don't like it unless
they have it so. It's a vara good way, to have a watering pot
of water and make a puddle in the bottom of the hole, and set
the roots in that, and throw in the soil; and then it settles
itself all round them, and ye need not to coax it with your
fingers. But if ye don't puddle the roots, the bush must be
well watered and soaked when ye have dune."

"Very well, Logan — thank you. Now please put it in a basket
for me, with a trowel, and let me take a watering pot of water
too; or Lewis can carry that, can't he?"

"He can take whatever ye have a mind," said Logan; "but where
is it going?"

"I'll take the basket with the rose," said Daisy — "it's going
a little way — you can set it just here, in my chaise, Logan."

The gardener deposited the basket safely in the chaise, and
Daisy got in and shook the reins. Lewis, much wondering and a
little disgustful, was accommodated with a watering pot full
of water, by the grinning Logan.

"See ye ride steady now, boy," he said. "Ye won't want to show
any graces of horsemanship, the day!"

Whatever Lewis might have wanted, the necessity upon him was
pretty stringent. A watering pot full of water he found a very
uncomfortable bundle to carry on horseback; he was bound to
ride at the gentlest of paces, or inflict an involuntary cold
bath upon himself every other step. Much marvelling at the
arrangement which made a carriage and horses needful to move a
rose-bush, Lewis followed, as gently as he could, the progress
of his little mistress's pony-chaise; which was much swifter
than he liked it; until his marvelling was increased by its
turning out of Melbourne grounds and taking a course up the
road again. Towards the same place! On went Daisy, much too
fast for the watering pot; till the cripple's cottage came in
sight a second time. There, just at the foot of the little
rise in the road which led up to the cottage gate, Loupe
suddenly fell to very slow going. The watering pot went easily
enough for several yards; and then Loupe stopped. What was the
matter?

Something was the matter, yet Daisy did not summon Lewis. She
sat quite still, looking before her up to the cottage, with a
thoughtful, puzzled, troubled face. The matter was, that just
there, and not before, the remembrance of her mother's command
had flashed on her — that she should have nothing to do with
any stranger out of the house unless she had first got leave.
Daisy was stopped short. Get leave? She would never get leave
to speak again to that poor crabbed, crippled, forlorn
creature; and who else would take up the endeavour to be kind
to her? Who else would even try to win her to a knowledge of
the Bible and Bible joys? and how would that poor ignorant
mortal ever get out of the darkness into the light? Daisy did
not know how to give her up; yet she could not go on. The
sweet rose on the top of her little rose-tree mocked her, with
kindness undone and good not attempted. Daisy sat still,
confounded at this new barrier her mother's will had put in
her way.

Wheels came rapidly coursing along the road in front of her,
and in a moment Dr. Sandford's gig had whirled past the
cottage and bore down the hill. But recognizing the pony
chaise in the road, he too came to a stop as sudden as Daisy's
had been. The two were close beside each other.

"Where away, Daisy?"

"I do not understand, Dr. Sandford."

"Where are you going? or rather, why are you standing still
here?"

"Because I was in doubt what to do."

"Did the doubt take you here, in the middle of the road?"

"Yes, Dr. Sandford."

"What is it, Daisy? To whom are you carrying a rose-bush?"

"I am afraid — nobody."

"What is the matter — or the doubt?"

"It is a question of duty, Dr. Sandford."

"Then I will decide it for you. Go on and do what you wish to
do. That will be right."

"Oh, no, sir," said Daisy, smiling at her adviser — that is
just what would be wrong. I cannot."

"Cannot what?"

"Do that, sir; do what I wish to do." And Daisy sighed withal.

"What do you wish to do?"

The doctor was quite serious, and as usual a little imperative
in his questions, and Daisy knew him to be trusted.

"I wanted to take this little rose-bush and set it out in the
garden up there."

"_There?_ do you mean the garden of that cottage?" said the
doctor, pointing with his whip.

"Yes, sir."

"Are you bound thither now?"

"No, sir — I am going home."

"Rose-bush and all? Daisy, let Lewis get Loupe home, and you
come here and ride with me. Come! I want you."

Truly Daisy wanted nothing else. She left rose-bush and
watering pot, chaise and pony, to Lewis's management, and
gladly let the doctor take her up beside him. She liked to
drive with him; he had a fine horse and went fast; and there
were other reasons.

Now they drove off in fine style; fast, over the good roads;
whisked by Melbourne, sped away along south, catching glimpses
of the river from time to time, with the hills on the further
side hazily blue and indistinct with the September haze of
sunbeams. Near hand the green of plantations and woodland was
varied with brown grainfields, where grain had been, and with
ripening Indian corn and buckwheat; but more especially with
here and there a stately roof-tree or gable of some fine new
or old country house. The light was mellow, the air was good;
in the excitement of her drive Daisy half forgot her
perplexity and discomfiture. Till the doctor said, suddenly
looking round at her with a smile, "Now I should like to know
the history of that rose-bush."

"Oh, there is no history about it," said Daisy, quite taken by
surprise.

"Everything has a beginning, a middle, and an end," said the
doctor. "What was the beginning of this?"

"Only, Dr. Sandford," said Daisy, doubtfully, — "I was sorry
for that poor woman, after what you told me about her."

"Molly Skelton?"

"Yes, sir."

"And you thought to comfort her with rose-bushes?"

"No sir, — but — I wanted to get on good terms with her."

"Are you on any other terms?"

"She does not know me, you know, sir," said Daisy, lifting to
her friend a face that was beyond his comprehension, — "and I
do not think she was very well pleased to see me in her garden
a little while ago."

"You have been in her garden, then?"

"Yes, sir."

"Daisy, will you excuse me for asking, why you should be on
any terms whatever with Molly Skelton?"

"She is so unhappy, Dr. Sandford," — Daisy said, looking up
again.

"And do you think you can do anything to make her less
unhappy?"

"I thought" — Daisy did not look up now, but the doctor
watching her saw a witnessing tinge that he knew coming about
her eyelids, and a softened line of lip, that made him listen
the closer, — "I thought — I might teach her something that
would make her happy, — if I could."

"What would you teach her, Daisy?"

"I would teach her to read — perhaps — I thought; if she would
like me and let me."

"Is reading a specific for happiness?"

"No sir — but — the Bible!" Daisy said, with a sudden glance.
And so clear and sure the speech of her childish eye was, that
the doctor, though believing nothing of it, would not breathe
a question of that which she believed.

"Oh, that is it!" he said. "Well, Daisy, this is the
beginning; but though I came in upon the middle of the subject
I do not understand it yet. Why did not the rose-tree get to
its destination!"

"Because — I remembered, just when I had got to the bottom of
the hill, that mamma would not let me."

Daisy's tone of voice told more than she knew of her subdued
state of disappointment.

"Mrs. Randolph had forbidden you to go to Molly's cottage?"

"No sir; but she had forbidden me to speak to anybody without
having her leave. I had forgotten it till just that minute."

"Ask her leave, and then go. What is the difficulty in that,
Daisy?"

"She will not give me leave, Dr. Sandford. Mamma does not like
me to do such things."

"Do you care much about it?"

"Yes, sir."

"Present your request to Mrs. Randolph to-morrow, Daisy — that
is my advice to you."

"It would be no use, Dr. Sandford."

"Perhaps not; but I advise you to take my advice; and lay the
rose-bush by the heels till to-morrow afternoon."

"By the heels, sir."

"Yes. Logan will tell you what that means."

Daisy looked with such a gaze of steadfast inquiry up in the
doctor's face, that he had hard work to command his
countenance. She could not make out anything from his face,
except that somehow she got a little encouragement from it;
and then they whirled in at the gate of Melbourne, and in
another minute were at home. Daisy went off to see after her
rose-bush, find Logan, and have it laid by the heels. The
doctor marched in through the hall, into the library, and then
catching sight of Mr. Randolph on the piazza, he went out
there. Mr. Randolph was enjoying the September sunlight, and
seemed to be doing nothing else.

"Good afternoon!" said the doctor.

"How do you do?" said Mr. Randolph. "Can you, possibly have
business on hand, doctor, in this weather?"

"Very good weather for business," said the doctor.

"Too good. It is enough to look and breathe."

All Mr. Randolph was doing, apparently. He was lounging on a
settee, with a satisfied expression of countenance. The doctor
put himself in a great cane chair and followed the direction
of his host's eyes, to the opposite river and mountains; over
which there was a glory of light and atmosphere. Came back to
Mr. Randolph's face with an air of the disparaged business.

"It is not bad, driving."

"No, I suppose not!"

"Your little daughter likes business better than you do."

A smile came over Mr. Randolph's face, a smile of much
meaning.

"She likes it too well, doctor. I wish I could infuse some
degree of nonchalant carelessness into Daisy's little wise
head."

"We must deal with things as we find them," said the doctor.
"I met her this afternoon in the road, with a carriage-load of
business on hand; but what was very bad for her, it was
arrested business."

"How do you mean?"

The doctor rose here to give his chair to Mrs. Randolph, who
stepped out through the library window. He fetched another for
himself, and went on.

"She was in the middle of the road, her chaise loaded with
baskets and greenhouse plants, and with a general distribution
of garden tools between herself and her outrider. All in the
middle of the road at a stand-still — chaise and pony and all,
— and Daisy herself in particular. I found it was an
interrupted expedition, and invited Daisy to take a ride with
me; which she did, and I got at the rationale of the affair.
And I come now to make the request, as her physician, not as
her friend, that her expeditions may be as little interfered
with as possible. Let her energies work. The very best thing
for her is that they should find something to work upon, and
receive no interruption."

"What interrupted her this afternoon."

"Conscience — as I understand it."

"There is no dealing with Daisy's conscience, doctor," said
Mr. Randolph, with a smile. "What _that_ says, Daisy feels
herself bound to do."

"Do not burden her conscience then," said the doctor. "Not
just now — till she gets stronger."

"Where was she going this afternoon?" Mrs. Randolph asked in
her calm voice.

"On an errand of the most Utopian benevolence —"

"Having what for its object?"

"A miserable old crippled creature, who lives in a poor
cottage about half a mile from your gate."

"What was Daisy desiring to do, doctor?"

"Carry some comfort to this forlorn thing, I believe; whom
nobody else thinks of comforting."

"Do you know what shape the comfort was to take?"

"I think," said the doctor, — "I am not quite sure, but I
think, it was a rose-bush."

Mr. Randolph looked at his wife and straightened himself up to
a sitting posture.

"And what hindered her, Dr. Sandford?"

"I think, some understanding that she had not liberty to go
on."

"Very proper in Daisy," said Mrs. Randolph.

"That is your child who is wanting in docility," remarked Mr.
Randolph.

"She might have remembered my orders before she got so far," —
said the lady.

"I wish you would change the orders," said Dr. Sandford,
boldly.

"Not even to oblige you, doctor," said Mrs. Randolph. "Daisy
has an idea that the companions who are not fit for her are
precisely the ones whom she should cultivate."

"I think Daisy would state the question differently, however,"
Mr. Randolph remarked.

"She has a tinge of the wildest fanaticism," Mrs. Randolph
went on, dropping her work, and facing the doctor. "Wherever
there are rags and dirt, there, by force of contrast, Daisy
thinks it is her business to go. This is a miserable place, I
suppose, that she was aiming for this afternoon — is it not?"

"Very miserable. But the point is, to visit it would have made
Daisy happy."

"It is sheer fanaticism!" said Mrs. Randolph. "I cannot let
her encourage it. If I did, she would not be fit for anything
by and by. She is fit for very little now."

"You will of course judge as you please about it," said the
doctor; "but it is my duty to tell you that the danger in that
line is far more than compensated by the advantage to be
gained. For Daisy's health, she should be checked in nothing;
let her go where she will and do what she will; the more
business on hand the better, that carries her out of doors and
out of herself. With a strong body and secure health, you will
find it far easier to manage fanaticism."

"I am sure Dr. Sandford is right, Felicia," said Mr. Randolph.

"I know Daisy —" said the lady.

"I think I know fanaticism," said the doctor; "and if I do,
the best thing you can do with it is to give it plenty of sun
and air."

"Is it quite safe for Daisy to go to this cottage you speak
of?" Mr. Randolph asked.

"Quite safe."

"I cannot think of letting Daisy go there, Mr. Randolph!" said
his wife.

"What danger do you apprehend, Felicia?"

It was not quite so easy to say. The lady handled her tetting-
pins, which were in her fingers, for a moment or two in
silence; then let them fall, and raised her handsome head.

"Daisy must be withdrawn entirely from the associations which
have taken possession of her — if it is possible. The very
best thing for her in my opinion would be to send her to a
boarding-school. — Unless you wish your daughter to grow up a
confirmed _religieuse_, Mr. Randolph. Do you wish that?"

"I have not considered it. What do you suppose Daisy will do
to harm herself at this place Dr. Sandford speaks of?"

"Some absurdity, that just cherishes the temper she is in."

"Quite as likely" — to wear it out, Mr. Randolph was going to
say; but some remembrance of Daisy came up and stopped him.

"Good evening!" said the doctor, rising to his feet.

"Are you going, Dr. Sandford?"

"Yes."

"Then you recommend that we let Daisy go to this place, and
alone?"

"In my capacity of physician I _should_ order it," said the
doctor, with a smile; "only, I do not like to give orders and
have them dishonoured."

Off he went.

"Felicia," said Mr. Randolph, "I believe he is right."

"I am sure he knows nothing about it," said the lady.

"Do you? Daisy is very delicate."

"She will never die of want of resolution."

"Felicia, I mean to enquire into Daisy's wishes and purposes
about this matter; and if I find them unobjectionable, I shall
give her leave to go on with it."

"You do not know what you are about, Mr. Randolph."

"I shall find out, then," said the gentleman. "I would rather
she would be a _religieuse_ than a shadow."


CHAPTER XXX.

MOLLY'S GARDEN.


Daisy pondered over the doctor's counsel. It was friendly; but
she hardly thought well advised. He did not know her father
and mother so well as she did. Yet she went to find out Logan
that afternoon on her return from the drive, and saw the rose-
bush laid by the heels; with perhaps just a shadow of hope in
her heart that her friend the doctor might mean to put in a
plea for her somewhere. The hope faded when she got back to
the house, and the doctor was gone, and Mrs. Randolph's
handsome face looked its usual calm impassiveness. What use to
ask her such a thing as leave to go to the cripple's cottage?
No use at all, Daisy knew. The request alone would probably
move displeasure. Every look at her mother's face settled this
conviction more and more deeply in Daisy's mind; and she ended
by giving up the subject. There was no hope. She could do
nothing for any poor person, she was sure, under her mother's
permission, beyond carrying soup and jelly in her pony-chaise,
and maybe going in to give it. And that was not much; and
there were very few poor people around Melbourne that wanted
just that sort of attention.

So Daisy gave up her scheme. Nevertheless next morning it gave
her a twinge of heart to see her rose-bush laid by the heels,
exactly like her hopes. Daisy stood and looked at it. The
sweet half-blown rose at the top of the little tree hung
ingloriously over the soil, and yet looked so lovely and smelt
so sweet; and Daisy had hoped it might win poor Molly
Skelton's favour, or at least begin to open a way for it to
come in due time.

"So ye didn't get your bush planted —" said Logan, coming up.

"No."

"Your hands were not strong enough to make the hole deep for
it, Miss Daisy?"

"Yes, I think they could; but I met with an interruption
yesterday, Logan."

"Weel — it'll just bide here till ye want it."

Daisy wished it was back in its old place again; but she did
not like to say so, and she went slowly back to the house. As
she mounted the piazza steps she heard her father's voice. He
was there before the library windows.

"Come here, Daisy. What are you about?" he said, drawing her
up in his arms.

"Nothing, papa."

"How do you like doing nothing?"

"Papa, I think it is not at all agreeable."

"You do! So I supposed. What were you about yesterday
afternoon?"

"I went to ride with Dr. Sandford."

"Did that occupy the whole afternoon?"

"Oh, no, papa."

"Were you doing nothing the rest of the time?"

"No sir, not _nothing_."

"Daisy, I wish you would be a little more frank. Have you any
objection to tell me what you were doing?"

"No, papa; — but I did not think it would give you any
pleasure. I was only trying to do something."

"It would give me pleasure to have you tell about it."

"I must tell you more then, papa." And standing with her arm
on her father's shoulder, looking over to the blue mountains
on the other side of the river, Daisy went on.

"There is a poor woman living half a mile from here, papa,
that I saw one day when I was riding with Dr. Sandford. She is
a cripple. Papa, her legs and feet are all bent up under her,
so that she cannot walk at all; her way of moving is by
dragging herself along over the ground on her hands and knees;
her hands and her gown all clown in the dirt."

"That is your idea of extreme misery, is it not, Daisy?"

"Papa, do you not think it is — it must be — very
uncomfortable?"

"Very, I should think."

"But that is not her worst misery. Papa, she is all alone; the
neighbours bring her food, but nobody stops to eat it with
her. She is all alone by night and by day; and she is
disagreeable in her temper, I believe, and she has nobody to
love her and she loves nobody."

"Which of those two things is the worst, Daisy?"

"What two things, papa?"

"To love nobody, or to have nobody to love her?"

"Papa — I do not know." Then, remembering Juanita, Daisy
suddenly added, — "Papa, I should think it must be the worst
to love nobody."

"Do you? Pray why?"

"It would not make her happy, I think, to have people love her
if she did not love them."

"And you think loving others would be better, without anybody
to give love back?"

"I should think it would be very hard!" — said Daisy, with a
most profound expression of thoughtfulness.

"Well — this poor cripple, I understand, lacks both these
conditions of happiness?"

"Yes, papa."

"What then? You were going to tell me something about her."

"Not much about _her_," said Daisy, "but only about myself."

"A much more interesting subject to me, Daisy."

You could only see the faintest expression of pleasure in the
line of Daisy's lips; she was looking very sober and a trifle
anxious.

"I only thought, papa, I would try if I could not do something
to make that poor woman happier."

"What did you try?"

"The first thing was to get her to know me and like me, you
know, papa; because she is rather cross, and does not like
people generally, I believe."

"So you went to see her?"

"I have never spoken much to her, papa. But I went inside of
her gate one day, and saw her trying to take care of some poor
flowers; so then I thought, maybe, if I took her a nice little
rose-bush, she might like it."

"And then like you? Well — you tried the experiment?"

"No, papa. I did get a rose-bush from Logan, and he told me
how to plant it; and I was on my way to the cottage, and had
almost got there; and then I recollected mamma had said I must
not speak to anybody without her leave."

"So you came home?"

"Yes, papa. No, papa, I went to ride with Dr. Sandford."

"Have you asked leave of your mother?"

"No, papa," — said Daisy, in a tone of voice which
sufficiently expressed that she did not intend it.

"So, my dear little Daisy," said her father, drawing his arm
round her a little more closely — "you think a rose-bush would
serve instead of friends to make this poor creature happy?"

"Oh, no, papa!"

"What was the purpose of it, then?"

"Only — to get her to like me, papa."

"What were _you_ going to do to make her happy?"

"Papa, if you lived in such a place, in such a way, wouldn't
you like to have a friend come and see you sometimes?"

"Certainly! — if you were the friend."

"I thought — by and by — she might learn to like it," Daisy
said, in the most sedately meek way possible.

Her father could not forbear a smile.

