And it was such a horrid house too. Sorrow there would take a sickly and
undignified form. For the Coltsfoot bungalow was unusually ugly even for
an Essex small-holding. A broken balustrade round the verandah, heavy
wooden gables, and an ingeniously large amount of inferior stained
timbering gave it an air of having been built in order to find a last
fraudulent use for a suite of furniture that had been worn out by a long
succession of purchasers who failed to complete agreement under the hire
system. There were Nottingham lace curtains in the windows, the gate was
never latched and swung on its hinges, nagging the paint off the
gate-post, at each gust of wind. If one passed in the rain there was
always some tool lying out in the wet. Ugliness was the order of the day
there, and it was impossible to believe that the owners were anything
but weak-eyed, plain people.

The baby had not really been pretty at all. Mrs. Winter's tribute to it
had only been the automatic response to all aspects of child life which
is cultivated by the wives of the clergy. And the parents would take the
tragedy ungracefully. The woman would look out from her kitchen window
at her husband as he pottered ineffectively with the goat and the fowls
and all the gloomy fauna of the small-holding, which had, as one would
not have thought that animals could have, the look of being underpaid.
Perhaps he would kneel down among those glass bells which, when they are
bogged in Essex clay on a winter afternoon, are grimly symbolical of the
end that comes to the counter-meteorological hopes of the small-holder.
The fairness and weedy slenderness which during their courtship she had
frequently held out to her friends as proof of his unusual refinement,
would now seem to her the outward and visible signs of the lack of
pigment and substance which had left him at the mercy of a speculator's
lying prospectus. When he came in to the carelessly cooked meal there
would be a quarrel. "Why did you ever bring me to this wretched place?"
She would rise from the table and run towards the bedroom, but before
she got to the door she would remember the coffin, and she would have to
remain in the sitting-room to weep. She would not look pretty when she
wept, for she was worn out by child-birth and nursing and grief and lean
living on this damp and disappointing place. Presently he would go out,
leaving the situation as it was, to potter once more among the glass
bells, and she would sit and think ragingly of his futile occupation,
while an inner region of her heart that kept the climate of her youth
grieved because he had gone out to work after having eaten so small a
meal.

Marion rose to her feet that she might start at once for these poor
souls and tell them that they must not quarrel, and warn the woman that
all human beings when they are hurt try to rid themselves of the pain by
passing it on to another, and help her by comprehension of what she was
feeling about the loss of the child. But immediately she laughed aloud
at the thought of herself, of all women in the world, going on such an
errand. If she went to Coltsfoot now the anticipation of meeting
strangers would turn her to lead as soon as she saw the house, and the
woman would wonder apprehensively who this sullen-faced stranger coming
up the path might be; when she gained admittance she would be able to
speak only of trivial things and her voice would sound insolent, and
they would take her for some kind of district visitor who intruded
without even the justification of being a church worker and therefore
having official intelligence about immortality. Her lips were sealed
with inexpressiveness when she talked to anyone except Richard. She
could not talk to strangers. She could not even talk to Ellen, with whom
she ought to have been linked with intimacy by their common love for
Richard, with whom she must become intimate if Richard's future was to
be happy.

Her eyes sought for Ellen in the ruins, but she was not visible.
Probably she had gone into one of the towers where her dreams could not
be overseen and was imagining how lovely it would be to come here with
Richard. It must be wonderful to be Richard's sweetheart. Marion had
seen him often before as the lover of women, but he had never believed
in his own passion for any of them, and therefore there had always been
something desperate about his courtship of them, like the temper of a
sermon against unbelief delivered by a priest who is haunted by
sceptical arguments. But to a woman whom he really loved he would be as
dignified as befitted one who came as an ambassador from life itself,
and gay as was allowed to one who received guarantees that the fair
outward show of the world is no lie; in all the trivialities of
courtship he would show his perfect quality without embarrassment. She
was angered that she would not be able to see him thus. There struck
through her an insane regret that being his mother she could not also be
his wife. But this was greed, for she had had her own good times, and
Harry had been the most wonderful of sweethearts.

There had been a June day on this very hill.... She had been standing by
the towers talking to Bob Girvan for a few minutes, and when she had
left him she had felt so happy at the show of flowering hawthorn trees
that stood red and white all the way down the inland slope of the ridge
that she began to run and leap down the hill. But before she had gone
far, Harry had walked out towards her from one of the hawthorns. She had
felt confused because he had seen her running, and began to walk stiffly
and to scowl. "Good morning, Marion," he had said. "Good morning," she
had answered, feeling very grown-up because she had no longer bobbed to
the squire. He told her, looking intently at her and speaking in a
queer, strained voice, that he had found a great split in the trunk of
the white hawthorn, and asked her if she would like to see it. She said,
"Yes." It struck her that she had said it too loudly and in an
inexpressibly foolish way. Indeed, she came to the conclusion as she
followed him down the hillside that nobody since the world began had
ever done anything so idiotic as saying "Yes" in that particular manner,
and she became scarlet with shame.

When they came to the dazzling tree he advanced to it as if he cared
nothing for its beauty, and showed her with a gruff and business-like
air a split in the trunk. She could not understand how he had not seen
it before, as it had been there for the last four months. Then he had
pointed up to the towers with his stick. "Who's that you were talking to
up there?" "Bob Girvan," she had answered; "did you want to speak to
him, sir?" He seemed, she thought, cross about something. "No, no," he
answered impatiently, "but he's a silly fellow. Why do you want to talk
to him?" She told him that Bob had stopped to ask if his father could
come over and look at the calf her grandmother wanted to sell, and that
seemed to please him, and after that they had talked a little about how
the farm had got on since Grandfather's death. Then he said suddenly, "I
suppose that if you don't go about with Bob Girvan there's some boy who
does take you out. Isn't there?" She whispered, "No." But he had gone on
in a strange, insistent tone, "But you're getting-quite a big girl now.
Seventeen, aren't you, Marion? There'll be somebody soon."

At that, paralysis fell on her. She stared out of the scented shadow in
which they stood together at the masts of Roothing Harbour far away,
wavering like upright serpents in the heated air. Her heart seemed about
to burst. Then she heard a creaking sound, and looked about for its
cause. He had put up his arm and was shaking the branch which hung over
her head so that the blossom was settling on her hair. When she looked
at him he stopped and muttered, "Well, good-bye. It's time I was getting
along," and walked away. From the shadow she had watched him with an
inexplicable sense of victory rising in her heart, coupled with a
disposition to run to someone old and familiar and of authority. A year
later they had stood once more under that hawthorn tree, and again he
had shaken the mayblossom down on her, but this time he had laughed. He
murmured teasingly, "Maid Marion! Maid Marion!" and laughed, and she had
looked up into his eyes. Like many rakes, he had bright, innocent grey
eyes; and indeed, again like many rakes, he was in truth innocent. It
was because he had remained as ignorant as a child of the nature of
passion that he had experimented with it so recklessly.

With her he had delightedly discovered love. Indeed, she had had such a
courtship that she need envy no other woman hers. A let the contract for
erection and completion of the building to C, I having made the articles
of agreement for same.

In the meantime I was notified that B and C were taking sub-bids for
the erection of the 35' 0" building, all with my plans and specifications.
They were taking the sub-bids from the same parties that were to do
the work for C on the building for A. B let C build the 35' 0" building.

I notified B and C that I will collect my commission on the construction
and completion of their building, to which notices I have no reply.

The 35' 0" building was commenced at the same time as the building for
A; my plans, specifications and details were used for the building by the
same sub-contractors, etc.

The buildings are now nearly complete, and the building for B or the
85' 0" building is a portion of the building designed for A with slight
variations made by C.

I think the above to be very explicit; and now, gentlemen, I would
like to ask you for your opinion as to my compensation, and to
what extent I am entitled to it.

Yours very respectfully,
F.C. SAUER.

[We think that you are entitled to the full commission of five per cent
on the cost of the 35-foot building, and believe that you can collect
it.--EDS. AMERICAN ARCHITECT.]
* * * * *

VENTILATING WOODEN COLUMNS.

ZANESVILLE, O., December 23,1889.

TO THE EDITORS OF THE AMERICAN ARCHITECT:

_Dear Sirs_,--We notice that in buildings in the East for factory purposes,
all wood columns have a hole bored through the centre for ventilation.
What size should the hole be for 12" x 12", 10" x 10" and 8" x 8"
posts. Also size of cross holes for the purpose of communicating with
vertical hole, and how far from ends.

Respectfully yours,
A.E. PILING CO., LTD.
[We have referred this to Mr. C.J.H. Woodbury who replies that the
method followed by the best mill-builders is to bore a hole along
the axis one and three-fourth to two inches in diameter. The method
formerly used was to bore the hole in half-way from each end after
the column was finished, but as the auger would follow the grain
of the wood, the holes would not always meet, and running out nearer
the side of the column would produce structural weakness which has
been revealed in tests of columns whenever destructive tests of
such columns have been made. The better way is to arrange a lathe
with a hollow headstock and a guide which will carry a pod-auger
boring in from one end. This will define the axis of the column
whether it is to be turned or left square. Near each end, say five
inches, a couple of transverse holes generally five-eighth of an
inch in diameter are bored. This arrangement is to reduce and in
some cases prevent checking in the same way as has been used, time
immemorial, for getting out hubs for wagon wheels.--EDS.
AMERICAN ARCHITECT.] 
* * * * * 

BOOKS IN WATER-COLOR PAINTING.
SPOKANE FALLS, WASH., December 11, 1889.She had dragged herself up the hill to escape from the
bickerings at Yaverland's End, and had been resting there, looking down
on the peace of the marshes and listening to the unargumentative cry of
the redshanks, and wishing that she might dwell during this time among
such quiet things; and suddenly there came a wind from the sea, and it
was as if a little naked child had been blown into her soul. All that
she felt was a tremor feeble as the first fluttering of some tiny bird,
and yet it changed the world. In that instant she conceived Richard's
spirit as three months before she had conceived his body, and her mind
became subject to the duty of awaiting him with adoration as her flesh
and blood were subject to the duty of nourishing him. Harry, who had
been lord of her life, receded rushingly to a place of secondary
importance, and she transferred her allegiance to this invisible
presence who was possessed of such power over her that even now, when it
could not be seen or touched or heard or imagined, it could make itself
loved. She had stood there in an ecstasy of passion until the sun had
fallen beyond Kerith Island. Then her cold hands had told her that she
must go home for the child's sake; and as if in recognition of this act
of cherishing there had come as she climbed the hill another tremor that
made her cry out with joy.

Ellen must not stand there, or she was bound to hate her. It was
intolerable that this girl who was going to be Richard's wife should
intrude into the sacred places of the woman who had to be content with
being his mother. "Ellen, Ellen!" she shouted, and waved her stick. The
girl clambered down and came towards her with steps that became slower
as she came nearer. She was, Marion saw, looking at her again under
faintly contracted brows, and she realised that because she wept about
the child at Coltsfoot her eyes were small and red, and that had added
to her face a last touch of ruin which made it an unfavourable place for
the struggles of an unspontaneous expression of amiability. Of course
the girl was alarmed at being called down from her serene thoughts of
Richard by grotesque wavings of a woman whose face was such a queer
mask. But there was nothing to be said that would explain it all. She
took refuge in silence; and knew as they walked home that that also was
sinister.


CHAPTER IV


It struck Marion that it was very beautiful in this room that night. The
white walls were bloomed with shadows and reflections, and the curtains
of gold and orange Florentine brocade were only partly drawn, so that at
each window there showed between them an oblong of that mysterious blue
which the night assumes to those who look on it from lit rooms. On the
gleaming table, under the dim light of a shaded lacquer lamp, dark roses
in a bowl had the air of brooding and passionate captives. Different
from these soft richnesses as silk is from velvet, the clear flame of
the wood fire danced again in the glass doors of one of the bookcases:
and at the other, choosing a book in which to read herself to sleep,
stood Ellen, her head a burning bush of beauty, her body exquisitely at
odds with the constrictions of the product of the Liberton dressmaker.
She held a volume in one hand and rested the other on her hip, so that
there was visible the red patch on her elbow that bespeaks the recent
schoolgirl, and all that could be seen of her face was her nose, which
seemed to be refusing to be overawed by the reputation of the author
whose work she studied. In the swinging glass door beside her there was
a diffusion of reflected hues that made Marion able to imagine what she
herself looked like, in her gown of copper-coloured velvet, sitting in
the high-backed chair by the fire. She was glad that sometimes, by
night, her beauty crawled out of the pit age had dug for it, and,
orienting her thoughts as she always did, she rejoiced that Richard
would find such an interior on his return.

"Have you found a book you like?"

"No. There's lots of lovely ones. But none I just fancy. I'm inclined to
be disagreeable and far too particular this evening. Are these your
books or Richard's?"

"Nearly all mine."

"You must be intellectual then. Now mother was different. No one could
have called her an intellectual, though she could always take a point
if you put it to her. Do you know, you're not like an elderly pairson at
all. Usually one thinks of a lady of your age as just a buddy in a
bonnet. But you've got such an active mind, not like a young pairson's.
I'll take Froude's 'Life of Jane Welsh Carlyle.' That ought to do."

"I shouldn't take it if I were you. It's too interesting. It'll keep you
awake."

"Oh, I'll not sleep in any case. I feel awful wakeful. But it'll be all
right as soon as Richard comes."

Her tone, betraying so unreproachfully that she quite expected that till
then things would be all wrong, reminded Marion what evenings of aborted
intimacies and passages of slow liking truncated by moments of swift
dislike, had passed in this room whose appearance she had been watching
with such satisfaction. She reflected on the inertia which inanimate
matter preserves towards the fret that animate creatures conduct in its
midst, the refusal of the world to grow grey at anybody's breath.
Exhibited by nature in the benedictions of sunlight that fall through
the court windows on the criminal in the dock, or the rain that falls on
the flags and Venetian masts of the civic festival, it has an air of
irony. But there is obstinacy about the way a chair keeps its high
polish though its sitter cries her eyes red.... With alarm she perceived
that she was showing a disposition to flee from a difficult situation
into irrelevant thought, which she had always regarded as one of the
most contemptible of male characteristics. She checked herself sharply.
It was necessary that she should use the remaining moments of the
evening in making Ellen like her.

"I think I'll wish you good-night, Mrs. Yaverland," said the girl.

"Let me come and see if you've got all you want."

But there was nothing Ellen wanted. She passed into the room of bright
new things and sat down on her bed and expressed complete satisfaction
in dogged tones. "Indeed, that gas-fire's sheer luxury," she said, "for
I'm strong as a horse. Really, I've everything, thank you...."

"Let me brush your hair."

As she took out the coarse black pins, her heart rejoiced because
Richard would have all this beautiful hair to play with; yet as she
brushed it out she wished that his thirst for beauty could have been
gratified by some inorganic gorgeousness, some strip of cloth of gold in
whose folds there would not lie any white triangle of a face that had to
be understood and conciliated. Her wish that it were so reminded her how
much it was not so, and she bent forward and looked over the girl's
shoulder at her reflection in the glass. "It is a face that believes
there is no foe in the world with which one cannot fight it out," she
thought. "Well, that is probably true for her. I, with my foes who are a
part of myself, am unusually cursed. If these young people have ordinary
luck they ought to make a fine thing of the world, and I will enjoy
standing by and watching them. Oh, I must make friends with her. We have
many things in common. I will talk to her about the Suffragettes. What
shall I say about them? I do honestly think that they are splendid
women. I think there was never anything so fine as the way they go out
into the streets knowing they will be stoned...." A memory overcame her.
"Ah!" she cried out, and laid down the brush.

"What's the matter?" exclaimed Ellen, standing up. There was a certain
desperation in her tone, as if she thought the tragic life of a
household ought to have a definite closing-time every night, after which
people could go to bed in peace.

"I forgot--I forgot to take some medicine. I must go and take it now.
And I don't think I'd better come back. I'm sure you'll brush your hair
better yourself. I'm sure I tugged. You're so tired, you ought to go to
bed at once. Good-night. Good-night." By the slow shutting of the door
she tried to correct the queer impression of her sudden flight, but knew
as she did so that it sounded merely furtive.

In her own room she undressed with frantic haste so that she could turn
out the light and retreat into the darkness as into a burrow. But
everywhere in the blackness, even on the inside of the sheet she drew
over her face as she lay in bed, were pictures of the aspects of evil
the world had turned to her that day: thirty years before, when she was
stoned down the High Street of Roothing. She was in the grip of one of
her recurrent madnesses of memory. There was no Richard to sit by her
side and comfort her, not by what he said, for she had kept so much from
him that he could say nothing that was really relevant, but by his
beauty and his dearness, which convinced her that all was well since she
had given birth to him; so her agony must go on until the dawn.

She must get used to that, because when he was married to Ellen she
would no longer be able to sit up in her bed and call "Richard,
Richard!" and strike the bell that rang in his room--that rang, as it
seemed, in his mind, since no other sound but it ever wakened him in the
night. Not again would he stand at the door, his dark hair damp and
rumpled, his eyes blinking at the strong light, while his voice spoke
hoarsely out of undispersed sleep. "Mother, darling mother, are you
having bad dreams?" Not again would she answer moaningly, "Oh, Richard,
yes!" and tremble with delight in the midst of her agony to see how,
when this big man was dazed and half awake, he held his arms upwards to
her as if he were still a little boy and she a tall overshadowing
presence. In the future he must be left undisturbed to sleep in Ellen's
arms. That thought caused her inexplicable desolation. Rather than think
it she gave up the struggle and allowed herself to be possessed by
memory, and to smart again under the humiliation of that afternoon when
life had made a fool of her. For what had hurt her most was that she had
gone out into the world, the afternoon it stoned her, in a mood of the
tenderest love towards it.

She had risen late, she remembered, that day. All night long she had
been ill, and had not slept until the first wrangling of the birds. Then
suddenly she had opened her eyes, and after remembering, as she always
did when she woke, that she was going to have a child, she had looked
out of her wide window into the mature and undoubtful sunshine of a fine
afternoon. She had felt wonderfully well and terribly hungry, and had
hastened at her washing and dressing so that she could run downstairs
and get something to eat. When she went into the kitchen she saw that
dinner was over, for the plates were drying in the rack and Peggy, the
maid, was not there. It was incredible that she had not known why Peggy
had gone out, that she should fatuously have told herself that the girl
was probably working in the dairy; but in those days her mind was often
half asleep with love for the unborn.

She rejoiced that she had missed the family meal, for it was not easy to
sit at the table with Grandmother and Cousin Tom and Aunt Alphonsine,
unspoken comments on her position hanging from each face like
stalactites. In the larder she found the cold roast beef, magnificently
marbled with veins of fat, and the cherry pie, with its globes of
imperial purple and its dark juice streaked on the surface with richness
exuded from the broken vault-of the pastry, and she ate largely, with
the solemn greed of pregnancy. Afterwards she washed the dishes, in that
state of bland, featureless contentment that comes to one whose being
knows that it is perfectly fulfilling its function and that it is
earning its keep in the universe without having to attempt any
performance on that vexing instrument, the mind.

When she had finished, she wandered out of the kitchen aimlessly,
benevolently wishing that her baby was born so that she could spend the
afternoon playing with it.

The parlour door was ajar, and she peeped in and saw Grandmother sitting
asleep in the high-backed chair, a shaft of sunlight blessing her bent
head to silver and stretching a corridor for dancing motes to the bowl
of mignonette. She saw the scene with the eye of an oleographer. In
defiance of experience she considered her grandmother as a dear old
lady, and the hum of a bee circling about the mignonette sounded like
the peace that was in the room becoming articulate and praising God.
Enjoyable tears stood in her eyes. Drying them and looking round the
dear scene, so that she might remember it, she saw that the grandfather
clock marked it as half-past two. Now was the time that she must go for
her walk. The children would be back at school, the men would be at
work, and the women still busy cleaning up after their midday meal. She
was afraid now to walk on the Yaverland lands for fear of finding
Goodtart, the cattleman, standing quite still in some shadowed place
where she would not see him till it was too late to avoid touching him
as she passed, and turning on her those dung-brown eyes in which
thoughts about her and her state swam like dead cats in a canal; and
though she desired to revisit the woods where she had walked with
Harry, she had never gone there since that afternoon when Peacey had
stepped out on her suddenly from behind one of the pillars of the
belvedere. The marshes too she could not visit, for she could not now go
so far. But there remained for her the wood across the lane, which ran
from the glebe land opposite Yaverland's End and stretched towards the
village High Street. No one ever went there at this time of day.

Her pink sunbonnet was lying on the dresser in the front parlour, and
she put it on to save the trouble of going upstairs for a hat, though
she knew it must look unsuitable with her dark, full gown. Stealing out
very quietly so that she should not disturb Grandmother, she went down
the garden, smiling at the robust scents and colours of the flowers. She
had a feeling in those days that nature was on her side. The purplish
cabbage roses seemed to be regarding her with clucking approval and
reassurance that a group of matrons might give to a young wife. The
Dolly Perkins looked at her like a young girl wondering. The Crimson
Ramblers understood all that had happened to her. She loved to imagine
it so, for thus would people have looked at her if she had been married,
and she slightly resented for her child's sake that she was not
receiving that homage. Humming with contentment, she crossed the lane to
the wood, whose sun-dappled vistas, framed by the noble aspirant
oak-trunks, stretched before her like a promise of happiness made by
some wise, far-sighted person.

It made Marion laugh angrily, as she lay there in the bed where she had
slept so badly in the thirty years that had passed since that afternoon,
to remember how she had walked in those woods in a passion of good-will
to the world. She dreamed complimentary dreams of life, pretending that
it was not always malign. She imagined that Harry would come back before
the child was born and would cloak her in protective passion, and his
pride in her would make him take her away somewhere so that everyone
would see that he really loved her and that he did not think lightly of
her. Freely and honestly she forgave him for his present failure to come
to her. It was his mother's fault. She had made him marry when he was
twenty-one, so that he had been led to commit a physical forgery of the
spiritual fact of fatherhood by begetting children who, being born of a
woman whom he did not love, were not the children of his soul. With
aching tenderness she recalled the extreme poverty of the emotion that
showed in his eyes when he spoke of his daughters, or when, as had
happened once or twice, they had looked out of the belvedere window and
seen the little girls running by on the brow of the hill, white leggy
figures against the frieze of the distant shining waters.

It was indeed not so much emotion as a sense that in other circumstances
these things might have aroused an emotion which, with his comprehensive
greed of all that was lovely in the universe, he regretted being
without. If he had only been with her now he would have been given that,
and would have found, like her, that it is possible to be ardently in
love with an unknown person. She was so sorry he was not here. But she
knew that he would come soon, and then he would have the joy of seeing
his true child, the child of his soul, and beyond the spiritual joy that
must come of that relationship he would have the delight of the
exquisite being she knew she was going to bring forth. For she knew then
perfectly what Richard was going to be like. She knew she was going to
have a son; she knew that he would have black, devout and sensitive
eyes. She knew that he would be passionate and intractable and yet held
to nobility by fastidiousness and love of her. She imagined how some day
in a wood like this, but set in a kinder countryside, Harry would kneel
in a sunlit clearing, his special quality of gaiety playing about him
like another kind of sunshine, while there staggered towards him their
beautiful dark child. He would miss nothing then, except this time of
acquaintance with the unborn, and perhaps he would not even miss that,
for no doubt he would make her the mother of other children.

At that thought she stood still and leaned back against the trunk of a
tree and closed her eyes and smiled triumphantly, and ran her hands down
her body, planning that it should perform this miracle again and again
and people her world with lovely, glowing, disobedient sons and
daughters. She felt her womb as an inexhaustible treasure. Slowly,
swimmingly, in a golden drowse of exultation, she moved on among the
trees till she came to the wood's end, and looked across the waste patch
scattered with knots of bramble and gorse at the yellow brick backs of
the houses in Roothing High Street and knew she must go no further. For
the feeling against her was very high in the village. They had told the
most foul stories of her; it was as if they had been waiting anxiously
for an excuse to talk of sexual things that they might let loose the
unclean fantasies that they had kept tied up in the stables of their
mind, that these might meet in the streets and breed, and take home
litters filthier than themselves. Men and women told tales that they
could not have believed simply that they might evoke before their minds,
and strengthened by the vital force of the listeners' hot-eared
excitement, pictures of a strong man and a fine girl living like beasts
in the fields. Not only did they tell lies of how they had watched her
and Harry among the bracken, they said she had been seduced by the young
doctor who had been _locum tenens_ here in February, and that they had
seen her in the lanes with the two lads that were being tutored at the
Vicarage. These things had been repeated to her by her grandmother in
order that she might know what disgrace she had brought on her family,
and in the night she had often lain in a sweat of rage, wanting to kill
these liars. But that day, standing in the sunshine, she forgave them.
She was glad that they had such brave yellow sunflowers in their little
wood-fenced gardens: she hoped that all the women would sometimes be as
happy as she was. She did not know that this was no day for her to
venture forth and forgive her enemies, since it was the Lord's Day, when
men ceased to do any manner of work, that they may keep it holy.

The first warning she was given was a sudden impact on a high branch of
an oak-tree a yard or two from where she stood, and the falling to
earth, delayed by the thick crepitant layers of green-gold, sun-soaked
leaves, of a cricket ball. With the perversity of rolling things it
dribbled along the broken ground and dropped at last into a mossy pit
half filled with dead leaves which marked where a gale had once torn up
a young tree by the roots; and the next moment she heard, not distantly,
the open-mouthed howl that comes from a cricket-field in a moment of
crisis. Then she remembered that it was a habit of the young bloods of
Roothing to evade their elders' feeling about Sabbath observance by
going in the afternoon to an overlooked wedge of ground that ran into
the woods and playing some sort of bat-and-ball game. This must be
Sunday. If she did not go home at once she would begin to meet the
village lovers, who would not understand how well she wished them, and
would look at her with the hostility that the lucky feel for the
unlucky. But when she turned to follow the homeward path she heard from
all over the wood scattered shouts. The lads were looking for their
ball. One she could hear, from the breaking down of brushwood, was quite
close to her. Her best plan was to hide. So she stood quite still under
the low branches of an elder-tree, while George Postgate doubled by.

Poor George! He was seventeen, and big for that, but his mind had stayed
at twelve, and he was perpetually being admitted in probation to the
society of lads of his own age, and then for some act of
thick-wittedness being expelled again. It was plain from the way that
his great horny fingers were scratching his head and his vast mouth was
drooping at the corners that it was his fault that the ball crashed so
disastrously out of bounds, and that he felt himself on the verge of
another expulsion. "Oh, ter dash with the thing!" he exclaimed
mournfully, and kicked a root, and lifted his face to the patch of blue
sky above and snuffled. Marion's heart dissolved. She could not let this
poor stupid thing suffer an ache which she was prevented from relieving
only by a fear of rudeness which was probably quite unjustified.
"George!" she called softly, staying among the branches. He gaped about
him. "George!" she called a little louder. "The ball's in the pit, among
the leaves." But he was transfixed by the wonder of the bodyless voice
and would not pay any attention to her directions, but continued to
gape. She saw that she would have to go and show him herself, and after
only half a moment's reluctance she stepped forward. She did not really
mind people seeing her, because she knew that it was only a convention
that she was ugly because she was going to have a baby. For there was
now a richer colour on her cheeks and lips than there had ever been
before and her body was like a vase. It was only when they had awful
thoughts about her that she hated meeting them, and George would not
have awful thoughts about her if she did him a good turn. So she went
over to him, pointing to the pit. "I saw it roll down there, George.
Look! There it is."

But he did not pick up the ball. He appeared to be petrified by the
sight of her. "Make haste," she said, "they'll be waiting for you." At
that he dropped his lids, and his lips thickened, and his face grew red.
Then he raised his head again and looked at her with eyes that were not
dull, as she had always seen them before, but hot and bright, and he
began to shift his weight slowly backwards and forwards from one foot to
the other. Her heart grew sick, because all the world was like this, and
she turned again to the path home. But through the tree-trunks in that
direction there came two other boys in search of the ball--Ned Turk, who
to-day was the station-master at Roothing station, and Bobbie Wickes;
and at the sight of her they stood stock-still as George Postgate had
done, and, like him, dropped their heads and flushed and lifted lewd
faces. A horror came on her. It was as if they had assumed masks to warn
her that they had some secret and sinister business with her. Then one
pointed his hand at her and made an animal noise, and the other laughed
with his mouth wide open. Neither said anything. Their minds were
evidently engaged in processes beneath those which find expression in
language. She stiffened herself to face them, though she felt frightened
that these two boys, whom she had known all her life, with whom she had
ridden on the hay-wains in summer and caught stickle-backs in the marsh
dykes, should change to these speechless beings with red leering masks
who meant her ill.

For the first time she felt herself too young for her destiny. "I am
only nineteen," she cried silently. Tears might have disgraced her but
that the child moved in her as if it had looked out at the frightening
figures through her eyes, and she suddenly hated Harry for leaving her
and his son unprotected from such brutes as people seemed to be, and was
vivified by the hatred. She made to walk past the boys back towards
Yaverland's End, but as she moved they sent up shrill wordless calls to
their fellows who were still in the fields, which were immediately
answered. She realised that any minute the woods would be full of lads
whom the sight of her would change to obscene creatures, and that being
consolidated in this undisturbed place they would say and do things that
would hurt her so much that they would hurt her child. There was nothing
for it but to leave the cover of the wood and cross the waste space and
walk down Roothing High Street and go back to Yaverland's End by the
lane. Her mood of forgiving love for the village, which the cricket-ball
had interrupted, had been so real that she felt as if a pact had been
established between it and her, and she was quite sure that she would be
safe from the boys there. If they were tiresome and followed her, no
doubt somebody like Mrs. Hobbs, who kept the general stores, would take
her in and let her rest till it was dark, and then see her home. She
turned round and walked out of the wood, and because she could not, in
her heavy-footed state, trample through the undergrowth, she had to
follow the path that led her to within a yard or two of George Postgate.
She could see from the workings of his large face that he was forming
some plan of action. And sure enough, when she passed him, he cried out
"Dirty Marion!" and twitched the sun-bonnet from her head. The sudden
movement made her start violently, for though she had not known what
fear was until she conceived, she now knew a panic-terror at anything
that threatened her body. Pity I never felt! I pity him!

ZELIMA (_whispers_).

Then, quick, three easy riddles. Bid pride go!

TURANDOT (_flaring up, whispers_).

What sayest thou, rash girl?

ADELMA (_aside_).

God! dare I trust My eyes? It is the very, man--the same Who served my
sire as gardener. Then he is A prince--a prince, indeed. My heart guessed
true.

TURANDOT.

Thou errant Prince, desist from this adventure.

See, I am nowise cruel, as men say.
It is but my deep loathing for all males That forces me to stand as
now at guard To keep from me a sex that I abhor.
Why should I not be free to fight my foe?
What brings you here to harden me again?
If prayers can move you, I myself will beg:
Desist! Put not my sharp mind to the test.
It is my only pride, the only weapon Heaven gave me. And I know that I
should die If any man were victor of my mind.
Claim not my riddles then. There still is time.
Else naught awaits you save a shameful death.

CALAF.

Voice of a goddess, body of an angel, Rare mind, unparalleled
intelligence, Are gathered in one woman's being here.
Who calls the man a fool that risks his life For treasures such as these?
Princess, your own High understanding cannot fail but see That as
your gifts in greater glory shine, As your refusal is more violent,
So many more the hearts you set on fire.

Had I a thousand lives, I would with joy, For your sake, Princess, die a
thousand deaths.

ZELIMA.

Be kind! Three easy riddles. He deserves them.

ADELMA (_aside_).

Would he were mine! He is a prince. That I Had known it then, ere I
became a slave!
Now I do love him with a threefold strength.
Oh, why is love for ever weak in courage?

(_Aside to_ TURANDOT.)
Princess, take care! Your honour is at stake!

TURANDOT (_aside_).

So it was fated one should come at last And teach me pity! Heart, be
firm and cold!

(_To_ CALAF, _vehemently_.)
Up, thou rash champion, gird thee for the fight!

ALTOUM (_to_ CALAF).

Are you still obstinate!

CALAF.

I said just now, Death give me, or else give me Turandot.

ALTOUM.

Proceed, then, with the public recitation Of that bad edict. Hark, and
tremble, you!

(_Music, ceremony._ PANTALONE _takes the Book of the Law from the folds
of his raiment, kisses it, holds it first to his breast and then to his
forehead, and hands it to_ TARTAGLIA, _who has just cast himself on
the floor, whereupon_ TARTAGLIA _recites with a loud voice_.)

TARTAGLIA.

There is no prince of royal lineage But shall be free to woo. But
first to him Three riddles of the Princess shall be set Before eight
doctors in the full Divan.
Let him solve these, and TURANDOT is his; But if he solve them not, he
shall straightway Be yielded up into the headsman's hands, Who promptly
shall, by severing his head, Do him to death. Immediate execution Of
this our solemn edict we affirm And swear by oath, by great
Confucius, We, Khan Altoum, Emperor of China.

(_The recital ended_, TARTAGLIA _kisses the Book of the Law, holds it
to his breast, then to his forehead, and hands it to_ PANTALONE, _who
has cast himself down with his face to the earth, and so receives
it_.

_He rises, and extends the book to_ ALTOUM, _who lays one hand upon it
to swear the oath_.)

ALTOUM (_sighing_).

Oh, bloody edict! To observe thee now I do affirm, and by Confucius
swear.

(PANTALONE _replaces the book in the folds of his garment_. _The whole
Divan waits in profound silence_. TURANDOT _rises_.)

TURANDOT (_in a didactic tone_).

Come, stranger, name that tender pair of doves, As white as innocence, as
frail as roses, Hiding from all men's eyes save his who loves To see how
by the other each reposes, Even as a sister by her sister's aide.

But he that loves and finds them where they hide Roams restless till he
holds them to his breast.
They bring him from the Islands of the Blest Heroic fire to make him do
and dare, And tidings from the Land of Heart's Desire.
Name, cunning stranger, name this tender pair.

(_Sits down again._)

CALAF.

(_Gazes upwards for a moment in meditation, then makes a bow to_ TURANDOT
_and lifts his hand to his brow_.)
Two doves, thou sayest, doves so tender-hearted That they are
always paired and never parted; Scarce grown enough to bear their
weight aloft, And yet already plump, and firm, and soft; Two smooth,
white doves to which my yearning wings, To which by night my secret
dreaming sings.
These two white doves which hold me free from scaith, These doves
my fortune--they are: HOPE and FAITH.

PANTALONE.

He's hit the mark, my dear Lord Chancellor!

TARTAGLIA.

Hit the bull's-eye.

THE EIGHT DOCTORS.

(_Open the first of the sealed papers._ _All together._)
Optime. Hope and Faith! Hope and Faith!
Hope and Faith!

ALTOUM (_joyfully_).

Heaven help thee farther, my belovèd son!

ZELIMA (_aside_).

Ye gods, protect him!

ADELMA (_aside_).

Blind him, O ye gods!
O give him not to her, or I shall die!

TURANDOT (_aside, indignantly_).

Can it be possible that _he_ should win?

(_To_ CALAF, _aloud_.)

Listen, poor fool! And solve this riddle now:

(_She stands up, and continues in her didactic tone._)
Come, stranger, name those slender pillars twain Which bear a bristling
fortress on their summit, A fort which still is in my sire's domain,
Although thy heart burns high to overcome it; Pillars in strength and
beauty smooth and rounded, On which thy Hope and Faith are firmly
founded:
These pillars holding Heaven upon their height-- Tell me the names, now,
of these pillars white.

CALAF.

(_After some meditation, and with the same bow as before._)
These two white pillars soaring to the skies, That bear a kingdom and
all Paradise; That bear the magic land my dreams divine, Which are
as slender as a forest pine; Of every prince the very noblest aim; Thine
empire's fairest ornament and fame, To which my hope clings like a
climbing flower-- I call these pillars twain: KNOWLEDGE and POWER.

PANTALONE.

(_Joyfully_.) Hits the bull right in the eye, my dear Lord
Chancellor!

TARTAGLIA.

Centre. Centre.

THE EIGHT DOCTORS.

(_In chorus, after unsealing the second leaf._)
Optime. Knowledge and Power! Knowledge and Power! Knowledge and Power!

ALTOUM (_excitedly_).

O joy! O joy!--Gods, help him to the end!

ZELIMA (_aside_).

Would this had been the last!

ADELMA (_excitedly, aside_).

Alas!

I lose him!

(_Aside to_ TURANDOT.)
This moment turns your fair renown to shame:
He is your better.

TURANDOT (_in a low voice_).

Silence! Ere he win Let the world go to pieces.

(_Aloud to_ CALAF.)
Rash fool! know My hatred step by step grows with thy hope Of victory.
Leave the Divan! Go! Flee From my last riddle, and so save thy head!

CALAF.

Your hate weighs heavy, my adored Princess.
So much the lighter weighs this head of mine, Since before you it finds
so little grace.

ALTOUM.

Desist, my son. And thou, my child, desist From further riddles.

Reach thy hand to him, For he deserves to be thy husband.

TURANDOT (_fiercely_).

He!
My husband!

Of my free will? Never!

Never!
Let the law have its course.

CALAF (_to_ ALTOUM).

Free be her will.
Naught I demand but death, or Turandot.

TURANDOT.

So be it, then; take death.

Hold still and mark!

(_Rises._)
Now tell me: knowest thou the magic flower By whose bright rays the soul's
dark deeps are lit; Which, hiding in its quiet, sacred bower, Waits for
the Fairy Prince to gather it; But which, if he find not its shy recess,
Withers and dies in forlorn loneliness?
Within the bosom of its petals furled Lies with Life's sense the Riddle
of the World; And he that first its chalice openeth Glows with the
wine of Life, the scorn of Death.

(_She unveils herself._)
Now look me in the face, now hold thy ground, Die like a dog, or name the
flower I mean.

CALAF (_in ecstasy_).

O beauty bright!

ALTOUM (_excitedly_).

Alas! he is wandering!

Compose thyself, my son. Keep clear! Keep clear!

ZELIMA (_aside_).

I am dizzy with excitement.

ADELMA (_aside_).

He is mine!

PANTALONE.

(_Beside himself._) Cheer up, sonny! cheer up!
Wish I could give him a dig in the ribs, Heaven knows! My shanks are
quivering with fear he shouldn't be able to get his wits together again.

Oh for a cooling draught of old Three Star!

TARTAGLIA.

If it weren't contrary to etiquette, I'd like to run into the kitchen and
fetch the vinegar bottle.

TURANDOT.

Death thou didst ask for, death thou hast received.

CALAF.
For one poor moment I was dazzled by Your beauty--but I was not
overcome.

(_To the public._)
This magic flower by which the soul is lit, Which makes the heart
tremble with dreaming it; This magic rose of all men's fiery dreams,
Which under soft moss hides its gentle beams; Which is with beauty
sweet and goodness shy, And bears the hope that holds the heavens
on high; This magic flower of purest ray divine, This flower is:
LOVE--dearest, your love and mine.

PANTALONE.
Praised be the Lord! Praised be the Lord!
Here! I can't stand this any longer....
(_Runs up to_ CALAF _and embraces him_.) 

TARTAGLIA.
Victory, your Majesty! Hail! Victory!

THE EIGHT DOCTORS.
(_Open the third leaf._) Love! Love! Love!
(_Vociferous hurrahs of the crowd outside and noisy music._ TURANDOT
_falls all of a heap on her throne_, ZELIMA _and_ ADELMA _busy
themselves with her_.
ALTOUM _lifts the PRINCE off his feet and kisses him_, PANTALONE
_and_ TARTAGLIA _helping_. _The doctors retire in a row to the
background._) 

ALTOUM.
And now enough of tyranny and whims-- Do you hear me, Turandot! And
you, dear son, Come to my heart.
(_He embraces_ CALAF.) 

TURANDOT.
(_Has recovered herself, and rushes in a rage at the embracing
pair._)
Stay! Do not let this man Believe he is my husband. I demand Another
meeting and three riddles more.
The time I was allowed was far too short.
Stay!----
ALTOUM (_interrupting her_).
False and cruel child! The game is played.
Thou shalt not so begin a second time.
The edict has run out, and is surrendered Into the keeping of my
ministers.

PANTALONE.
I beg a thousand pardons. But we can't do with any more of these
riddles, Heaven knows!
We can't do with any more head-chopping, Heaven knows, as if they
were nothing but lettuces. The young man there has guessed right.
The edict must be executed in its entirety.
The bridecake has got to go into the oven. (_To_ TARTAGLIA.) What
do you say, my Lord Chancellor?

TARTAGLIA.
Must be executed--in its entirety. There is no call for any further
explanations, interpretations, dissertations, appeals, and commentaries.
What do our learned doctors say?

THE EIGHT DOCTORS.
(_All together._) Must be executed! Must be executed--in its entirety.
Decision final--irrevocable!

ALTOUM.
Straight to the altar, then. This stranger prince Will now reveal
his birth and name, the priests---- 

TURANDOT (_in despair_).
Grant me a respite, father!

ALTOUM.

Not one minute.

TURANDOT.
(_Casting herself on her knees before him._)
If you would have me living, father, father!
Grant me another day, another contest.
I cannot bear the shame of it. I will rather Die than be subject
to that coxcomb there, Die rather than be wife to that proud boy.
The very word "wife," the mere thought of it, Of being his possession,
strikes me dead.

ALTOUM (_descending from his throne_).
Savage and obstinate and ruthless child!
Not one word more. Come, gentlemen, let us go!
CALAF (_to_ TURANDOT).

Arise, fair, cruel mistress of my heart!
(_To_ ALTOUM.)
I beg you, sire, grant her the respite! How Could I be happy if she
hated me?
And what avails my love, breeding but hate?
If I have not the power to touch her heart, Let her be free. I do
not claim my right.

(_To_ TURANDOT.)
If you could see into my heart that bleeds, Torn as it is, you would
be merciful.
You are determined I shall die. So be it.
(_To_ ALTOUM.) 
Grant her another match. My life is cheap.

ALTOUM.
No more of that! On to the Temple, on I The games are over now....
Imprudent youth!

TURANDOT (_determinedly_).
So be it, to the Temple, I say, too!
But on the altar steps your daughter dies.

CALAF.
Dies? Lord and master, and my Princess you...
I pray you both to grant me one desire:
I will myself set my unbending Queen One riddle now. And this is
my riddle: Who Is that King's son and of what stock is he, Who was
a beggar, porter, menial, Yet in good fortune more unfortunate?
Woman without a heart, guess here to-morrow In the Divan his and
his father's name.
If you can _not_, take pity on my pain, Appease your heart, refuse
your hand no more!
But if your cunning tell those two names true, Your pride may drink
its fill out of my blood.

TURANDOT.
Stranger, I take the bargain. It shall hold.

ZELIMA (_aside_).
Alas, new fears!

ADELMA (_aside_).

New hope is beckoning!

ALTOUM.
I do _not_ take the bargain. The law alone Holds good, and shall
be carried out.

CALAF (_kneels before him_).
Sublime Ruler of nations, star of all the world, Let your great
heart be softened, and vouchsafe To grant what here your daughter
begs with me.
Deny her not the satisfaction I Do not withhold. Let her bestir her
brains; And if her brains can serve her, let her give The answer
to my riddle here to-morrow.

TURANDOT (_aside_).
Rage stifles me, and he is mocking still.

ALTOUM.
Blind fool, you know not what you ask. But have Your wish! Another
contest there shall be!
If she can name the names, we will not force Marriage on her; but
you--for I forbid New carnage--free and scatheless go your way!
(_In a low voice to_ CALAF.)
Now follow me! Blind fool, what have you done?
(_Music strikes up with a march._ ALTOUM _turns, followed by the
guards, the doctors_, PANTALONE, _and_ TARTAGLIA, _to left exit_.
_Exeunt_ TURANDOT, ZELIMA, TRUFFALDINO, _the eunuchs, and female
slaves, with their tambourines, through the door to the right_.)
END OF THE FIRST ACT.

THE SECOND ACT 

SCENE I
Chamber in the harem.

TURANDOT, ZELIMA. _Afterwards_ ADELMA.

TURANDOT.
I cannot bear to think of it, Zelima; I cannot bear the thought of
my disgrace.

ZELIMA.

I cannot think you mean it, mistress mine.
A young prince, noble, handsome, so enamoured, And you so full of
hatred and disgust?

TURANDOT.
Torture me not. That is the very reason...
I am ashamed to say that it is so....
But there are other feelings strange to me....
I seem to shiver both with heat and frost....
No, no, I hate him, I am sure, Zelima-- Hate him for making me a
laughing-stock Before the whole Divan--nay, the whole world!
How they will laugh at me! Help me, Zelima!
Come to my help! How did his riddle run:
"Who is that Prince and of what stock is he, Who was a beggar,
porter, menial, Yet in good fortune more unfortunate?" So much is
clear that he himself is meant.
But how in all the world am I to guess His and his father's names?
Here no one knows him.
The Emperor himself has granted him For the time being still to be
unknown.
Only to save time did I take the odds.
What shall I do now? I am helpless, helpless!

ZELIMA.
How would it do to ask a fortune-teller?

TURANDOT.
A fortune-teller?

ZELIMA.

No, that would not do.
But think, how genuine his pain, his sighs!
And how he cast himself at your father's feet To plead for
you!

TURANDOT.

Enough of this--enough!
I said, indeed... my heart... believe it not.
It is not true. I hate him. For I know They all are treacherous:
pretending love Until they have the maiden in their toils; But when
they have their will, they laugh at us, Dallying with now this woman
and now that; Nor is there any slave too base for them, Nor any
harlot at too low a price.
Zelima, speak no more of him. If he To-morrow is victorious again,
Oh, I shall hate him worse than death.

ZELIMA.
Dear mistress, So long as you are young and beautiful, Rebellion
beseems you. But when age Comes creeping on, and wooers stay away,
What will be yours beside too late regret?...
What would you lose now save a little pride, The phantom of your
fame?...

ADELMA.
(_Has slowly come nearer, and now interrupts her._)
They that are base In birth may, it is true, so basely think As
thou, Zelima. How couldst thou conceive The feelings of our noble
mistress, when After so many years with triumph crowned, A stranger
roving here from who knows where Puts her to shame in public? How
shouldst thou Know anything of pride and pain and shame?
Thou didst not see the looks of mockery, The slanted smile round
every mouth. I saw it, Saw it and shook with rage and shame for
her.
I love her. And shall I stand and see her now, Against the promptings
of her heart and will, Delivered up into a stranger's hands?
TURANDOT (_vehemently_).
Stop! Do not make me mad beyond control!

ZELIMA.
Delivered up? Is it so bad as that?

ADELMA.
Be silent, thou! Thou pretty little slave, Thou hast no need to
understand these things.
What matters it to thee if, heedlessly, She pledged her word? And
what shall come to pass In the Divan to-morrow if in shame She hold
her tongue? I can already see The mockery scarcely hid, the open
scorn, And the base wit, such wit as is the meed Of a poor
actress.

TURANDOT (_beside herself_).
Hold your tongue, Adelma!
Unless I know the names before to-morrow, I shall have nothing save
this dagger....

ADELMA.
Do not despair, Princess. By taking thought-- Or, if it must be so,
by trickery-- We yet will find the names.

ZELIMA.
Oh, find the names, Dear, wise Adelma....

TURANDOT.
I must know the names, Adelma. His name, and his father's name.
How shall I find them out? Adelma, help me!

ADELMA.
One thing I know: to-day in the Divan Himself betrayed it: in this
city lives _One_ man who knows his name and origin.
Now what behoves us is to ferret through The town, and if we make
no stint of gold Haply we may discover what we seek.

TURANDOT.
Take anything--gold, gems--do what you will.

ZELIMA.
What can she do with gold or precious stones?
Whom shall she give them to, to purchase help?
And if the plan succeed, what will you do If some one find your
mesh of trickery?

ADELMA.
Who would betray the trick--if not Zelima?
ZELIMA (_flaring up_).
Shame on your venomous tongue! Princess, hear _me_:
Cast not your gold away. I had indeed Hoped to appease, convince
you in the end, Hoped you would give the Prince your hand--the
Prince Who loves you, and well is worthy of your love.
Now I will be obedient. My old mother, Skirina, came to visit me
just now.
Rejoicing at the fortune of the Prince, And knowing nothing of the
imminent Encounter which to-morrow shall decide, She told me she
had spoken to the stranger The night before, and said that my
step-father, Old Hassan, knows him. There and then I asked What
might his name be, but she did not know, Or swore she did not.
Hassan, so she said, Would not betray his name for any price.
This notwithstanding, she has promised me To do her best to worm
the secret out.
Now, Princess, doubt my zeal, if still you can.
(_Exit in excitement._) 

TURANDOT.
Come, to my arms! Why does she run away?

ADELMA.
Let the fool go. Now we have got the scent, And let us with swift
cunning track the game.
But come with me straightway and let me tell you The plan I have.
Put all your trust in me.

TURANDOT.
Adelma, I put all my trust in you.
But save me from this stranger whom I loathe.
(_Exeunt both._) 

SCENE II 
Before the Palace.
CALAF, BARAK.

CALAF.
But seeing that in all Pekin no man Knows me, save you, and since
my country lies A hundred days of journeying from here, And when
you think we have been wanderers O'er the earth's face eight years
as unknown men, And when you think we are reported dead:
I say, Barak, the wretched have no name.

BARAK.
And yet my mind misgives me: Here you win At one throw of the dice
the loveliest Of maidens and a mighty empire too:
You stake your head to win, and, having won, You throw the prize
away.

CALAF.
You must not measure My actions by the ell: I am in love....
But you have been discreet, Barak, I know?
Even to your wife?

BARAK.

Even to my wife, be sure.
And yet my heart forebodes much evil hap.

SCENE III
PANTALONE, TARTAGLIA, BRIGELLA, SOLDIERS.
_The foregoing._ 

PANTALONE.
Here he is, by the Lord Harry, here he is!

TARTAGLIA.
Who is this man, your Royal Highness?

PANTALONE.
Where the dickens have you been to, my dearest Prince? What sort
of people are you honouring with your intercourse, my dearest
Prince?

BARAK (_aside_).
Great heavens, what threatens now?

CALAF.
This is some stranger, Whom here I met and questioned of the
way.

TARTAGLIA.
By your leave, my dearest Royal Highness, I had not previously
noticed that there was any screw loose under your turban. Your
conduct so far had led me, I trust not misled me, to believe that
your head was screwed on quite safe.
But what the deuce are you up to now, if you will allow me to say
so?

PANTALONE.

'Sh! 'Sh! It's no use crying over spilt milk.
Heaven knows, my dear Prince, you little suspect what hot water
you've got into, and if we hadn't kept a sharp eye on you, you'd
be in a fine pickle at this moment. (_To_ BARAK.) Your presence
here, Mr. Nanny-goat, is no longer desired! As for you, my dearest
Royal Highness, will you have the goodness to withdraw to your
private apartments? Brigella, you will forthwith call two thousand
men of the guards to arms, and with your corps of pages sentinel
the entrance to his suite, taking care that no one gains admission.
Our most Sublime Majesty, the Emperor, is so much in love with the
Prince that he is all the time in a perfect state lest anything
should happen to him. If he is not his son-in-law by to-morrow
morning, Heaven knows the old gentleman will succumb to this violent
passion. (_To_ CALAF.) And let me tell you, you've been making a
fool of yourself.It knew, what her
consciousness had forgotten, of how she herself had felt when she was
within her mother's womb, and it was able to warn her that her unborn
baby was seriously thinking of revising its decision to live. While she
had staggered under the stones, the child had quailed in the midst of
her terror like a naked man above whom breaks a thunderstorm; her nerves
had played round him like a shaft of lightning, her loud heart-beat had
been the thunder. Now her fear-poisoned blood gave it sickly
nourishment, at which the foetal heart beat weakly, so that the embryo
knew what the born know as faintness. The system of delicate mechanical
adjustments by which it poises in the womb was for the moment
dislocated, and at this violent warning of what life can be its will to
live was overcast by doubt. If she could rest here now, and go home and
have a long sleep, and sit all the next morning on the brow of the hill
and watch the fishing-boats lie like black, fainting birds on the
shining flats, the child would feel her like a peaceful fane around it
and it would decide to live. But if Harry's mother came to see her next
day it would forsake her.

She would come very early, for she was one of those people who suffer
from a displaced day as others suffer from a displaced heart, and rose
at six. Long before Marion had completed the long sleep that was
necessary for the reassurance of her child she would be shaken, and look
up into her grandmother's face, which she did not like, for though the
expressions that passed over it were the same as they had always been,
it was now overlaid with a patina of malice. She would smile now, as she
dared to years ago, when she used to tell her little granddaughter that
Lady Teresa had come to give her a present for reciting so nicely at the
church school concert, but all her aspect would mean hatred of this girl
who had been given the romantic love that she had been denied, and hope
that its fruit might be destroyed. The room would be tidied; her drowsy
head would be tormented by the banging of drawers and the rustling of
paper. Out of consideration for Lady Teresa's feelings the photograph of
Harry by her bed would be turned face downwards. That she would not
really mind, for she would have liked to take it out of the frame and
tear it to pieces; but she would have to pretend that she minded.

Then there would burst into her room the trailing and squawking
personality of Lady Teresa. She would bring with her a quantity of warm
black stuffs, for she was one of the most enthusiastic followers of
Queen Victoria in the attempt to express the grief of widowhood by a
profusion of dark dry goods, and she would sit close to the bed, so that
Marion would lose nothing of the large face, with its beak nose and its
bagging chin and its insulting expression of outraged common sense, or
of the strangulated contralto in which she would urge that there was no
reason why any sensible gel should not be proud to marry the butler at
Torque House. By sheer noisiness she would make Marion cry. The child
would doubt again.... Since these things would have happened she could
not do other than she did. Her surrender was the price she had to pay
for Richard's life.

How artfully, moreover, it was disguised from her that she was going to
pay any real price! She looked back through the past at Peacey's conduct
of that matter as one might look through the glass doors of a cabinet at
some perfect and obscene work of art. He had laid his hand so
wonderfully across his face while he was speaking of his ugliness, so
that the drooping fingers seemed to tell of humility and the
renunciation of all greeds. And that candid, reverent gaze which he
turned upon her to-day had been so well calculated to speak of purity to
one who had shivered under sidelong leers. He had indeed that supreme
mastery over vice which comes of a complete understanding and dilettante
love of virtues. He knew how the innocent hunger for love and pity, and,
knowing well what these things were, he could speak as one who came as
their messenger. Loathingly and yet giving homage to his workmanship,
she recalled that later scence by which he had added a grace note to his
melody of wickedness and made so sweet a song of it that her will had
failed utterly.

Mrs. Cliffe had come in with a cup of tea and some cake on a tray.
"You'll feel better for this," she said, and while Marion had ate and
drunk she had stood by the window and looked at her. It seemed to Marion
that she had greatly changed of late. Before, she had belonged very
definitely to the shop-assistant class, which differentiated itself from
the women-folk of the village by keeping shapely and live-witted even
after marriage. But now she stood humpishly in her great apron like any
cottager's wife, and her hand, which she set akimbo, looked red and raw
and stupid. The way she stared at Marion's figure, too, was indicative
of a change from her pristine gentility.

"Funny I never heard of you being like this," she said at last.

"It is. I thought everyone was talking about it."

"They may be. But there's times when one doesn't listen to what people
are saying." For a time she was silent. "Ah, well," she meditated
bitterly, "it doesn't pay to do wrong, does it?"

"I haven't done wrong," said Marion.

"So you say now," Mrs. Cliffe told her, "but there'll come a day when
you see you have." She drew in her breath with a little gasp as Peacey
put his head in at the door.

He looked sharply from one to the other, and then advanced to Marion's
couch, rubbing his hands genially. "Now then, Trixy," he said teasingly,
"you don't want me to talk too long to your beloved husband, do you? I
might go telling him things about you, mightn't I? You run along and
look after him." Mrs. Cliffe retired quite taciturnly, nothing in her
face responding to this rallying, and he bent quickly over Marion. "I
hope she hasn't been worrying you?" he asked. Concern for her?--it
sounded just like concern for her--made his voice tremble. "That's why I
hurried back. Women are so narrow-minded to their poor sisters who
haven't been so fortunate. I thought she might have been making you feel
a bit uncomfortable."

"Oh no," said Marion.

The mask of his poor ugly face, which had been grotesque with pitying
lines, became smooth. He sighed with relief, and sat down by her side,
very humbly.

"But she was beginning to talk rather strangely," the poor fool Marion
had continued. "I think she's altered very much lately."

"Do you know, I was thinking so myself," Peacey had answered
reflectively. "I wonder if she's got anything on her mind. I wish I
could find out. One doesn't like a 'ome of friends not to share its
worries with you, without giving you a fair chance to 'elp. I must see
whether I can get it out of 'er."

Oh, he was a kind man. He was certainly very kind. She put down her cup
and braced her body and her soul, and said, "Mr. Peacey...."

The world had deceived her utterly that day; and yet there was one in
that cottage who had suffered more than she, for by her suffering she
had bought no Richard. Poor Mrs. Cliffe! She was a woman of sixty now,
white-haired, and fine-featured with the anxious fineness of one who has
for long lived out of favour with herself and has laboured hard for
re-establishment; but the fear still dwelt in her. Most times that
Marion passed down Roothing High Street, and saw the old woman sitting
knitting in the garden while her old blind husband shuffled happily here
and there, they would but bow and smile and look away very quickly. But
every now and then, perhaps once a year, she would put down her knitting
so soon as Marion came in sight and come into the road to meet her and
would give her nervous, absent-minded greetings. Then she would draw her
into the furthest edge of the pavement, because the blind have such
sharp hearing, and she would whisper:

"Have you heard from _him_ lately?"

"No."

"He's still at Dawlish?"

"They say so."

"Do you think he will ever come back?"

"No. He will never come back."

"Ah." She would stand looking past Marion with her face cat's-pawed by
memory and her fingers teasing the fringe of her shawl, till from the
garden the blind old man would cry lovingly and querulously, "Trixy,
where are you?" and she would answer, "Coming, dearie." As she turned
away she would murmur: "I shouldn't like him to come back...."

Poor Trixy Cliffe! She should have known only the sorrow of pure
femalehood, such sorrow as makes the eyes of heifers soft. Women like
her should be harvested like corn in their time of ripening, stored in
good homes as in sound barns, and ground in the mill of wifehood and
motherhood into the flour that makes the bread by which the people live.
But there must have been some beauty working in her soul, for Peacey
went only where he saw some opportunity to cancel some movement towards
the divine, being a missionary spirit. So she had been delivered over to
that terror which survived for ever. Even in the exorcised blue
territory of a good old woman's eyes. "Oh, poor Trixy, poor Trixy!"
moaned Marion, weeping. But it struck her that she was enjoying herself,
and she sat up rigidly and searched her soul for the smuggled
insincerity. "I must be lying," she said aloud with loathing. "I really
cannot be pitying Trixy Cliffe because in my heart of hearts I care for
no one but Richard. I would knead the flesh of anyone on earth and bake
it in the oven if that were the only food I could give him. What am I
doing this for? Ah, I see. I am hanging about this fictitious emotion
simply because I do not wish to go on and remember Roger." She held out
her hands into the blackness and cried out, "Oh, Roger, forgive me for
shutting you out of my memory as I have shut you out of everything else.
I will remember everything, I will!" She lay down and let all pictures
reappear before her eyes, but her mouth was drawn down at the corners.


CHAPTER V


It was no use wondering now whether or not Peacey had really murmured
"Good day, ma'am," as they parted at the door of the church after their
furtive marriage. She had certainly thought she had heard this ironic
respectfulness, and she had stared after him with a sudden dread that
under the cream of benignity there might after all be a ferment of
malign intention. But that gait, which was so light and brisk for such a
heavy man, had already taken him some distance from her, and he was now
entering the yew alley that was the private way from Torque Hall to the
churchyard. The sunlight falling through the interstices of the dark
mossy trees cast liver-coloured patches on his black coat. She had
turned and looked down, as she always did when human complexities made
her seek reassurance as to the worth of this world, on the shiny
mud-flats, blue-veined with the running tides, and green marshes where
the redshanks choired. Her misgiving had weakened at that beauty, for
with the logic of the young she thought that if the universe was
infinitely good it could not also be infinitely evil, and it had been
utterly dispelled by his considerate conduct during the following weeks.

He did not try to see her at all until a day or two before the birth of
her child was expected. Then he came at twilight. He would not let
Grandmother put a match to the lamp in the parlour, and Marion knew from
his quiet urgency that he was doing this so that she might continue to
wear the dusk as a cloak. He sat down by the window, his shoulders black
against the sunset, and his fat hands, with their appealing air of shame
at their own fatness, laid on the little table beside him an old; carved
coral rattle and a baby's dress precious with embroideries. These he had
bought, he said, up in London, where he had had to go for a day to do
business with the wine merchants. He had not seemed to listen to her
thanks. But his hunched shape against the primrose light and the
gleaming of his thick white fingers playing nervously with the fragile
gifts spoke of a passionate concern for her. No doubt that concern was
sincere. They told her after her confinement that during the day and
night through which her child was slowly torn from her he had not left
the house, and at her cries a sweat had run down his face. That was not
unnatural. An incomplete villainy would vex its designer as any
unfinished work of art vexes the artist. But she interpreted it in the
sense that he, knowing what delusions youth has regarding the human
capacity for love, had foreseen that she would.

She let him see her before anyone else, and he had made the most of that
ideal occasion when her being was so sensitive that it responded to
everything, and so well pleased at having safely borne her son that she
saw everything as evidence of creation's virtue. He had added stroke to
stroke with the modest confused smile with which he entered the room, as
if he felt his vast bulk ridiculous in this room of small rosebud
patterns; the uneasy laughter with which he disguised his embarrassment
when they could find no chair big enough for him; the shy wonder with
which he put out his hand and hooded the tiny black head with it, and
uncurled the little hand with his obese forefinger; the reticence with
which he checked his remark that he had always wanted to have a child of
his own. And he perfected the picture that he desired her to see by the
assurance he gave murmurously from the darkness of the open door. "Get
well soon.... You needn't be afraid of me. We made a bargain. I mean to
stick to it." He had caught the very tune that dogged sincerity plays on
the voice's chords. She lay happy after he had gone because she and her
child had so true a friend.

It was, of course, from no malice against her that he set out to deceive
her, but from the natural desire to protect his being from alterations
hostile to its quality. Long after, sitting with Richard in a café in
Rio de Janeiro, she had looked at the men who were taking the lovely
painted women to themselves, and she detected behind the gross mask that
the prospect of physical enjoyment set on the faces an expression of
harsh spiritual defensiveness; and thenceforward she had understood why
Peacey had practised this fraud on her. He had known, as all men know,
that there is a beneficent magic in the relationship between men and
women; the evil man, at war with all but himself, cannot but admit that
for his supremest pleasure he depends on one other than himself, and by
his gratitude to her is tainted with altruism and is no longer
single-minded in his war on others. Such men uphold prostitution because
it exorcises sex of that magic. It is not a device to save sensuality,
for love with a stranger is like gulping new spirit, and love with a
friend is drinking old wine. Its purpose is indeed this very
imperfection of the embraces that it offers, for they leave the soul as
it was.

Peacey, she understood in the light of this discovery, had desired her
with a passion that, uncircumvented, would have swept him on to love and
a life on which his laboriously acquired technique of villainy would
have been wasted, so it had been the problem set his virtuosity to
create a situation which would let him fulfil his body's hunger for her
and at the same time kill for ever all possibility of love between them.
She could imagine him seated under the little window in the butler's
pantry, polishing a silver teapot with paste and his own fingers, as
old-fashioned butlers do, for he was scrupulous in all matters of
craftsmanship; holding his fat face obliquely, so that it seemed as
unrelated to anything but space as a riding moon, save when he looked
down and smiled to see the blue square of the window and the elm top
shine upside down and distorted in the bulbous silver: thinking his
solution out to its perfect issue.

It had been quite perfect. By that visit, and by his abstention from any
later visit, he had induced in her just that mood of serenity and
confidence which would be most shocked by the irruption of his passion.
The evening when it all happened she had been so utterly given up to
happiness. She had taken the most preposterously long time to put
Richard to bed. He had had a restless day, and had been so drowsy when
she went to feed him in the evening that she had put him back in his
cradle in his day clothes, but about half-past eight he had awakened and
called her, and she found him very lively and roguish. She had stripped
him and then could not bear to put his night-clothes on, he looked so
lovely lying naked in her lap. He was not one of those babies who are
pieces of flesh that slowly acquire animation by feeding and sleeping;
from his birth he had seemed to be charged with the whole vitality of a
man. He was minute as a baby of three months is, he was helpless, he had
not yet made the amazing discovery that his hand belonged to him, but
she knew that when she held him she held a strong man. This babyhood was
the playful disguise in which he came into the world in order that they
might get on easy terms with one another and be perfect companions.
Never would he be able to feel tyrannous because of his greater
strength, for he would remember the time when she had lifted him in her
weak arms, and that same memory would prevent her from ever being
depressed into a sense of inferiority, so that they would ever move in
the happy climate of a sense of equality. And every moment of this
journey towards that perfect relationship was going to be a delight.

She bent over him, enravished by the brilliant bloom of his creamy skin
and the black blaze of his eyes, which had been black from birth, as
hardly any children's are; turned him over and kissed the delicate crook
of his knees and the straight column of his spine and the little square
wings of his shoulder-blades, and then she turned him back again and
jeered at him because he wore the phlegmatic, pasha-like smile of an
adored baby. She became vexed with love for him, and longed to clasp
him, to crush him as she knew she must not. She put on his
night-clothes, kissing him extravagantly and unsatedly, and when she
finished he wailed and nuzzled to her breast. "Oh, no, you greedy little
thing," she cried, for it was a quarter of an hour before he should have
been fed again, but a wave of love passed through her and she took him
to her. They were fused, they were utterly content with one another. He
finished, smacking his lips like an old epicure. "Oh, my darling love!"
she cried, and put him back into the cot and ran downstairs. If she
stayed longer she would keep him awake with her kisses and play. She was
brightened and full of silent laughter, like a girl who escapes from her
sweetheart.

Grandmother sat very quietly at her sewing and soon went upstairs.
Grandmother was getting very old. When she said "Good-night" she seemed
to be speaking out of the cavern of some preoccupation, and when she
went upstairs her shawl fell from her shoulders and trailed its corner
on the ground. Marion hoped that the old lady had not worn herself out
by worrying about her, and she pulled out the sewing that had been shut
up in the work-basket and meditated finishing it, but she was too tired.
Nowadays she knew a fatigue which she could yield to frankly, as it was
honourable to her organism, and meant that her strength was going into
her milk and not into her blood. She folded her arms on the table and
laid her head on them and thought of Richard. It was his monthly
birthday to-day. He was three months old. She grieved to think that she
could feed him for only six months more. How could she endure to be
quite separate from him? Sometimes even now she regretted that the time
had gone when he was within her, so that each of her heartbeats was a
caress to him, to which his little heart replied, and she would feel
utterly desolate and hungry when she could no longer join him to her
bosom. But she would always be able to kiss him. She imagined herself a
few years ahead, calling him back when he was running off to play,
holding his resistant sturdiness in her arms while he gave her hasty,
smudged kisses and hugged his ball for more loving. But she reflected
that, while the character of those kisses would amuse her, they would
not satisfy her craving for contact so close that it was unity with his
warm young body, and she must set herself to be the most alluring mother
that ever lived, so that he would not struggle in her arms but would
give her back kiss for kiss. She flung her head back, sighing
triumphantly because she knew she could do it, but as her eyes met her
image in the mirror over the mantelpiece she was horrified to see how
little like a mother she was looking. Lips pursed with these long
imaginary kisses were too oppressive for a child's mouth; she had lost
utterly that sacred, radiating lethargy which hushes a house so that a
child may sleep: on a child's path her emanations were beginning to cast
not light but lightning.

She called out to herself: "You fool! If you really love Richard you
will let him run out to his game when he wants to, that he shall grow
strong and victorious, and if you call him back it must be to give him
an orange and not a kiss!" But it seemed to her that this would be a
sacrifice until, staring into the glass, she noticed that she was now
more beautiful than she had ever been, and then she saw the way by which
she could be satisfied. Harry must come back; she knew he was coming
back, for they had intercepted his letter to her, and they would not
have done that if it had been unloving. After she had weaned Richard she
must conceive again and let another child lift from him the excessive
burden of her love: then her mind and soul could go on in his company
without vexing him with these demands that only the unborn or the
nursling could satisfy. Then this second child would become separate
from her, and she must conceive again and again until this intense life
of the body failed in her and her flesh ceased to be a powerful artist
exulting in the creation of masterpieces. It must be so. For Richard's
sake it must be so. Her love would be too heavy a cloak for one child,
for it was meant to be a tent under which many should dwell. Again as in
the wood she laid her hand on her body and felt it as an inexhaustible
treasure. Again she was instantly mocked.

There had come, then, a knock at the door. She had felt a little
frightened, for since her stoning in Roothing High Street she had felt
fear at any contact with the external world; she knew now that rabies is
endemic in human society, and that one can never tell when one may not
be bitten by a frothing mouth. But it was not late, and it was as likely
as not that this was Cousin Tom Stallybrass come to say how the Frisian
calf had sold at Prittlebay market, so she opened it at once.

Peacey stood there. He stood quite still, his face held obliquely, his
body stiff and jointless in his clothes, like a huge, fat doll. There
was an appearance of ceremony about him. His skin shone with the white
lacquer of a recent washing with coarse soap, he was dressed very neatly
in his Sunday broadcloth, and he wore a black-and-white check tie which
she had never seen him wear before, and his fingers looked like
varnished bulging pods in tight black kid gloves.

He did not speak. He did not answer her reluctant invitation that he
should enter. She would have thought him drunk had not the smell that
clung about him been so definitely that of soap. From the garden behind
him, which was quilted by a thick night fog, noises as of roosting birds
disturbed. His head turned on the thick hill of his neck, his lids,
with their fringe of long but sparse black lashes, blinked once or
twice. When the sound had passed, his face again grew blank and moonish
and he stepped within. He laid his bowler hat on the table and began to
strip off his gloves. His fleshy fingers, pink with constriction,
terrified her, and she clapped her hands at him and cried out: "Why have
you come?"

But he answered nothing. Speech is human, and words might have fomented
some human relationship between them, and he desired that they should
know each other only as animals and enemies. He continued to take off
his gloves, while round him fragments of fog that had come in with him
hung in the warm air like his familiar spirits, and then bent over the
lamp. She watched his face grow yellow in the diminishing glare, and
moaned, knowing herself weak with motherhood. Then in the blackness his
weight threshed down on her. Even his form was a deceit, for his vast
bulk was not obesity but iron-hard strength. All consciousness soon left
her, except only pain, and she wandered in the dark caverns of her mind.
Her capacity for sexual love lay dead in her. She saw it as a lovely
naked boy lying with blue lips and purple blood pouring from his side,
where it had been jagged by the boar who still snuffled the fair body,
sitting by with its haunches in a spring. She cried out to herself: "You
can rise above this! This is only a physical thing," but her own answer
came: "Yes, but the other also was only a physical thing. Yet it was a
sacrament and gave you life. There is white magic and black magic. This
is a black sacrament, and it will give you death." Her soul fainted into
utter nothingness.

She woke and heard Richard crying for her upstairs. She dragged herself
up at once, but remembered and fell grovelling on the floor and wept.
But Richard continued to call for her, and she struggled to her feet and
made her way up the stairs, clinging to the banisters. She looked over
her shoulder at the loathed room and was amazed to see that this mawkish
early morning light showed it much tidier than it had been by the glow
of the lamp the night before. It was evident that Peacey had set it in
order before he let himself out, and had even neatly folded the sewing
she had left crumpled on the table. At this manifestation of his
peculiar quality she flung her arm across her face and fled to her son's
room. But when she got there a sense of guilt overcame her and she was
ashamed to go to him, though she knew he needed her, and staggered first
to the window to look out at the sea and the shining plain, whose beauty
had through all previous agonies reassured her. But the eastern sky was
inflamed with such a livid scarlet dawn as she had never seen before,
and the full tide was milk streaked with blood, and the sails of the
barges that rode there were as rags that had been used to staunch
wounds. Unreasonably she took this as confirmation that there had
happened to her one of earth's ultimate evils, a thing that no thinking
on could make good. But turning to her child to still his crying, she
saw the tiny exquisite hands waving in rage and the dark down rumpled on
the monkeyish little skull, and the black eyes in which all the beauty
and high temper that were afterwards to be Richard were condensed, and
she ran to him. She caught him up in her arms and laughed into the
criminal face of the morning.

From that day on Marion and Richard lived together in the completest
isolation. She had meals with her family, she moved among them doing
what part of the household and dairy work that she had always done, but
she never spoke to them unless it was necessary; for she realised now
why Grandmother had been so preoccupied that she let the tail of her
shawl trail on the ground as she went upstairs that night, and why
Cousin Tom Stallybrass had not come in to tell how the calf had gone at
Prittlebay market. When one afternoon she came to the head of the stairs
and saw Aunt Alphonsine gesticulating in her tight _dame de compagnie_
black in the parlour below, stretching out her long lean neck like the
spout of a coffee-pot to Grandmothers' ear, she stood quite still,
staring at the two women and hating them till they saw her and fell
silent. She did not take her gaze from them until Aunt Alphonsine put up
her hand to cover her scar. Then she knew that this wretched woman was
at last afraid of her and would let her alone, and she turned
contentedly to the room where Richard was.

But later on a misgiving seized her lest her aunt might have come as
envoy from Peacey, and since she perceived that, her rage against the
world was so visibly written on her that she inspired fear; she thought
it best to give her boy into the charge of Peggy and to go over to
Torque Hall herself. She waited in the courtyard outside the servants'
quarters while they fetched him, and stood with her head high, so that
the faces peering at her from the windows should see nothing of her
torment, at the corner of the gardens that was visible through the
gracious Tudor archway. There was nothing showing save a few pale mauve
clots of Michaelmas daisies standing flank-high in the slanting dusty
shafts of evening sunshine, and the marble Triton, glowing gold in
answer to the sunset, with gold autumn leaves scattered on his pedestal.
But she knew very well how fair it all must be beyond, where she could
not see--the broad grass walk stretching between the wide, formal
flowerbeds, well tended but disordered with the lateness of the year, to
the sundial and the chestnut grove. How could Harry, who had loved her,
possess all this and not want to share it with her? She could have
sobbed like a child whose playmate is not kind, had not Peacey stood at
her elbow. "I want to give you warning that if ever you come near me
again I will kill you," she said. He looked sharply at her and she saw
that he was convinced and discomfited. But suddenly he smiled. She went
home, wondering uneasily why he should have smiled, but came to the
conclusion that this was simply one of his mystifications and that he
had simply been trying to cover his defeat. It was an extraordinary fact
that there never once occurred to her that possibility, the thought of
which, she afterwards realised, had made Peacey smile. The truth was
that she never thought directly of that night's horror, but, perhaps
because of that fantasy about the wounded youth which had vexed her
delirium, she always disguised it in her mind as an encounter with a
wild beast, and the expectation of human issue no more troubled her than
it would a woman who had been gored by a boar.

It was partly for this reason, and partly because of a certain ominous
peculiarity of her physical condition, that she did not know for some
months that she was going to have Peacey's child. It was indeed a rainy
December morning when she heard a knock at the door and knew it was
little Jack Harken, because he was whistling "Good King Wenceslas," as
he always did, and would not go to answer him, although she knew
Grandmother and Peggy were both in the dairy, because she was distraught
with her own degradation. Her encounter with Peacey had been like being
shown some picture from a foul book and being obliged to stare at it
till it was branded on her mind, so that whenever she looked at it she
saw it also, stamped on the real image like the superscription on a
palimpsest. But now she felt as if she herself had become a picture in a
foul book. And she was quite insane with a sense of guilt towards
Richard. This discovery had, of necessity, meant that she must wean him,
and her obsession interpreted their conflict between them that had
naturally followed as a wrangle between them as to her responsibility
for this evil. Now he was lying in his cot screaming with rage, his
clean frock and the sheets running with the rivulets of milk that he had
spat out and struck from the teat of the bottle she was forcing on him,
and she was sobbing, for this sort of thing had been going on for days,
"I can't help it, darling, I can't help it."

Then Jackie began to thump rhythmically on the door below, and she ran
down, maddened with so much noise, and snatched the letter he held out
to her. At the writing on the envelope her heart stood still. She
recanted all she had lately thought of Harry. Hatred and resentment fell
from her. The promise of her lover's near presence came on her like a
south wind blowing over flowers. At his message that he was waiting for
her on the marshes under the hillside she remembered what love is--a
shelter, a wing, a witty clemency that finds the perfect unguent for its
mate's hurt as easily as a wit finds jests, a tender alchemy that
changes the dark evil subsistence of the universe to bright, valuable
gold. In her light shoes, and with her black hair loose about her
shoulders, she ran out into the rainy yard, fled round the house quickly
so that none might see her and spy on them, and plunged down the
thaw-wet hillside, crying out with joy, even when she slipped and fell,
because her lover's arms would so soon be round her.

She was amazed, for she had not yet had leisure or the heart to look out
of the window, that beneath her the marshes crackled white with sunlit
snow, and a blue sea stretched to the rosy horizon that girdles bright
frosty days. Even as this beauty had lain unseen under her windows, so
had her happiness waited unsuspected. She did not see him till she was
close upon him, for he was striding up and down between the last two
trees of the elm hedge. Her heart ached when she saw him standing,
brilliantly lovely as the glistening snow-laden branches above him, for
it was plain from the confident set of his shoulders and the loose grip
of his hand on his stick that he was unaware that any situation existed
which was not easily negotiable. They had evidently told him nothing at
Torque Hall to destroy the impression she must have created by her last
letter to him in which she had described her acceptance of Peacey's
offer of a formal marriage. They had not dared, for they knew how
terrible he would be when he moved to avenge her. But he lifted his eyes
and ran to her and took her in his arms, and did not cease to kiss her
till she sobbed out what they had done to her. Then it was as if a wind
had blown and the snow had fallen from the branches, leaving them but
dark, gnarled wood.

"But why did you marry him?"

"The people stoned me in the street and I could get no peace at home."

"Couldn't you have tried to stand it?"

"I was afraid for the boy."

"Then why couldn't you have gone away?"

"How could I when I was so ill? Why did not you come back?"

"How could I leave the prince and princess?"

She was aghast to find them quarrelling, and while he drew a shuddering
breath between his teeth, she interrupted: "Oh, Richard is so lovely!
You must see him soon. Oh, such a boy!"

But he had paid no heed and shakingly poured out words since it was so
like the harmless spite of a child that beats young to old, her blood
from that of a loved girl to a hating woman. He found the situation, she
had thought at the time, and still thought after thirty years, far less
negotiable than a high love would have done. It did not occur to him
that he might take her away. He took it for granted that thereafter
they must be lost to each other. But save for his desire to blame her
for these mischances, which did not offend her, since it was so like the
harmless spite of a child that beats his racquet because it has sent his
ball into the next garden, he seemed not to be thinking of her part in
that loss at all. It was his extreme sense of his own loss that was
making him choke with tears. It appeared that love was not always a
shelter, a wing, a witty clemency, a tender alchemy. She stood half
asleep with shock until a sentence, said passionately in his delightful
voice which made one see green water running swiftly, and at first
refused admission to her mind by her incredulous love, confirmed itself
by reiteration. "Damn it all," he was saying, "you were unique!" At that
she cried out, "Oh, you are Peacey too! I will go back to Richard," and
turned and stumbled up the wet hillside.

It is true that Harry's desertion nearly killed her--that there was a
moment, as she breasted the hill-top and found herself facing the
malevolent red house where they had always told her that he did not
really love her, when she thought she was about to fall dead from excess
of experience and would have chosen to die so, if Richard had not waited
for her. Yet it was also true that for long she hardly ever thought of
Harry. Such fierce and unimagined passions and perplexities now filled
her, that the simple and normal emotions she felt for him became
imperceptible, like tapers in strong sunlight.

The day after their meeting she had found Aunt Alphonsine all a dry
frightened gibber, holding a whitefaced conference with Grandmother in
the parlour, and they had asked her if she had known that Peacey had
left Torque Hall that morning. She had shaken her head and given a
dry-mouthed smile, for she saw how terrified they were lest all that had
had a hand in her marriage were to be made to pay for it; but because
the child in her arms laughed, and the child in her womb had moved, she
was so torn between delight and loathing that she had no time to
speculate whether Harry had done this thing sweetly out of love for her
or cruelly out of bodily jealousy of Peacey. Nor, when a few weeks later
it was announced that for the first time in its history Torque Hall had
been let furnished, and that the family was going to spend the next
twelve months abroad and in London, did her heart ache to think he must
be sad to leave the grey, salt Essex which he loved. She thought of it,
indeed, but negligently. She could imagine well how he had walked with
his dogs among the dripping woods and had set his face against a
tree-trunk near some remembered place, and had wept (for like most very
virile men, he wept in sorrow); and when he had gone home, thick-lipped
and darkly flushed with misery, he had flung down his stick on the chest
in the hall and muttered, while frightened people watched from the
shadows of the armour or listened at doors held ajar, "I must get out of
this." No doubt it was very sad, but it was simple; it was brother to
the grief of the yard dog when she lost her puppies. It was not like her
agony. Nothing was simple there. Destiny had struck her being a blow
that had shivered it to fragments, and now all warred so that there was
confusion, and the best things were bad.

Her body was full of health and she was very beautiful. Richard, who was
beginning to take notice, took great pleasure in her. He used to point
his fingers at her great lustrous eyes as he did at flowers, and he
would roll his face against the smooth skin of her neck and shoulders;
and when he was naked after his bath he liked her to let down her hair
so that it hung round him like a dark, scented tent. But as she bent
forward, watching his little red gums shine in his laughing mouth, guilt
constricted her heart. For she knew that no woman who was going to have
a child had any right to be as well as she was. She knew that it meant
that she was giving nothing to the child, that the blood was bright in
her cheeks because she was denying every drop she could to the child,
that her flesh was nice for Richard to kiss because she was electric
with the force she should have spent in making nerves for the child. She
knew that she was trying to kill the thing to which she had been ordered
to give life; that the murder was being committed by a part of her which
was beyond the control of her will did not exonerate her. In these
matters, as she had learned in the moment when she had discovered that
her baby had conceived without the consent of her soul, the soul cannot
with honour disown the doings of the body. The plain fact was that she
was going to have a child, and that she was trying to kill it. Remorse
dragged behind her like a brake on the swift movements of her happy
motherhood; and at night she lay wide-eyed and whispered to some judge
to judge her and bring this matter to an end.

It was no wonder that even when a solicitor came to see her and told her
that Harry had settled on her and Richard a sum so large that she knew
he must be deeply concerned for her, since, like many men of his type,
he had such an abundant sense of the pleasures which can be bought with
money that to part with it unnecessarily was a real sacrifice, she
thought of him with only such casual pity as she had felt when the
yard-dog howled. Well, that had all been set right, long afterwards on
that day of which she had told nobody.

But she had cheered herself in all those nights that she would make up
for her body's defection by loving the child very much when it was born.
She knew she would have no passion for it as she had for Richard, but
she foresaw herself being consciously and slantingly tender over it,
like a primitive Madonna over the Holy Child. There was, of course, no
such solution of the problem. It became plain that there was not going
to be in that hour when she knew the unnatural horror of a painless
parturition. She had not been at all shocked by the violence she had
endured at Richard's birth. It had seemed magnificently consistent with
the rest of nature, and she had been comforted as she lay moaning by a
persistent vision of a harrow turning up rich earth. But contemplating
herself as she performed this act of childbirth without a pang was like
looking into eyes which are open but have no sight and realising that
here is blindness, or listening to one who earnestly speaks words which
have no meaning and realising that here is madness.

She was going through a process that should have produced life: but
because of the lack of some essence which works through pain, but
nevertheless is to the breeding womb what sight is to the eye or sanity
to the brain, it was producing something that was as much at variance
with life as death. The old women at her bedside chuckled and rubbed
their hands because she was having such an easy time, but that was
because they were old and had forgotten. If a young woman had been
there she would have stood at the other side of the room between the
windows, as far away from the bed as she could, and her lips would have
pursed, as if she felt the presence of uncleanness. So were her own,
when they showed her the pale child. She had indeed done an unclean and
unnatural thing when she had brought forth a child that lived yet was
unloved; who was born of a mother that survived and looked at it, and
who yet had no mother, since she felt no motion towards it, but a deep
shiver of her blood away from it; who aroused no interest in the whole
universe save her own abhorrence; who was, as was inevitable in one so
begotten and so born, intrinsically disgusting in substance.

"Well, I have Richard to help me bear this," she said to herself, but
her heart reminded her that though she had Richard, this child had no
one. Pitifully she put out her arms and drew it to her breast, but
detected for herself the fundamentally insincere kindness that a
stranger will show to a child, confident that before long it will be
claimed by its own kin.

She always remembered how good the little thing had been as it lay in
her arms, and how distasteful. Those were always to remain its silent
characteristics. It was so good. "As good," the nurses used to say, "as
if he were a little girl." It hardly ever cried, and when it did it
curiously showed its difference from Richard. He hated being a baby and
subject to other people's wills, and would lie in a cot and roar with
resentment; but this child, when it felt a need that was not satisfied,
did not rebel, but turned its face to the pillow and whined softly. That
was a strange and disquieting thing to watch. She would stand in the
shadow looking at the back of its little head, so repellently covered
with hair that was like fluff off the floor, and listening to the cry
that trailed from its lips like a dirty piece of string; and she would
wonder why it did this, partly because she really wanted to know, and
partly because it fended off the moment when she had to take it in her
arms. Perhaps, she reflected, it muted its rage because it knew that it
was unlovable and must curry favour by not troubling people. Indeed, it
was as unlovable as a child could be. It was not pleasant naked, for its
bones looked at once fragile and coarse, and its flesh was lax, and in
its clothes it was squalid, for it was always being sick or dribbling.
Then her heart reproached her, and she admitted that it cried softly
because it had a gentle spirit, and she would move forward quickly and
do what it desired, using, by an effort of will, those loving words that
fluttered to her lips when she was tending Richard. Time went on, but
her attitude to it never developed beyond this alternate recognition of
its hatefulness and its goodness.

She had called it Roger after her own father in a desperate effort to
bring it into the family, but the name, when she spoke it, seemed
infinitely remote, as if she were speaking of the child of some servant
in the house whom she had heard of but had never seen. When he was out
of her sight, she ejected the thought of him from her mind, so that when
her eyes fell on him again it was a shock. He did not become more seemly
to look at. Indeed, he was worse when he grew out of frocks, for
knickerbockers disclosed that he had very thin legs and large, knotty
knees. He had a dull stare, and there seemed always to be a ring of food
round his mouth. He had no pride. When she took the children on a
railway journey Richard would sit quite still in his seat and would
speak in a very low voice, and if any of the other passengers offered
him chocolates or sweets he would draw back his chin as an animal does
when it is offered food, and would shake his head very gravely. But
Roger would move about, falling over people's legs, and would talk
perpetually in a voice that was given a whistling sound by air that
passed through the gap between his two front teeth, and when he got
tired he would whine. He was unexclusive and unadventurous. He liked
playing on the sands at Prittlebay in summer when they were covered with
trippers' children. He hated Richard's passion for bringing the names of
foreign places into the games. When Richard was sitting on his engine
and roaring, "I'm the Trans-Andean express, and I don't half go at a
pace!" Roger would stand against the wall opposite and cry over and over
again in that whistling voice: "Make it the London, Tilbury and
Prittlebay train! Make it the London, Tilbury and Prittlebay train!"
When he felt happy he would repeatedly jump up in the air, bringing both
his feet down on the ground at once, but a little distance apart, so
that his thin legs looked horrible, and he would make loud, silly
noises. At these times Richard would sit with his back to him and would
take no notice. Always he was insolent to the other child. He would not
share his toys with him, though sometimes he would pick out one of the
best toys and give it to his brother as a master might give a present to
a servant. He was of the substance of his mother, and he knew all that
she knew, and he knew that this child was an intruder.

They clenched themselves against him. They were kind to him, but they
would silently scheme to be alone together. If they were all three in
the garden, she sitting with her needlework, Richard playing with his
engine and Roger making daisy-chains, there would come a time when she
would arise and go into the house. She would not look at Richard before
she went, for in externals she forced herself to be loyal to Roger. When
she got into the house she would linger about the rooms at factitious
operations, pouring out of the flower-glasses water that was not stale,
or putting on the kettle far too soon, until she heard Richard coming to
look for her, lightfootedly but violently, banging doors behind him,
knocking into furniture. He would halt at the door and stand for a
moment, twiddling the handle round and round, as if he had not really
been so very keen to come to her, and she would go on indifferently with
her occupation. But presently she would feel that she must steal a
glance at the face that she knew would be looking so adorable now,
peering obliquely round the edge of the door, the lips bright with
vitality as with wet paint and the eyes roguish as if he felt she were
teasing life by enjoying it so, and the dear square head, browny-gold
like the top of a bun, and the little bronze body standing so fresh and
straight in the linen suit. So her glance would slide and slide, and
their eyes would meet and he would run to her. If he had anything on his
conscience he would choose this moment for confession. "Mother, I told a
lie yesterday. But it wasn't about anything really important, so we
won't talk about it, will we?"

Then he would clamber over her, like a squirrel going up a tree-trunk,
until she tumbled into some big chair and rated him for being so
boisterous, and drew him close to her so that he revelled in her love
for him as in long meadow-grass. Even as she imagined that night before
Peacey came, he did not struggle in her arms but gave her kiss for kiss.
They would be sphered in joy, until they heard a sniff and saw the other
child standing at the open door, resting its flabby cheek on the handle,
surveying them with wild eyes. There would be a moment of dislocation.
Then she would cry, "Come along, Roger!" and Richard would slip from her
knee and the other child would come and very gratefully put its arms
round her neck and kiss her. It would go on kissing and kissing her, as
if it needed reassurance.

But she had always done her duty by Roger. That had not been so very
difficult a matter at first, for Grandmother had made a great fuss of
him and taken him off her hands for most of the day. Marion had never
felt quite at ease about this, for she knew that he was receiving
nothing, since the old woman was only affecting to find him lovable in
order that it might seem that something good had come of the marriage
which she had engineered. But the problem was settled when he was
eighteen months old, for then Grandmother died. Marion did not feel
either glad or sorry. God had dreamed her and her grandmother in
different dreams. It was well that they should separate. But it had the
immediate disadvantage of throwing her into perpetual contact with the
other child. She looked after it assiduously, but she always felt when
she had been with it for an hour or two that she wanted to go a great
distance and breathe air that it had not breathed. Perpetually she
marvelled at its contentedness and gentleness and unexigent hunger for
love, and planted seeds of affection for it in her heart, but they would
never mature.

The relationship became still more galling to her after yet another
eighteen months, when Harry came back to live with his family at Torque
Hall, who had returned there the year before. No communication passed
between them, but sometimes by chance he met her in the lanes when she
was out with the children. The first time he tried to speak to her, but
she turned away, and Richard said, "Look here, you don't know us," so
after that they only looked at one another. They would walk slowly past
each other with their heads bent, and as they drew near she would lift
her eyes and see him, beautiful and golden as a corn of wheat, and she
would know from his eyes that, dark for his fair, she was as beautiful,
and they would both look at Richard, who ran at her right side and was
as beautiful as the essence of both their beauties. It seemed as if a
band of light joined the bodies of these three, as if it were
contracting and pulling them together, as if in a moment they would be
pressed together and would dissolve in loving cries upon each other's
breasts. But before that moment came, Harry's eyes would stray to the
other child. Its socks would be coming down round its thin legs; it
would be making some silly noises in its squalid, whistling voice; its
features would be falling apart, unorganised into a coherent face by any
expression, as common children's do. The situation was trodden into the
mud. They would pass on--their hearts sunk deeper into dingy
acquiescence in their separation.

Nevertheless she did not fail in her duty towards Roger. So far as
externals went she was even a better mother to him than to Richard.
Frequently she lost her temper with Richard when he ran out of the house
into the fields at bedtime, or when he would not leave his tin soldiers
to get ready for his walk, but she was always mild with Roger, though
his habit of sniffing angered her more than Richard's worst piece of
naughtiness. She took Richard's illnesses lightly and sensibly. But when
Roger ailed--which was very often, for he caught colds easily and had a
weak digestion--she would send for the doctor at once, and would nurse
him with a strained impeccability, concentrating with unnecessary
intensity on the minutiæ of his treatment and diet as if she were
attempting to exclude from her mind some thought that insisted on
presenting itself at these times. When they came to her on winter
evenings and wet days and asked for a story, she would choose more often
to tell them a fairy-tale, which only Roger liked, rather than to start
one of the sagas which Richard loved, and would help to invent,
concerning the adventures of the family in some previous animal
existence, when they had all been rabbits and lived in a burrow in the
park at Torque Hall, or crocodiles who slooshed about in the Thames
mud, or lions and tigers with a lair on Kerith Island. She never gave
any present to Richard without giving one to Roger too; she dressed him
as carefully in the same woollen and linen suits, although in nothing
did he look well. Never had she lifted her hand against him.

As time went on she began to make light of her destiny and to declare
that there was no horror in this house at all, but only a young woman
living with her two children, one of whom was not so attractive as the
other. It was true that sometimes, when she was sewing or washing dishes
at the sink, she would find herself standing quite still, her fingers
rigid, her mind shocked and vacant, as if some thought had strode into
it and showed so monstrous a face that all other thoughts had fled; and
she would realise that she had been thinking of something about Roger,
but she could not remember what. Usually this happened after there had
arrived--as there did every six months--parcels of toys, addressed to
him and stamped with the Dawlish postmark and containing a piece of
paper scrawled "With love from father."

She would be troubled by such moments when they came, for she was
growing distantly fond of Roger. There was something touching about this
pale child, whose hunger for love was so strong that it survived and
struggled through the clayey substance of its general being which had
smothered all other movements of its soul; who was so full of love
itself that it accepted the empty sham of feeling she gave it and
breathed on it, and filled it with its own love, and was so innocent
that it did not detect that nobody had really given it anything, and
went on rejoicing, thus redeeming her from guilt. He would come and
stand at the door of any room in which she was sitting, and she would
pretend not to know he was there, so that she need caress him or say the
forced loving word; but when at length, irritated by his repeated
sniffs, she turned towards him, she would find the grey marbles of his
eyes bright with happiness, and he would cry out in his dreadful
whistling voice, "Ah, you didn't know I was watching you!" and run
across undoubtingly to her arms. There would be real gratitude in the
embrace she gave him. His trust in her had so changed the moment that
she need not feel remorse for it.

It had seemed quite possible that they could go on like this for ever,
until the very instant that all was betrayed. She had had a terrible
time with Richard, who was now seven years old. After their midday meal
he had asked permission to go and spend the afternoon playing with some
other boys on the marshes, and she had given it to him with a kiss,
under which she had thought he seemed a little sullen. When Roger and
she had nearly finished their tea he had appeared at the door, had stood
there for a minute, and then, throwing up his head, had said doggedly:
"I've had a lovely time at the circus." She had left the bread-knife
sticking in midloaf and sat looking at him in silence. This was real
drama, for she had refused to take them to the circus and forbidden him
to go by himself because there was a measles epidemic in the
neighbourhood. It flashed across her that by asking for permission to
play with the boys on the marshes when he meant to go to the circus he
had told her a lie. The foolish primitive maternal part of her was
convulsed with horror at his fault. Because he was more important than
anybody else, it seemed the most tremendous fault that anybody had ever
committed, and because he was her son it seemed quite unlike any other
fault and far more excusable. Her detached wisdom warned her that she
must check all such tendencies in him, since what would in other
children be judged a shortcoming natural to their age, would in him be
ascribed to the evil blood of his lawless begetting, and he would start
life under the powerful suggestion of a bad reputation. She resolved to
punish him. The core of her that was nothing but love for Richard, that
would have loved him utterly if they had not been mother and son, but
man and woman, or man and man, or woman and woman, cried out with
anguish that she should have to hurt him to guard against the destiny
which she herself had thrust upon him.

She said in a strained voice: "How dare you tell a lie to me and pretend
that you were going to the marshes?" He answered, his eyebrows meeting
and lying in straight, sullen bars: "I had to do that so's you wouldn't
worry about me not coming home. And I paid for myself with the sixpence
that was over from the five shillings Cousin Tom gave me at Christmas.
And you know it doesn't really matter about the measles, because I'm
strong and don't always go catching things like Roger does."

He made as if he were going to sit down at the table, but she said: "No,
you mustn't have any tea. Go to your room and undress. You've lied and
you've disobeyed. I'll have to whip you." Her heart was thumping so that
she thought she was going to faint. He lifted his chin a little higher
and said: "Very well, the circus was very good. It was quite worf this."
He marched out of the room and left her sick and quivering at her duty.
After she had heard him bang his door, she realised that Roger was
asking her again and again if he might have some more cherry jam, and
she answered, sighing deeply, "No, dear, it's too rich. If you have any
more you'll be ill," and she rose from the table and took the jar into
the larder. She decided to clear away tea first, but that only meant
carrying the tray backwards and forwards twice, and after a few moments
she found herself standing in the middle of the kitchen, shaking with
terror, while the other child whined about her skirts and stretched up
its abhorrent little arms. She pushed it aside, qualifying the harsh
movement with some insincere endearment, and went to Richard's room and
walked in blindly, saying: "I must whip you--you've broken the law, and
if you do that you must be punished." Out of the darkness before her
came the voice of the tiny desperado: "Very well. It was quite worf
this. Mother, I'm ready. Come on and whip me." She pulled down the
blinds and set herself to the horrid task, and kept at it hardly,
unsparingly, until she felt she had really hurt him. Then she said, with
what seemed to be the last breath in her heart-shattered body: "There,
you see, whenever you break the law people will hurt you like this. So
take notice." She moved about the room, leaving it as it should be left
for the night, opening the windows and folding up the counterpane, while
he lay face downwards on his pillow. Just as she was closing the door he
called softly:

"Mummie!"

She continued to close it, and he cried:

"Mummie!"

But she remained quite quiet so that he thought she had gone. After a
minute she heard him throw himself over in the bed and kick the clothes
and sob fiercely, "Gah! Why can't she come when I call her?"

She was back by his bedside in a second, and his arms were round her
neck and he was sobbing:

"Mummie, mummie, I know I've been naughty!" And as he felt the wetness
of her face he cried out, "Oh, mummie, have I made you cry? I will be
good! I will be good! I'll never make you cry again! I know I was a
beast to go 'cos you really were frightened of us getting measles, but
oh, mummie, I did so want to see a tiger!"

They clung to each other, weeping, and he said things into her neck that
were far more babyish than usual and yet fiercely manly, and they almost
melted into each other in the hot flow of loving tears.

"You were quite right to whip me," he told her. "I wouldn't have
believed you were really cross if you hadn't hurt me." Presently, when
he was lying quietly in her arms, all sticky sweetness like toffee, he
sighed, "Oh, darling, the circus was lovely! There were such clever
people. There was a Cossack horseman who picked up handkerchiefs off the
ground when he was riding at full speed, and there was a most beautiful
lady in pink satin. Mummie, you'd look lovely in pink satin!--and she'd
bells on her legs and arms, and she waggled them and it made a tune.
That was lovely, but I liked the animals best. Oh, darling, the lions!"

She rebuked him for his continued enjoyment of an illicit spectacle that
ought now to be regarded only as material for repentance, but he
protested: "Mummie, you are mean. Now you've whipped me for going,
surely I've a right to enjoy it." But he lay back and just gave himself
up to loving her. "Oh, you beautiful mummie. You've such lots and lots
of hair. If there were two little men just as big as my fingers, they
could go into your hair, one at each ear, and walk about it like people
do in the African forests, couldn't they? And they'd meet in your
parting, and one would say to the other, 'Mr. Livingstone, I presume?'"
They both laughed and hugged each other, and he presently fell asleep as
suddenly as children do.

She lingered over him for long, peering at him through the dusk to miss
nothing of his bloomy brownness. He curled up when he slept like a
little animal, and his breath drove through him deeply and more serenely
than any adult's. At last she felt compelled to kiss him, and, without
waking up, he shook his head about and said disgustedly, "Wugh!" as she
rose and left him.

Twilight was flooding the house, and peace also, and she moved happily
through the dear place where she lived with her dear son, her heart
wounded and yet light, because though she had had to hurt him, she knew
that henceforward he would obey whatever laws she laid upon him. He had
been subject to her when he was a baby; it was plain that he was going
to be subject to her now that he was a boy; she might almost hope that
she would never lose him. "I must make myself good enough to deserve
this," she said prayingly. As she went downstairs she looked through the
open front door into the crystalline young night, tinged with purple by
some invisible red moon and diluted by the daylight that had not yet all
poured down the sluice of the west, and resolved to go out and meditate
for a little on how she must live to be worthy of this happy motherhood.

She walked quickly and skimmingly about the dark lawns, exalted and
humble. In a gesture of joy she threw out her arms and struck a clump of
nightstock, and the scent rushed up at her. A nightingale sang in the
woods across the lane. These things seemed to her to be in some way
touchingly relevant to the beautiful destiny of her and her son, and her
eyes were filled with tears of gratitude for nature's sympathy. She went
round the house, walking softly, keeping close to the wall, to eavesdrop
on the lovely, drowsy, kindly world. The silence of the farmyard was
pulsed with the breath of many sleeping beasts. The dark doors and
windows of the cattle-sheds looked out under the thick brows of their
thatched eaves at the strange fluctuating wine-like light as if they
were consciously preserving their occupants from the night's magic. As
she walked to the garden's edge, the crickets chirped in the long grass
and the ballet of the bats drove back and forwards in long streaks. The
round red moon hung on the breast of a flawless night, whose feet were
hidden in an amethystine haze that covered the marshes and the sea, and
changed the lit liners going from Tilbury to floating opals; and within
the house was Richard. All was beauty.

Surely it would be given to her to deserve to be his mother? She stood
there in an ecstasy that was hardly at all excitement, until it blew
cold and she remembered that she had left the fire unmended, and went
back to the house.

She went in by the kitchen, and was amazed to see that the larder door
was open and giving out a faint ray of light. She pulled it open and saw
the other child standing on a chair and spooning cherry jam out of the
jar into his mouth. A candle, which it had put on the shelf below it,
threw on the ceiling an enormous shadow of its large, jerry-built skull.
It turned on her a pale and filthy face and dropped the jar, so that
gobs of jam fell on its pinafore, the paper-covered shelf, the chair,
the floor. She lifted the child down and struck it. It gave her the most
extraordinary pleasure to strike it. She struck it three times, and each
time it was as good as drinking wine. Then she fell forward on her knees
and covered her face with her hands. The child ceased to howl and put
its jammy arms forgivingly about her while she wept, but its touch only
reminded her how delicious it had been to beat it. Still, she submitted
to its embrace, and muttered in abasement: "Oh, lovey, mummy shouldn't
have done that!"

The child was puzzled, for it knew it ought not to have stolen the jam,
and as always, it was so full of love that it could not believe that
anybody had behaved badly to it. There was nothing to do but to give it
a kiss and take it off to bed. When she saw its horrid little body
stripped for the bath, heat ran through her throat, and she remembered
again how exquisite it had been to hurt him, and she speculated whether
very much force would be needed to kill it. All the time it knelt at her
knee saying its prayers she was wondering whether, when he was a little
older, he would not get caught by the tide out on the flats. "You vile
woman!" she exclaimed in amazement. "You murderess!" But that was merely
conversation which did not alter the established fact that her
profounder self still hated the child it had brought forth, as it had
done before he was born, and now, as then, was plotting to kill it, and
that some check which her consciousness had always exerted on that
hatred had for some reason been damaged, and that he was in active
danger from her.

All night she lay awake, and in the morning she went up to the bailiff's
office at Torque Hall and asked them to send for Harry. She waited in an
inner room, her heart quite calm with misery, and when Harry appeared in
the doorway she did not care one way or another that he was white and
shaken. Without delaying to greet him, she told him that she loathed
Peacey's child so much that it must be taken away from her, at least for
some time, and that she had wondered if she ought to give him a chance
of finding affection with his father, who had, after all, never stopped
sending him presents.

There was a silence, and she turned her eyes on him and found him
looking disapproving. Plainly he thought it very unnatural of her to
dislike her own child, and was daring to doubt if his own son was safe
with her. He--he of all men--who by his disloyalty had brought on her
this monstrous birth that had deformed her fate! She clenched her fists
and drew in a sharp breath and her eyes blazed. He moved forward
suddenly in his chair, and she saw that this display of her quality had
drawn him to her, as always the moon of her being had drawn the fluid
tides of his, and that he wanted to touch her. Nearly he desired her.
That also was insolence. Her acute hating glance recorded that whereas
desire had used to make his face hard and splendid like a diamond, like
a flashing sword, it now made it lax, and she realised with agony,
though, of course, without surprise, that he had been unfaithful to
their love times without number. But she looked into his eyes and found
them bereaved as her heart was. She turned aside and sobbed once, drily.
After that, they spoke softly, as if one they had both loved lay dead
somewhere close at hand. He told her that Peacey had set up for himself
in an inn, and that a widowed sister of his, named Susan Rodney, who
also had been in the Torques' service, was keeping house for him. She
was a really good sort, he declared, although she was Peacey's sister,
and very motherly; indeed, she had been terribly upset by the loss of
her only child, a little boy of nine, so she would doubtless welcome the
charge of Roger. At any rate, there would be no harm in letting the
child go to her for a three months' visit.

"I'll settle the whole thing," he said. "You'd better not write; he may
want to meet you."

With distaste she perceived that although he had never done anything
useful for her, he was still capable of being jealous of her, and she
abruptly rose to go. But she delayed for a moment to satisfy a curiosity
that had vexed her for years.

"Tell me," she asked. "How did you get rid of Peacey? Was it money?"

He shrugged his shoulders. "Not altogether. You see, I found out
something about him...."

She walked home slowly, with her head bent, wondering what blood she had
perpetuated.

So, a week later, Susan Rodney came. Her visit was a great humiliation.
She was a woman of thirty-five, strangely and reassuringly unlike her
brother, having a fair, sun-burned skin with a golden down on her upper
lip, and slow-moving eyes, the colour of a blue sky reflected in shallow
floods. She was as clean and useful as a scrubbed deal table. And
because she was wholesome in her soul, she abhorred this woman who was
sending away her own child. During the twenty-four hours she was at
Yaverland's End she ate sparingly, plainly because she felt reluctance
at accepting hospitality from Marion, and rose very early, as if she
found sleeping difficult in the air of this house. This might have been
in part due to the affection she evidently felt for her brother, which
was shown in the proud and grudging responses to Marion's enquiries as
to how he was getting on at Dawlish.

"He's doing ever so well, and he's made the place a picture," she would
begin volubly, and then would toss her head slowly like a teased heifer,
and decide that Marion did not deserve to hear tidings of the glorious
man she had slighted. But the greater part of her loathing was that
which a woman with a simple heart of nature must feel for one who hated
her child, which the sound must feel for the leprous.

Marion could have mitigated that feeling in a great part, not by
explaining, for that was impossible, but by simply showing that she had
suffered, for Susan was a kind woman. Instead she did everything she
could to encourage it. She told no lies, although by now her efforts to
win over the neighbourhood, so that she could get a servant easily and
be able to give her whole time to the children, had made her coldly sly
in her dealings with humanity. She liked Susan too much for that. Merely
she made no attempt to disguise her personality. After the children had
gone to bed she sat by the hearth and held her head high under the
other's ruminant stare, knowing that because of the times she had been
subject to love and to lust her beauty was lip-marked as a well-read
book is thumb-marked, and that that would seem a mark of abomination to
this woman in the salty climate of whose character passion could not
bloom. She knew, too, that to Susan, who every Sunday since her babyhood
had gone to church and prayed very hard, with her thick fair brows
brought close together, to be helped to be good, the pride of her
bearing would seem terribly wicked to a sinner who had broken one of the
Ten Commandments.

Marion kept down her eyes so that the other should not see that the
eyeballs were strained with agony, and should think that she was a loose
and conscienceless woman. She hated doing this. She liked Susan so much,
and she was terribly lonely. She would like to have thrown her arms
round Susan's neck and cried and cried, and told her how terribly
difficult she found life, and how she hated people being nasty to her,
and asked her if sometimes she did not long for a man to look after her.
But instead she sat there rigidly alienating her. For she had seen that
because Susan disliked her she was precipitating herself much more
impulsively than she would otherwise have done into affection for the
child whom she suspected was being maltreated by this queer woman in
this queer house. In any case she would have admitted Roger to her
heart, for it was plainly very empty since the loss of her son, whom she
had loved so dearly that she did not speak of him to Marion, but being
slow of movement she might have taken her time over it; and it was
necessary that these two should love each other at once. At any moment
Roger might understand his mummie hated him, and that would break his
poor little heart, which she knew was golden, unless he had some other
love to which to run. She was so glad when she found herself seeing them
off at Paddington, although it was a horrible scene. Susan had primly,
and with an air of refusing to participate in the spoils of vice,
declined to let Marion buy her a firstclass ticket, so the parting had
to take place in a crowded thirdclass compartment. Roger shrieked and
kicked at leaving her, and leaned howling from the window, while Marion
said over and over again, "Mummy's so sorry ... it's only that just now
she isn't well enough to look after you both ... and Richard's the
eldest, so he must stay ... and you'll be back ever so soon.... And
there's such lovely sands at Dawlish...."

All the people in the corner-seats had looked with distaste at this
plain, ill-behaved child and had cast commending glances on Richard, who
stood by her side on the platform, absorbedly watching the porters
wheeling their trucks along, but always keeping on the alert so that he
never got in anyone's way. She couldn't bear that. She wanted to scream
out: "How dare you look like that at this poor little soul who has been
sinned against from the moment of his begetting? Think of it, his mother
hates him!"

She looked wildly at Susan for some comfort, but found her pink with
grave anger. Well, it was better for Roger that Susan should feel thus
about her. So she went on with these murmurs, which she felt the child
might detect as insincere at any moment, until the green flag waved. She
watched the diminishing train with a criminally light heart. Richard
began to jump up and down. "Mummie! Won't it be lovely--just us two!"

It was lovely. It was iniquitously lovely. In the morning Richard ran
into her room and flung himself, all dewy after the night's long sleep,
into her bed and nuzzled into her and gave her endless love which did
not have to be interrupted because the other child was standing at the
head of the bed, its pale eyes asking for its share of kisses. When he
went to school, she stood at the door and watched him run along the
garden to the gate, flinging out his arms and legs quite straight as a
foal does, and was exultingly proud of being a mother as she had not
been when there ran behind him Roger on weak, ambling limbs. When he
returned, they had their meal together to the tune of happy laughter,
for there was now no third to spill its food or say it was feeling sick
suddenly or babble silly things. In the afternoon she had to drive him
out to go and play games with the other boys. Much rather would he have
stayed with her, and when she called him back for a last hug he did not
struggle in her arms but gave her back kiss for kiss. She always changed
her dress for tea, and arranged her hair loosely like a woman in a
picture, and went out into the garden to gather burning leaves and put
them in vases about the room, and when it fell dark she set lighted
candles on the table because they were kinder than the lamp to her
pain-flawed handsomeness and because they left corners of dusk in which
these leaves glowed like fire with the kind of beauty that she and
Richard liked. She would arrange all this long before he came in, and
sit waiting in a drowse of happiness, thinking that really she had lost
nothing by being cut off from the love of man, for this was much better
than anything she could have had from Harry. When Richard came in he
would hold his breath because it was so nice and forget to tell her
about the game from which he was still flushed; and after tea they would
settle down to a lovely warm, close evening by the fire, when they would
tell each other all the animal stories that Roger had not liked.

On Saturday afternoons they always went down to the marshes together,
and they were glad that now was the ebbing of the year, for both found
the beauty of bad weather somehow truer than the beauty of the sunshine.
They loved to walk under high-backed clouds that the wind carried
horizonwards in pursuance of some feud of the skies. They liked to see
Roothing Castle standing up behind a salt mist, pale and flat as if it
were cut out of paper. 'Sh! Don't forget!

BRIGELLA.

(_Stepping in front of the footlights._) I'm Brigella, begging your pardon.
One of the old honest family of the Brigellas.

As you can hear by the way I talk, I was born in Ferrara. There are lying
rogues, drat 'em, as say as how you can tell any one that comes from
Ferrara by his knavish face. Concerning my own person, though I says
it as shouldn't, I've a heart of gold. Not half. Talking about gold now,
you'll be wondering, sure enough, what brought _me_ from Ferrara to
Pekin. Well, now, it was a purse of gold, God bless ye! It was a little
matter of two hundred florins that belonged to my employer, the celebrated
Dr. Gratiano...

PANTALONE.

(_Pulls his sleeve._) Better not!

BRIGELLA.

And now with this heart of gold of mine blest if I ain't got to conduct
this broth of a boy, bless his honest face! to the block, by command of
my mistress, the high and mighty Turandot ...the cru'l Turandot. (_Sobs._)

TRUFFALDINO
(_Pushing_ BRIGELLA _aside._) That's enough.
Get out of that. A regular rogue. Standing there and talking about
florins.... H'm!
Regular rogue.

(PANTALONE _pulls his sleeve_.)
Ah! quite so. I am Truffaldino, by your leave.
Truffaldino from the Giudeccao Quite so.
(_Turning towards_ BRIGELLA.) Regular rogue.
It is monstrous that the dirtiest rascals should always get on best. I
have not myself always had the best of luck in these parts... Would you
believe it, my voice used to be a very fine, deep baritone. But now...
(_Sings falsetto_):

I am not young; I am not old; I live, yet have no life!
Ask him who hath suffered woes untold From some volcanic strife Of
passionate years, if he remember, Tombed in the grave of life's
December, Its vanished golden June.

What do you say about my voice? Lady-like?
Well, yes, you see I've spent so much of my time in the society of
ladies that I'm afraid my voice has assimilated the quality of theirs.
(_Sighs deeply._) Oh, yes. Not that there is any lack of good
nourishment. Oh, no. Nor of liquid refreshment. Oh, no. Nor of refined
and entertaining company. Oh, no. Nor could any one suggest that I am
not in high favour. Oh, no.
I have been appointed Chief... Inspector...
Oh, no, no, Chief... Manager... Oh, no, no, no... Chief Administrator...
Quite so!
Chief Administrator of the Harem of her Imperial Highness the Princess
Turandot. A position of distinction, a--
(PANTALONE _pulls his sleeve, and drags him away_.)

PANTALONE.

Confound you, sir!... (_To the hangman, who has appeared on the wall._)
Another inch or so to the right. Halt! a fine place that.

TARTAGLIA.

Too far to the right, my dear colleague. Much too far to the right.
There's a fine place quite near there between the young Maharajah of
Timbuctoo and the Crown Prince of Beluchistan. (_To the headsman._)
Just a shade farther--to the left, that's it, you've got it--straight
up, straight up. Halt!

PANTALONE.

That will never do, my dear Lord Chancellor.
That will never do. Really, we _can't_ have three moustaches together.
Back to the right--to the right. The Prince of Hyrcania is clean-shaven.

His Royal Highness, the dear fellow, will have quite a martial appearance
next to him. That's it, right in the middle. A little bit more to the
front. Right you are. Halt! (_To the Prince._) I do hope your Royal
Highness is delighted with the situation we have been at such pains to
select for you. Commanding position, don't you think? Eh? Very well,
then, that's all right. Drive it in fast. Down with you.
Quick--march! And now, your Royal Highness, my dear old fellow, may we
request the honour of your company back to town? We shall proceed,
according to instructions, past the harem of our illustrious
Princess to the place of execution.

But you won't need to make-a, long stay _there_, you'll be back
here again very shortly.

Let me take this opportunity of introducing to you one of our most
capable, one of our busiest officials, with whom you will soon come
into closer contact.
A very charming man--(_whispers to him_). You'll find him sharp though,
he has a cutting manner.
...But don't look so cut up, your Royal Highness; keep your pecker up.
Come now, love hasn't treated you so badly after all; it brings most
men to the altar and then to the halter-- you'll keep your head out
of that noose anyhow.
And your flame, your idolized, lovely Turandot, will perhaps do you the
honour of appearing on the grated balcony. I tell you this in case
you should by any chance desire to cast her one of your languishing
glances, your Royal Highness, my dear old chappie. You silly fool
you...
Forward, march!... Forward, I tell you, march, and be damned to you! Right
about turn, forward march!

(_Music.

Exeunt all, in the same order as they came, towards the interior of the
city. Enter CALAF, from the left, on a pony. He dismounts, and looks round
about him in a dazed and dreamy manner._)

SCENE II
CALAF.

(_Stepping in front of the footlights._) I am Prince Calaf, 'sh!
Nobody must know my name.
Calaf--I don't mind telling _you_. My father is Timur, once the mighty
King of Astrakhan--the cruel Sultan of Taschkent drove us out of our own
country. O miserable fate! O heavenly gods!
I wandered for months and months with my parents in the desert. Our foe,
the Sultan, sent riders after us. At the Court of Kaikobad, King of
the Carcasenes, I served as a gardener. His daughter, the Princess
Adelma, fell in love with me. I had to flee again, and came to
Berlas.
There I kept my poor parents by carrying burdens, and by begging. Then
a happy chance gave me these fine clothes, a horse, and this purse
of gold. I set out in quest of adventure. And here I am now in Pekin.

(_Noise behind the scenes. Enter BARAK from the city._)

SCENE III
CALAF, _then_ BARAK.

BARAK.

Whence come you, stranger?

CALAF.

       

Who asks?

BARAK.

Dare I believe, my eyes?

       

CALAF.

Do I see right?

BARAK.

It is he!

CALAF.

None else!

BARAK.

My Prince!

CALAF.

My tutor, friend!

BARAK.

Prince Calaf!

CALAF.

Barak!

BARAK.

Yet alive!

CALAF.

You here?

BARAK.

And you, Prince?

CALAF.

Quiet. Betray me not. But whisper low, How comes it that in Pekin you
are found?

BARAK.

When your ill-fated army fought and lost Before the gates of Astrakhan,
and fled Close followed by the Sultan of Taschkent, Who, barbarous,
o'er the battlefield careered, I in my helpless rage and wounded
sore Sought refuge in the city. There I heard Timur, your noble father,
like yourself, Had fallen in the battle. Weeping then, I hastened to
the Palace, with intent To save Elmase, your mother, from the foe.
I could not find her. And already raged The Sultan o'er the unresisting
town.
I turned my back on hope, and fled away.
And after months of wandering I came hither, And took a false name,
calling myself Hassan The Persian, and as such I came to know A
widow in distress.

By virtue of My few remaining jewels which I sold For her, and by the
good advice I gave, I rescued her from utter penury.
She was not thankless, I disliked her not, And in the end I married her.
And she Even to this very day thinks that I am A Persian, and she calls
me Hassan, not Barak. And so I live with her, and I Am poor indeed after
my former state, But richer than a prince now that I find You who are
dearer to me than a son, Now that I find my Prince Calaf alive.

(_Kneels._)

CALAF.

'Sh! Speak no name! On that disastrous day I hied me with my father to
the Palace.
We snatched what precious things we could, and fled, We and my mother,
out of Astrakhan, All three in beggars' garb.

BARAK (_weeps_).

Prince, say no more!
My heart is breaking. Timur, my noble King, The Queen herself in such
sad lowliness.
But are they yet alive?

CALAF.

They are alive, Barak. They both are living. And after that, Wandering
still farther, in the end we came Unto the city of the Carcasenes.

BARAK (_rises_).

O say no more! I have heard enough of grief...
And yet I see you as a knight attired.
Tell me how fortune favoured you at last.

CALAF.

Tell you how fortune--_favoured_ me? You jest!
But I will tell you how I fared. The Khan Of Berlas hath a
favourite sparrow-hawk, That with his jesses to the forest flew.
By some good chance I caught this hawk, and brought him Home to the Khan,
who questioned of my name.
I hid my birth, and painted myself poor, A porter of burdens, and my
parents ill.
Straightway he sends them to the hospital... (_Weeps._) Barak, thy King,
thy Queen, in a hospital!

BARAK.

Merciful God!

CALAF.

To me he gives this purse here; A horse he gives me, too, and this
attire.
I throw myself into my parents' arms, And weeping say: "I will no longer
bear To see you so. Now I will fare in quest Of the jade Fortune, and
either I will lose My life, or you shall hear from me anon." They clung
around my, neck, would come with me.
(God grant they have not followed at my heels In their blind love!) Now
to Pekin I come Where in the Emperor's army I will 'list; And if I
rise!--The day of vengeance dawns!-- Why is the city full to
overflowing?
Stay! I will seek thee out again, Barak; But now I burn to see what
festival Swells such a crowd.

BARAK.

O go not, my dear Prince.

And spare your eyes the pitiable sight Of most ignoble butchery.

CALAF.

Butchery?

BARAK.

It cannot be but you have heard the fame Of Turandot, the Emperor's
only daughter, Who, beautiful as she is cruel, fills Pekin with
death and mourning without end?

CALAF.

Something I heard of this kind at the Court Of Kaikobad. Indeed, they
told me there That Kaikobad's own son mysteriously In Pekin found his
death. And this was why King Kaikobad waged war against Altoum.
But these are tales told for an idle hour.
Well, what comes next?

BARAK.

What next? Why, Turandot, The mighty Emperor's daughter, unexcelled
In the mind's keenness, and of beauty such That never master's
pencil limned her (spite Of the innumerable pictures of her Which
travel round the world), is so conceited, And hates all men with
such a ruthless hate, The greatest princes woo her hand in
vain.

CALAF.

That ancient fable. And what follows next?

BARAK.
This fable is a fable that is true.
Her father often sought to have her wed-- For she is sole heir to
his mighty throne-- But she said "no" to every prince that came,
And his soft heart would not constrain her "yea." Not seldom her
refusal led to war, And, though his arms were yet victorious, He
felt the approach of age, and so one day He spake to her, deliberately
resolved:
"Make up thy mind to take a husband now, Or else show me a means
to spare my land The throes of war. Age bows my shoulders down, And
I have made too many kings my foes By breaking faith with them for
love of thee.
So once again I charge thee, promptly wed, Or show the means I seek,
then live and die Even as it pleases thee." The proud maid then
Used every artifice to thwart his will, Was sick with fury, yea,
was nigh to death!
And when the Emperor would not bate a jot, Hark what this wild
she-devil then devised....

CALAF.
I know the tale! She craves an edict: this-- That any prince be
free to sue for her.
With this condition: She will set the suitor Three riddles, and
before the whole Divan.
If he can solve them, he shall be her consort, And heir of China.
If he cannot solve them, Altoum by most solemn oath is bound To rid
the reckless suitor of the head Which could not solve the riddles
of his daughter.
Goes not the fable so? Well, you go on with it; It bores
me.

BARAK.

Fable! Would to Heaven it were!
The Emperor would not hear of it at first; But she with threats and
feints and flattering Forces the old man's gentle heart to yield,
Convincing him by saying: "No one ever Will risk his head on it;
and if he should, In any case the Emperor would be blameless, Since
it were question of an edict sworn, And noised abroad." And what
she willed was done.
A fable, is it? Is it a fable, all That this inhuman law has brought
to pass?

CALAF.
Well, if you say it is so, I will credit The edict. But I never
will believe That any fool has known, and risked his head.

BARAK.
You won't believe it? Pray you, look up here!
(_Points to the heads on the wall._)
All those are heads of hopeful princes, who Have tried their luck
and could not solve the riddles, And hence... are where they
are.

CALAF (_horror-struck_).

Most horrible!
But, tell me, who could ever be so mad, So crazy, as to risk his
head to win A monster of a maiden such as this?

BARAK.
Prince, he who sees her picture is so lost, That to possess the
living picture he Would blindly walk into the arms of death.

CALAF.
A fool might.

BARAK.

Yes, and a wise man, too.
Hark to the people pouring out to see The wise and handsome Prince
of Samarkand Beheaded now. The Emperor himself weeps, But the
she-devil puffs herself with pride.
(_In the distance a beating of muffled drums._)
This muffled rolling is the headsman's sign.
It was to see it not I left the town.

CALAF.
These are strange things you tell me, Barak How Could Nature ever
fashion such a thing, And call it woman, as this Turandot, So
harnessed against love, so pitiless?

BARAK.
My own wife's daughter serves her in the harem, And tells such
things about her--things, my Prince!-- Worse than a tigress is this
Turandot; And worst of all her vices is her pride.

CALAF.
To Hell with such a monster! If _I_ were Her father,, I would burn
her at the stake....
BARAK (_looking towards the city gate._)
See, there comes Ishmael, the friend and guide Of the young Prince
they slaughtered even now.
My poor friend!

SCENE IV
ISHMAEL. _The foregoing._
ISHMAEL (_Enters weeping from the city_).
Oh, my friend! Now he is dead.
My Prince is dead! Accursed headsman's axe, Why hast thou severed
not this neck of mine?
(_Breaks out into despairing weeping._) 

BARAK.
But why didst thou not hinder him in time, My friend?

ISHMAEL.
Dost thou on all my misery Heap reprimands, Hassan! I have done my
duty To the uttermost. I might, indeed, have summoned His father
hither, if there _had_ been time; But there was _not_.

BARAK.
Be calm, my friend, be calm.

ISHMAEL.
Calm? I be calm? Like arrows stinging sharp The last words that he
spoke stick in my breast:
"Weep not," he said, "for I am glad to die, Since I may not possess
her. Bear my greeting Unto my father. May he pardon me That when I
fared I took no leave of him.
Tell him it was for fear lest his denial Should force my disobedience.
And show him This picture.
(_Draws a picture from the folds of his robe._)
When he sees such loveliness, He will forgive, and weep my fate
with thee." Thus speaking, my dear Prince a hundred times Kissed
the accursed picture, and then bowed His neck to the stroke. Blood
spurts on high.
The trunk Quivers, and falls. High in the headsman's hands The head
I love. Blind, dazed with pain I flee....
(_Hurls the picture to the ground and tramples on it._)
Thou devilish, accursed witchery!
I tread thee in the dust, thou spawn of Hell!
And O that I could trample with these feet The witch herself! Haha!
I was to take thee Unto his father, unto Samarkand?
I fancy That Samarkand will never see me more.
(_Exit in desperation._) 

SCENE V 
BARAK, CALAF.

BARAK.
Well? Did you hear?

CALAF.

You see me all amazed.
One thing I understand not: how such power Should issue from a
picture.

(_Bends down to lift up the picture._)
BARAK (_screams_).

Prince, bethink you I What are you doing?

CALAF.
I will lift it up, To gaze upon this perilous loveliness....
(_Makes a dash for the picture._ BARAK _holds him back with force._)
BARAK.

You might as well look on the Gorgon's head!
I will not let you.

CALAF.

Have you lost your wits?
Let go of me! If _you_ are weak, _I_ am not!
(_Pushes him aside, and lifts the picture up._)
I tell you: woman's loveliness hath never Fettered even for a
second's space my eyes, Much less my heart: I mean the loveliness
Of _living_ women. And now a daub or so, Cast on a canvas by some
colour-grinder, Will stagger me, you think! Am I a child?
(_Sighs._) 
Mine is no case of love...
(_Is about to look at the picture, when BARAK quickly lays his hand
upon it and prevents him._) 

BARAK.
Prince, close your eyes, For Heaven's sake!

CALAF.
Offend me not. Let go!
(_Looks at the picture, makes a gesture of surprise, and is seen
to be in a state of ecstasy that grows with gazing._)
BARAK (_in anguish_).

Disaster, take thy course!

CALAF.
O Barak, what Do I behold? How can it be that this Sweet face, these
gentle eyes, this soft, white breast, Should harbour such a heart
as thou hast said, A heart cold as the snows of yesteryear?

BARAK.
Unhappy man!

CALAF.

O worshipped rosy cheeks!
O magic-breathing lips! O angel eyes!...

BARAK.
Unhappy man!

CALAF.
What son of earth shall be So brimmed with bliss, so blessed of the
gods, That he shall hold thee, breathing, animate Perfection, in
the hollow of his arms?

BARAK.

Unhappy man!
CALAF (_looks up for a moment, resolved_).
This is the turn of fate!
The loveliest lady of the whole round earth, Yea, and the richest
empire time hath known, I by a game of riddles now shall win-- Or
else, thou turbid life of mine, farewell!

BARAK.
Unhappy man!

CALAF (_gazing at the picture again_).
Thou sweetest promise! Thou Pledge of my hope! Lo! a new sacrifice
Is coming to thy riddles and to thee.
Vouchsafe one smile, sweet lady, lady mine!-- O Barak, tell me,
tell me, shall I once, Before they murder me, behold her face?
(_A new roll of drums from the centre of the city, sounding nearer
than the first._ CALAF _hearkens, though his eyes are still riveted
on the picture._ _The executioner appears on the city wall, a fearful
sight, his bare arms bespattered with blood._ _He plants the head
of the_ PRINCE Of SAMARKAND _on the vacant pole and then disappears_.)
BARAK.

Stop looking on her face and look on that!
That head up yonder, smoking yet with blood, Is the last lunatic's.
And the same headsman Who set it there to-morrow will be yours.
(_Bursts into tears._)
CALAF (_turning towards the Prince's head_).
Unhappy man! What unknown power decrees That I must be thy mate?
Up, Barak, up!
Thou hast already once mourned me for dead, And why not once again?
I will venture it.
Tell no one who I am. Perchance the heavens Are tired of heaping
troubles on my back.
If fortune crown me in this game of riddles, Barak, I shall be
grateful! Now, farewell!

BARAK.
O Heaven! My son.... My child....
(_Notices his wife coming out of her house._)
Come hither, quick!
Skirina, help thou also! See, this youth, Whom I love well, is
running from me now To woo the Princess and her riddles....
SCENE VI 
SKIRINA. _The foregoing._ 

SKIRINA.

Hold!
What drives thee on, fair youth, to meet thy death?

CALAF.
My fate, good woman, and this loveliness....
(_Shows the picture._) 

SKIRINA.
Who gave him the she-devil's image? (_Weeps._)
BARAK (_weeps likewise_).

Chance.

CALAF (_frees himself_).
Hassan, farewell! Farewell, thou worthy dame I My charger and this
purse I give to you.
(_Draws his purse and hands it to_ SKIRINA.)
My poverty has nothing else to show Its gratitude. I pray you, if
you will, Give something of it to the Heavenly Powers That they
protect me. And something to the poor, That they may pray for me.
And so farewell!

(_Exit in the direction of the city._) 

BARAK.
Prince, do not go! My son.... My dear, dear son....

SKIRINA.
Confucius be merciful to us!

SCENE VII
_The great hall of the imperial Divan: two high doors on each side,
on the right to_ TURANDOT'S _harem, on the left to the_ EMPEROR'S
_chambers_.

TRUFFALDINO, EUNUCHS.

TRUFFALDINO.
Halt! First scrubbing company, at ease, march. Stack muskets.
Attention! Present besoms. Sweep. Sweep like the devil. Roll up,
spread, smooth.

(_Eunuchs roll up the carpets._)
There's nothing I like better than watching other people work. Quite
so. This here is the Great Throne. His Majesty the Emperor of China
sits on that.

(_Two eunuchs carry the throne past._)
We call it the Great Throne because it's a big 'un. And this is the
Little Throne. Quite so, the Little Throne.
(_Two eunuchs carry_ TURANDOT 's _throne to its place_.)
The Princess's, don't you know. We call this the Little Throne
because it's a small 'un. Quite so. And _these_ are the eight
cushions of the learned doctors.
(_Eight slaves carry cushions past._)
The sublime Divan will assemble immediately, and then they'll all
sit on 'em--the Emperor on the Great Throne, the Princess on the
Little Throne, and the Doctors on the eight cushions.
(BRIGELLA _enters from the right_.) 

BRIGELLA.
I've always got the blues in Pekin. Not half!
Here's the Emperor just gone and issued a fresh Court ceremonial
again, and I can't get it into my noddle. I keep on practising. I
can't do anything without practising. Oh, all right, you're a
laughing at me. What are you laughing about?

TRUFFALDINO.
Business is good, that's what I'm laughing for.
My business and my adored Princess's. Trade's flourishing, praised
be the Lord! Huge turnover, commissions promptly executed. Greatest
stock of sheep's heads in the world. The Divan will assemble
immediately. There's another prince arrived, with his head itching....
_Ut veniant omnes_--let them all come.

BRIGELLA.
No, it's getting a bit too hot, all our young sparks going off like
match-heads. Strike me dead, a man _can_ talk without his head--he
can talk with his belly if he's a ventriloquist--but he can't keep
his mouth shut when he's lost his head. What _are_ you a-laughin'
at? It's no joke, not half! It's not three hours since the last was
polished off, and you can find it in your heart to laugh!A voice answered
haltingly, "No," and a match scratched, and Richard crossed the room and
lit the candle by her bedside. She could not see him, for the light was
too strong after the darkness, and she could not quite climb out of her
dream, but she rocked her head from side to side and muttered, "Go to
bed, I'm all right, all right." But he sat down on her bed and took her
hand in his, and said sullenly, "You've been calling out for my father.
Why are you doing that?" She whimpered, "Nothing. I was only dreaming."
But he went on, terrifying her through her veil of sleep. "I know all
about it, mother. The other boys told me about it. And Goodtart said
something once." His hand tightened on hers. "You used to meet him up at
that temple." For a minute he paused, and seemed to be shuddering, and
then persisted, "What is it? Why do you cry almost every night? I've
heard you ever so often. You've got to tell me what's the matter."

She stiffened under the fierce loving rage in his tone and stayed rigid
for a moment. Through her drowsiness there was floating some idea that
the salvation of her soul depended on keeping stiff and silent, but
because she was still netted in the dream, and the beating of the tin
cans distracted her, she could not follow it and grasp it, and soon she
desired to tell him as much as she had always before feared it. In her
long reticence she felt like a suspended wave forbidden to break on the
shore by a magician's spell, and she lifted her hands imploringly to him
so that he bent down and kissed her. It was as if the heat of his lips
dissolved some seal upon her mouth, and she sobbed out: "It's when the
boy touches me with a stick that I can't bear it!"

"What boy did that?"

"I think it was Ned Turk. When I was stoned down Roothing High Street."

"Mother, mother. Tell me about that."

She wailed out everything, while the hand that held hers gradually
became wet with sweat. At the end of her telling she drew her hair
across her face and looked up at him through it. "Have I lost him?" she
wondered. "Harry did not like me so much after horrible things had
happened to me." Then as she looked at him her heart leaped at the sight
of his beauty and his young maleness, and she cried out to herself,
"Well, whether I have lost him or not, I have borne him!"

But she had him always, for presently he bent forward and laid his face
against her hand, and began to kiss it. Then he pulled himself up and
sat hunched as if the story he had heard were a foe that might leap at
him, and almost shouted in his queer voice, which was now breaking,
"Mother, I would like to kill them all! Oh, you poor little mother! I
love you so, I love you so...." He buried his face in the clothes for
one instant and seemed about to weep, and then, conscious of her tears,
slipped his arm behind her and raised her up, and covered her with
kisses, and muttered little loving, comforting things. She crooned with
relief, and until the sky began to lighten and she had to send him back
to bed, sobbed out all the misery she had so long kept to herself. He
did not want to go. That she liked also; and afterwards she slipped
softly into dreamless sleep.

Yet strangely, for surely it was right that a mother should be solaced
by her son? There shot through her mind just before she slept a pang of
guilt as if she had done some act as sensual as bruising ripe grapes
against her mouth. How can one know what to do in this life? Surely it
is so natural to escape out of hell that it cannot be unlawful; and by
calling "Richard! Richard!" she could now bring her worst and longest
dream to an end. Surely she had the right to make Richard love her; and
she knew that by the disclosure of her present and past agonies she was
binding his manhood to her as she had bound his boyhood and his
childhood. Yet after every time that she had called him to save her from
a bad dream she had this conviction of guilt. She could not understand
what it meant. It was partly born of her uneasy sense that in these
nights she was unwillingly giving Richard a false impression of her
destiny which laid the blame too heavily on poor Harry; because she
could not yet tell the boy of all Peacey's villainy, he was plainly
concluding that what had broken her was Harry's desertion. But it was a
profounder offence than this that she was in some way committing. She
did not know what it was, but it robbed her torment of any expiatory
quality that it might ever have had. For now, when she evoked the little
figure in a nightshirt beating the dark with its fists, she felt
nothing. There was not the smallest promise of pain in her heart. As
much as ever Roger was an orphan.

But worst of all it was to have had the opportunity to settle this
matter for once and for all and to expunge all evil, and to have missed
it. For Roger came back. Richard was seventeen, and had gone to sea. How
proud she had felt the other day when Ellen had asked why he had gone to
sea! He might do many things for his wife, but nothing comparable to
that irascible feat of forcing life's hand and leaping straight from
boyhood into manhood by leaving school and becoming a sailor at sixteen
so that he should be admirable to his mother. During the holidays, when
he formed the intention, she had watched him well from under her lids
and had guessed that his pride was disgusted at his adolescent
clumsiness and moodiness and that he wanted to hide himself from her
until he felt himself uncriticisable in his conduct of adult life. She
had had to alter that opinion to include another movement of his soul
when, as they travelled together to London the day he joined his ship,
he turned to her and said: "My father never saw any fighting, did he?"
She had met his eyes with wonder, and he had pressed the point rather
roughly. "He was in the army, wasn't he? But he didn't see any fighting,
did he?" She had stammered: "No, I don't think so." And he had turned
away with a little stiff-lipped smile of satisfaction. That had
distressed her, but she had a vague and selfish feeling that she would
imperil something if she argued the point. But whatever his motives for
going had been, she was glad that he went, for though she herself was
not interested in anything outside her relationships, she knew that
travel would afford him a thousand excitements that would evoke his
magnificence. The Spring day when he was expected to come home she had
found her joy impossible to support under the eyes of the servant and
the farm-men, for she had grown very sly about her fellow-men, and knew
that it was best to hide happiness lest someone jealous should put out
their hand to destroy it. So she had gone down to the orchard and sat in
the crook of a tree, looking out at an opal estuary where a frail
rainstorm spun like a top in the sunshine before the variable April
gusts. She wondered how his dear brown face would look now he had
outfaced danger and had been burned by strange suns. She had heard
suddenly the sound of steps coming down the path, and she had turned in
ecstasy; but there was nobody there but a pale young man who looked like
one of the East-End trippers who all through the summer months
persistently trespassed on the farm lands. As he saw her he stopped, and
she was about to order him to leave the orchard by the nearest gate when
he flapped his very large hands and cried out, "Mummie! Mummie!" There
was a whistling quality in the cry that instantly convinced her. She
drew herself taut and prepared to deal with him as a spirited woman
deals with a blackmailer, but as he ran towards her, piping exultantly,
"Now I'm sixteen I can say who I want to live with--the vicar says so,"
she remembered that he was her son, and suffered herself to be folded in
his arms, which embraced her closely but without suggestion of strength.

That day, at least, she had played her part according to her duty: she
had corrected so far as possible the sin of her inner being. It had not
been so very difficult, for Roger had shown himself just as
goldenhearted as he had been as a child. He would not speak of the years
of ill-treatment from which he had emerged, save to say tediously, over
and over again, with a revolting, grateful whine in his voice, how hard
Aunt Susan had worked to keep the peace when father had one of his bad
turns. It appeared that for the last two years he had been an apprentice
in a draper's shop at Exeter, and though there he had been underfed and
overworked and imprisoned from the light and air, all that he complained
of was that the "talk was bad." Tears came into his light eyes when he
said that, and she perceived that there was nothing in his soul save
sickly, deserving innocence, and of course this inexterminable love for
her. There would never be any end to that. All through the midday meal
he kept on putting down his fork with lumps of meat sticking on it and
would say whistlingly: "Ooh, mummie, d'you know, I used to think it must
be my imagination you had such a wonderful head of hair. I don't think
I've ever seen such another head of hair."

But he was so good, so good. He said to her in the afternoon as they
walked along the lanes to Roothing High Street, a scene the memory of
which he had apparently cherished sentimentally, "You know, mummie, when
I told Aunt Susan that I was going to run away and find you, she said
that I had better try my luck, but I mustn't be disappointed if you
didn't want me. But I knew you would, mummie...."

Her heart was wrung, not so much by his faith in her, which was indeed a
kind of idiocy, as by the sense that, if Susan thought he had better try
his luck with her, his life with his father must have been a hell, and
that he was not complaining of it. Flushing, she muttered, "I'm glad you
knew how I felt, dear," and all day she did not flinch. When it was past
eight, and Richard had not come, she cut for Roger the pastry that she
had baked for the other, and laughed across the table at him as they
ate; and when the door opened and the son she loved moved silently into
the room, looking sleepy and secret as he always did when he was greatly
excited, she stood up smiling, and loyally cried, "Look who's here,
Richard!" She thought as she said it how like she was to a wife who
defiantly faces her husband when one of her relations whom he does not
like has come to tea, and she tried to be amused by the resemblance. But
Richard's eyes moved to the stranger's gaping, welcoming face, hardened
with contempt, and returned to her face. He became very pale. It
evidently seemed to him the grossest indecency on her part to allow a
third person to be present at their meetings, and indeed she herself
felt faint, as she had used to do when she met Harry is front of other
people. But she pulled out of herself a clucking cry that might have
come from some happy mother without a history: "Richard! don't you see
it's Roger!"

Surely, after having been able to keep the secret of what she felt for
him through that torturing moment when she found Richard's displeasure,
she had the right to expect that all would go well. It was loathsome
having him in the house, and she and Richard were hardly ever alone. But
her bad dreams left her. This was life simple as the Christians said it
was, in which one might hug serenity by the conscientious performance of
a disagreeable duty. Yet there came a day, about three weeks after his
coming, when Roger sat glumly at the midday meal and did not talk, as he
had ordinarily done, about the chaps at Exeter, and how there was one
chap who could imitate birds' calls so that you couldn't hardly tell
the difference, and how another chap had an uncle who was a big grocer
and used to send him a box of crystallised fruit at Christmas; and
immediately the meal was finished he rose and left the room, instead of
waiting about and saying, "I s'pose you aren't going for a walk, are
you, mummie?" Relieved by his departure, she had leaned back in her
chair and smiled up at Richard, saying, "How brown you are still!" when
suddenly there had flashed across her a recollection of how Roger's
shoulders had looked as he went out of the room, and she started up to
run out and find him. He was in one of the outhouses, clumsily trying to
carpenter something that was to be a surprise to somebody. He did not
look up when she came in, though he said with a funny lift in his voice,
"Hello, mummy!" She stood over him, watching his work till she could not
bear to look at his warty hands any longer, and then asked: "Roger,
dear, is there anything the matter?" She spoke to him always without any
character in her phrases, like a mother in books. He mumbled, "Nothing,
mummie," but would not lift his head; and after a gulping minute
whimpered: "I want to go back to the shop." "Back to the shop, dear? But
I thought you hated it. Darling, what is the matter?" He remained
silent, so she took his face between her hands and looked into his eyes.
Perhaps that had not been a very wise thing to do.

Marion had dropped her hands and gone back to Richard, and said with
simulated fierceness: "You haven't done anything to Roger that would
make him think that we don't like having him here?" He glanced sharply
at her and recognised that their destiny was turning ugly in their
hands, and he answered: "Of course not. I wouldn't do anything to a chap
who's been through such a rotten time." She thought, with shame, that if
his face had become cruel at her question, and he had answered that he
thought it was time the other went, she would have bowed to his
decision, because he was her king, and she realised that it was no
wonder that Roger had found out. That moment of which she was so proud
because she had said heartily, "Richard, don't you see it's Roger?"
without showing by any wild yearning of the eye that she would have
given anything to be alone with him, had been instantly followed by a
betrayal. For when he had lifted his lips from her cheek and had turned
to greet Roger with courtesy that was at once kind and insincere, he had
left one hand resting on her shoulder as it had been when they embraced,
and his thumb stretched out to press on the pulse that beat at the base
of her throat. If she had been completely loyal she would have moved;
but she had stood quite still, letting him mark how she was not calm and
rejoicing at all, but shaken as by a storm with her disgust at this
loathsome presence. His hand had relaxed and he had passed it
caressingly up her neck. She had let herself sigh deeply; she might as
well have said, "I am so glad you understand I hate him." That was the
first of a thousand such betrayals. The words said between souls are not
heard by the eavesdropping ear, but the soul also can eavesdrop, and
tells in its time. That morning there must have come a moment to the
poor pale boy, as he worked at his silly present in the little shed,
when it was plain to him that the mother and the brother whom he had
thought so kind were vulpine with love of each other, vulpine with hate
of him.

There was no disputing his discovery, since it was true. The only thing
to do was to try to arrange some way of life for him in which he would
have a chance to become an independent person who could form new and
unspoiled relationships. It was, of course, out of the question to send
him back to the shop, but the problem of disposing of him was one that
raised innumerable difficulties which Marion was the less able to face
because her bad dreams had begun again. He had so little schooling that
it was impossible to send him in for any profession. He, himself, who
was touchingly grateful because they were not sending him back to the
shop, chose to be trained as a veterinary surgeon, and he was
apprenticed to old Mr. Taylor at Canewdon. But it turned out that though
he had a passionate love for animals he had no power over them. After he
had been chased round a field three times and severely bitten by a
stallion with whom he had sat up for two nights, Mr. Taylor pronounced
that it was hopeless and sent him home. They tried him as a chemist's
assistant next, and he did well for ten months, until there was that
awful trouble about the prescription. There had been nothing to do after
that save to put him to work as a clerk and give him an allowance that
with his wages would enable him to live in comfort and try to seem glad
when he came home for his holidays.

For he was still not quite sure. His suspicion that his mother did not
love him was so strong that, half because his sweetness of nature made
him not want to bother her if his presence really gave her pain, and
half because he could not bear to put the matter to a test, he would not
take a situation anywhere near Roothing. But he liked to come home for
his fortnight's holidays at Christmas, and sit by the hearth and look at
his wonderful mother and comfort himself by thinking that if they were
so kind he must have been wrong. Best of all, perhaps, he liked the Bank
Holidays, when he travelled half the day in a packed carriage to get
there and had only a few hours to spend with her; it was easier to keep
things going when he stayed such a short time, and there was less
misgiving on his face when he waved good-bye from the carriage window
than there was after any of his longer visits. But so far as she was
concerned, all his visits were in essence the same, in that at the end
of each of them she was left standing on the platform with her eyes
following the retreating train and a fear coiling tighter round her
heart. She had always known, of course, that this life for which she was
responsible, and by whose fate she would be judged, would blunder to
ruin, and as the years went on there came intimations, faint as
everything connected with Roger, but nevertheless convincing, which
confirmed her dread. He was always changing his situation and moving
from suburb to suburb, for he would never take a job in the city,
because the noise and crowds in the narrow streets frightened him.

From a bludgeoned look about him, which became more and more marked, she
was sure that he was being constantly dismissed for incompetence, but he
would never admit that. "I'm a funny chap, mummie," he would say
bravely, "I can't bear being shut up in the same place for long." And
she would nod understandingly and say, "Do as you like, dear, as long as
you're happy," because he wanted her to believe him. But she would be
sick with visions of this blanched, misbegotten thing standing smiling
and wriggling under the gibes of normal and brutal men throughout the
inexorably long workday, and then creeping to some mean room where it
would sit and snivel till the night fell across the small-paned window.
And through the sallow mist of her unavailing and repugnant pity there
flashed suddenly the lightning of certainty that some day the thing
would happen. But what thing? She would put her hand to her head, but
she was never able to remember.

And when he was twenty-two and living at Watford something did happen;
though it was not, she instantly recognised, the thing. She herself had
never been angered by it, although she hated telling Richard about it,
but had instantly perceived the pathos of the situation; her mind had
always done its duty by Roger. It told, of course, the most moving story
of loneliness and humiliation and hunger for respect and love that he
should have represented himself to the girl with whom he had been
walking out as a man of wealth and that after a rapturous afternoon at a
flower show he should have taken her to the best jeweller's in Watford
and given her a diamond brooch and earrings, for which, even with his
allowance, he could not possibly pay.

The visit to Watford she had to make to clear things up had seemed at
first the happiest event of all her relationship with Roger. It had been
unpleasant to find him grey with weeping and disgrace, but there had
been victory in forcing herself to comfort him with an exact imitation
of the note of love. It had been ridiculous to face the angry lady in
the case, who wore nodding poppies in her hat and had an immense
rectangular bust and hips like brackets, but it was pleasant to murmur,
"Oh, but he was speaking the truth. I'm quite comfortably off. I've come
to pay the jeweller," and watch the look of amazement on the hot,
high-coloured face giving place to anger and regret as it penetrated
into her that she had really had the chance of marrying a wealthy man,
and that after the things she had said that chance would be hers no
longer. Marion liked hurting the girl because she had hurt Roger. Marion
felt with satisfaction that the pleasure was a feeling a mother ought to
feel.

She liked, too, going into the jeweller's shop and sitting there under
the goggling eyes of the tradesman and speaking in the right leisurely
voice that she had learned from her lover: "Yes, but I don't want you to
take them back. I want to pay for them. There seems to have been some
misunderstanding. There is no difficulty about the money at all. My son
only wanted you to wait till his quarter's allowance came. I have the
money here in notes. If you would count it...." She was playing a
mother's part well; and she rejoiced because the jeweller's eyes were
examining with approval and conviction her beautiful clothes. For she
had begun lately to take great pains over her dressing, partly because
it was pleasant for her who was so smirched with criticism both from
within and without to be above reproach in any matter, but mostly
because she liked to look well in Richard's eyes; that this had served
Roger's end seemed to lift from her a part of her guilt. She hurried
back to give Roger the receipt, and took him in her arms and rocked him
as he sobbed out his ridiculous story: "Oh, mummie, I never would have
done it if I hadn't gone mad. You see, mummie, Queenie's such a glorious
woman...."

But the soul has the keenest ears of any eavesdropper. He sat up
suddenly and lifted her arms off his shoulders and looked at her with
pale, desperate eyes. She clapped her hand across her face and then took
it away again, and said softly: "What is it, dear?" But he had sunk into
a stupor, and had dropped his protruding gaze on the pattern of the
oilcloth on the floor, which he was tracing with the toe of his boot.
She could get nothing out of him. He obviously did not want her to stay
two or three days with him, as she had proposed to do, but, on the other
hand, he said over and over again as they waited on the platform for her
train, "Mummie, I do love you, mummie. I do love you. And thank you,
mummie...." But she knew that these alterations and inconsistencies of
his mood did not matter to their lives any more than the pitch and roll
of a steamer travelling through rough weather affects its course. For
since that moment when he had stared into her eyes and seen she did not
love him she had known that somewhere, far off, beyond time and space,
there had been set a light to the fuse of that event which she had
always feared ... the event that would destroy them all....

But had it? For after all, nothing dreadful had happened. Roger had
written to her the next day telling her that he would not take his
allowance any more because he did not think he deserved it, and he must
try and be a man and shift for himself, and saying that he was taking a
situation in another town which he did not name. That was the last they
heard of him for a long time, for he came no more to Roothing for his
holidays. Presently, with an exultant sense of release, but with an
increasing liability to bad dreams, she went abroad to join Richard, at
first at the post he held at the Romanones Mines in Andalusia, and then
in Rio de Janeiro. There she was happy. She was one of those Northerners
to whom the South belongs far more truly than it does to any of its
natives. For over those the sun has had power since their birth,
consuming their marrows and evaporating their blood so that they became
pithless things that have to fly indoors for half the day and leave the
Southern sun blazing insolently on the receptive Southern earth. But
with blood cooled and nerves stabilised by youth spent on the edge of
the grey sea, she could outface all foreign seasons. She could walk
across the silent plaza when its dust lay dazzling white under the
heat-pale sky and the city slept; the days of heavy rain and potent
pervasive dampness pleased her by their prodigiousness; and when the
thunderstorm planted vast momentary trees of lightning in the night she
was pleased, as if she was watching someone do easily what she had
always impotently desired to do.

And Richard was so wonderful to watch in this new setting that matched
his beauty, easily establishing his dominion over the world as he had
established it over her being from the moment of his conception. There
was a conflict raging in him which, since it never resulted in
hesitancy, but in simultaneous snatchings at life by both of the warring
forces, gave him the appearance of the calmest exultation. He loved
riding and dancing and gambling so much that his face was cruel when he
did those things, as if he would kill anybody who tried to interrupt him
in his pleasure. But he gave the core of his passion to his work and
disciplined all his days to the routine of the laboratory, so that he
was always cool and remote like a priest. It gave him pleasure to be
insolent as rich men are, but all his insolence was in the interests of
fineness and humility. He was ambitious, so fastidious about the quality
of his work that he rejected half the world's offers to him. And always
he turned aside from his victories and smiled secretively at her, as if
they were two exiles who had returned under false names to the country
that had banished them and were earning great honours. She wished this
life could go on for ever.

But one day Richard came to her as she sat in the dense sweetness of the
flowering orange grove and tossed a letter into her lap. She did not
open it for a little, but lay and looked at Richard through her lashes.
His swarthiness was burned by the sun, and his body was slim like an
Indian's in his white suit, and his lips and his eyes were deceitful and
satisfied, as they always were when he had been with Mariquita de Rojas.
That did not arouse any moral feeling in her, because she did not think
of Richard's actions as being good or bad, but only as being different
in colour and lustre, like the various kinds of jewels; there are
pearls, and there are emeralds. But it made her feel lonely, and she
turned soberly to opening her letter. It was from Roger. He was in
trouble; he had been out of a job for some months; his savings were
gone, and the woman was bothering for her rent; he asked for help. At
first she did not think that she would tell Richard, but recognising
that that was a subtle form of disloyalty to Roger, she said evenly:
"Richard, how can I cable money to Roger? He wants it quickly. And,
Richard, I think I should go home and look after him." Richard had set
his eyes on the far heat-throbbing seas and, after a moment's quivering
silence, had broken into curses. "Oh, don't speak of poor Roger like
that!" she had cried out, and he had answered terribly: "I'm not
speaking of him; I'm speaking of my father, who let you in for all
this." She had muttered protestingly, but because of the hatred in his
face she was not brave enough to tell him that she had made her peace
with his father before he died. Not even for Harry's sake would she
imperil the love between her and her son.

She had gone home a few months later, but, of course, it had been
useless. Roger would never come back to live with her. All she could do
was to sit at Yaverland's End, ready to receive him when he turned up,
as he always did when he had got a new post, to boast of how well he was
going to do in the future. Usually on these occasions he brought her a
present, something queer that wrung the heart because it revealed the
humility of his conception of the desirable; perhaps a glass jar of
preserved fruit salad which had evidently impressed him as looking
magnificent when he saw it in the grocer's shop. She would kiss him
gratefully for it, though every time he came back he was more like the
grey and hopeless men, cousins to the rats, who hang round cab-ranks in
cities.

A regular routine followed these visits. First he wrote happy letters
home every Sunday; then he ceased to write so often; then there was
silence; and then he wrote asking for help, because he had lost his job
and owed money to the landlady. Then she would seek him out, wherever he
was, and pay the landlady, who was usually well enough disposed towards
Roger unless he had tried to win her affections by being handy about the
house, in which case there were extra charges for the plumber and an
irremovable feeling of exasperation. And she would ask him to come home
with her, and not bother about working, but just be a companion to her.
At that, however, he always slowly shook his small, mouse-coloured head.
For he was still not quite sure ... and he feared that he might become
so if he went back and lived with her. As things were, he could
interpret her prompt answer to his call as a sign of affection.
Moreover, he had his poor little pride, which was not a negligible
quality; he never would have sent to her for money if he had not felt so
sorry for his landladies. To admit that he could not earn a bare living
when his brother was making himself one of the lords of the earth would
have broken his spirit.

Knowing these things, she could not beg him over-much to come to her,
but that left dreadfully little to say in the hours they had to spend
together on these occasions. There fell increasingly moments of silence
when, unreminded by his piteousness and her obligations by the good
little pipe of her voice, she was aware of nothing but his
unpleasantness. For he was becoming more and more physically horrible.
As was natural when he lived in these mean lodgings, he was beginning
to look, if not actually dirty, at least unwashed; and there was
something else about his appearance, something tarnished and
disgraceful, which she could not understand till the landlady at
Leicester said to her: "I do think it's such a pity that a nice young
man like Mr. Peacey sometimes don't take more care of himself like he
ought to." Drunkenness seemed to her worse than anything in the world,
because it meant the surrender of dignity; she would rather have had her
son a murderer than a drunkard. She had wondered if the truth need ever
reach Richard, and there had floated before her mind's eye a newspaper
paragraph: "Roger Peacey, described as a clerk, fined forty shillings
for being drunk and disorderly and obstructing the police in the course
of their duty...." She had asked quickly, "What is he like? Does he get
violent?" The woman had answered: "Oh no, mum; just silly-like," and had
laughed, evidently at the recollection of some ridiculous scene.

Oh God, oh God! When she struggled out of her bad dreams she awoke to
something that, having had this confirmation, was now no longer fear,
but a shudder under the breath of a stooping, searching evil. She had
always known that the existence of Richard and herself and Roger was
conditional upon their maintenance of a flawless behaviour. There was
somewhere in the dark conspiring ether that wraps the world an intention
to destroy her for her presumption in being Richard's mother and him for
daring to be Richard--an intention that was vindictive against beauty
and yet was fettered by a harsh quality resembling justice. It could not
strike until they themselves became tainted with unworthiness and fit
for destruction. Now they had become tainted. She knew that Roger's
drunkenness would be obscenely without dignity; she knew that she would
side with her triumphant son and against her son who needed her pity.
They would all be unworthy and they would all be destroyed. Nothingness
would swallow up her Richard. To free herself from her fear she leaped
out of bed and ran to the window, and stared on the white creeks that
lay under the moonlight among the dark marsh islands with a brightness
that seemed like ecstasy, as if they were receiving pleasure from it.
Her thoughts ran along the hillside to the man who lay high above and
excluded from this glittering world in his marble tomb. "Oh, Harry," she
cried, "I'm not blaming you, but if you'd stuck to me it would have been
so different...."

If he had been loyal to her she would have awakened now in a great
house, with many rooms in which, breathing deeply and evenly, there
slept beautiful people who had begun their being in her womb. Harry
would not have died if he had been with her. The procreative genius of
her body would have kept him in life to give her more. Her last-born
child would still have been quite young. It was to him she would have
gone now; if she had wakened she would have found him in the end room, a
boy fair as his father, and having the same look of integrity in joy, of
immunity from sorrow or profound thinking. She would have watched his
face, infantile and pugnacious with dreams of the day's game, until she
longed too strongly to touch him and kiss him. Then she would have
turned and went back along the corridor, between the glorious young men
and women who lay restoring their might for the morrow, not one of them
threatened, not one of them doomed....

Love could have made that of her life if it had not been beaten away.
The thought was bitter. She stared with thin lips at the happy gleaming
tides until it struck her suddenly that love had come back into her
house. It was here now, attending on the red-haired girl, and it would
not be beaten off; it would be cherished, it would be given sacrifices.
Surely if it could have made beautiful her own life, which without it
had been so hideous, it could exorcise Richard's destiny. She fixed her
eyes on the high moon and said as if in prayer, "Ellen.... Ellen...."

There sounded, in the recesses of the house, the ping of an electric
bell.

She looked at the clock by her bedside. It was three o'clock. She said
to herself, with that air of irony which people to whom many strange
things have happened assume when they fear that yet another is
approaching, so that they shall not flatter Fate by their perturbation,
"It's late for anyone to call."

But the ping sounded again; and then the thud of blows upon the door.

She cried out, "Ah, yes!" She knew who it was. It was Roger, come in
rags, come in an idiot hope of escaping justice, after some fatuous and
squalid crime, to destroy Richard and herself. She hurried over to her
wardrobe and drew out her warm dressing-gown and thrust her feet into
slippers, while her lips practised saying lovingly, "Roger, Roger,
Roger! ... Why, it's you, Roger!... Come in. Come in, my boy.... What is
it, my poor lad?..."

She went down through the quiet house and laid her fingers on the handle
of the door; delayed for a moment, and raised her hand to her face and
smoothed from it certain lines of loathing. Bowing her head, she
murmured a remonstrance to some power.

But when she opened the door it was Richard who stood there.


CHAPTER VII


He could not at once discern in the darkness who it was that opened the
door, and he remained an aloof black shape against the moon-glare,
lifting his cap and saying, "I am sorry to knock you up at this hour,"
so for a minute Marion had the amusing joy of seeing him as he appeared
to other people, remote and vigilant and courteous and really more
hidalgoesque than the occasion demanded. She laughed teasingly. The hard
line of him softened, and he said, "Mother," and stepped over the
threshold and folded her in his arms, and kissed her on the lips and
hair. She rested quietly within his groping, pressing love. This indoor
darkness where they stood was striped with many lines of moonlight
coming through cracks in doors and the margins of blinds, so that it
seemed to have no more substance than a paper lanthorn, and outside the
white boles and branches of the lit leafless trees were as luminous
stencillings on the night. There was nothing solid in the world but
their two bodies, nothing real but their two lives.

She did not ask him why he had come at this hour. There was indeed
nothing so very unusual in it, for more than once when he was a sailor
she had been wakened by the patter of pebbles on her window and had
looked down through the darkness on the whitish oval of his face, marked
like a mask with his eagerness to see her; and later, in southern
countries, he had often walked quietly into the dark, cool room where
she lay having her siesta, though she had thought him a hundred miles
away, and it had seemed as if nothing could move in the weighty heat
outside save the writhing sea. It had always seemed appropriate to their
relationship that he should come to her thus, suddenly and without
warning and against the common custom. Thus had he come to be born.

She pushed him away from her. "Have you put your motor-cycle in the
shed?" she asked indifferently.

"No. It's outside the gate."

"Put it in. There may be frost by the morning."

He turned away to do it. To him it was always heaven, like the peace of
dreamless sleep, to hand over to her the heavy sword of his will.

She watched him go out into the white ecstatic glare and pass behind the
illuminated twiggy bareness of the hedge, which looked like the
phosphorescent spine of some monstrous stranded fish. This was a strange
night, crude as if some coarse but powerful human intelligence were
co-operating with nature. She had a fancy that if she strained her ears
she might hear the whirr of the great dynamo that served this huge
electric moon. But however the night might be, this strange, dangerous
son of hers was a match for it. She looked gloatingly after him as he
passed out of her sight, and then turned and went into the kitchen. It
was easy to prepare him a meal, for there was a gas-stove and the stores
lay at her hand, each in its own place, since in her five minutes' visit
to the cook every morning she imposed the same nervous neatness here and
kept the rest of the house rectangular and black and white.

She heard the closing of the front door and his steps coming in search
of her. She liked to think of him finding his way to her by the rays of
light warmer than moonlight through half-open doors. If it had been
anyone else in the world that was coming towards her she would have
gathered up her thick plaits and pinned them about her head. But from
him she need not hide the signs, which made all other people hate her,
that she had been beautiful and had been destroyed.

When he came in she said, "Light the other gas-jets. Yes, both of them."

Now there was a lot of light. She could see the bird's-wing brilliance
of his hair, the faint bluish bloom about his lips, that showed he had
not shaved since morning, the radiance of his eyes and the flush on his
cheeks that had come of his enjoyed ride through the cold moony air. The
queer things men were, with their useless, inordinate, disgusting yet
somehow magnificent growth of hair on their faces, and their capacity
for excitements that have nothing to do with emotion....

He came and stood beside her and slipped his arm round her waist and
murmured, "Well, Marion?" and laughed. Always he had loved calling her
that, ever since as a little boy he had found her full name written in
an old book and had run to her, crying, "Is that really your lovely
name?" Even more than by the name itself had he been pleased by the way
it was written, squintwise across the page and in a round hand, exactly
as he himself was then writing his own name in his first school books.
It made him see his mother as a little girl, and helped him to dream his
favourite dream that he and she were just the same age and could go to
school and play games together. It still gave him an inexplicable glow
of pleasure, the memory of that brownish signature staggering across the
flyleaf of "Jessica's First Prayer."

She perceived that he was violently excited at coming back to her, but
she took the toast from under the grill, buttered it, set it on the warm
plate, and poured the eggs on it with an ironical air of absorption.
These two went very carefully and mocked each other perpetually so that
the gods should not overhear and be jealous. "Now, eat it while it's
hot!" she said, holding out the plate.

He put it down on the kitchen table and gathered her into his arms.

"Well, mother?" he murmured, looking down at her, worshipping her.

"Oh, my boy," she whispered, "you've lost your brown, up there in
Scotland."

"Oh, I'm all right. But you?"

"As well as well can be."

"But, mother dear, you look as if you'd been having those bad dreams."

"No, I've had none, none at all."

"That means not too many. Does it?"

They kissed, and he said tenderly yet harshly: "Roger hasn't been
bothering you?"

"Ah, the poor thing, don't speak of him like that," she said. "No, but
I've not heard from him for six weeks. Not even at Christmas. I'm a
little anxious. But it may be all right. You remember last Christmas
there was a time when he didn't write. I expect it'll be all right." But
with her eyes she abandoned herself to fear, so that he should soothe
her and stroke her hands with his, which were trembling in spite of
their strength because he was so glad to see her.

"Mother, darling, I have hated leaving you alone. But it was necessary.
I've done good work this winter." He made with one hand a stiff and
sweeping movement that expressed his peculiar kind of arrogance, which
stated that his was the victory, now and for ever, and yet took
therefrom no pride for himself. "I've pulled it off," he said jeeringly,
and smiled at her derisively but with tight lips, as if they must take
this thing lightly or some danger would spring. "Where I get my brains
from I don't know," he muttered teasingly, and put out his hand and
traced the interweaving strands in one of her plaits. "What hair you've
got!" he said. "I've never seen a woman with ..." He started violently
and was silent.

She cried out, "What is it?" But he answered, speaking clippedly, "Oh,
nothing, nothing...."

So evidently was he overcoming a moment of utter confusion that she
turned away and busied herself with the coffee.

Behind her his voice spoke falsely, uplifted in a feint of the surprised
recollection which at its first coming had struck him dumb the previous
moment. "And Ellen! I'm a nice sort of lover to be five minutes in the
house without asking for my Ellen! How is she? How have you been getting
on together?"

"Oh, your dear Ellen!" she cried fervently. But her heart went cold
within her. He was right. It was against nature that he should have
forgotten the woman he loved when he came under the roof where she was
sleeping her beautiful sleep. Could it be that Ellen was not the woman
he loved and that his engagement to her was some new joke on the part of
destiny? She whirled round to have a look at him, exclaiming to make
time, "Oh, she is the most wonderful creature who ever lived." But he
had forgotten his embarrassment now, and was standing with bent head,
thinking intently, and on his face there was the dazzled and vulnerable
look of a man who is truly in love. Well, if that were so, why could it
not be pure and easy joy for them both, as it was for other sons and
mothers when there were happy marriage afoot? Why must their life, even
in such parts of it as escaped the shadow of Peacey or Roger, be so
queer in climate? This time it was Richard's fault. She had been
willing to be lightly, facilely happy over it like other people. Her
spirit snarled at him, and she cried out impatiently, "Go and eat your
eggs before they're cold." As Richard took his seat, moving slowly and
trancedly, and began to eat his food with half indifference because of
his dreams, she took the chair at the other end of the table, and,
cupping her chin in her hands, stared at him petulantly.

"Why didn't you tell me in your letters how beautiful she was?" she
demanded.

He answered mildly, "Didn't I?"

"No, you didn't," she told him curtly. "You said you thought her pretty.
Thought her pretty, indeed, with that hair and that wonderful Scotch
little face!..."

She caught her breath in irritation at the expression on his face, the
uneasy movement from side to side of his eyes which warred with the
smile on his lips. Why, when he thought of his love, need he have an air
as if he listened to two voices and was distressed by the effort to
follow their diverse musics? But she could not quarrel with him for
long, for he was wearing the drenched and glittering look which was
given him by triumph or hard physical exercise and which always overcame
her heart like the advance of an army. His flesh and hair seemed to
reflect the light as if they were wet, but neither with sweat nor with
water. Rather was it as if he were newly risen from a brave dive into
some pool of vitality whose whereabouts were the secret that made his
mouth vigilant. Even he had the dazed, victorious look of a risen diver.
Utterly melted, she cried out, "I am so glad you have come home."

He started, and came smiling out of his dream. "I am so glad to be
here," he said. They laughed across the table; the strong light showed
them the dear lines they knew on one another's faces. "That's why," he
cried brilliantly, "I've come at this ungodly hour. I had to be here. I
got into London at nine o'clock and I went and had some dinner at the
Station Hotel. But I felt wretched. Mother, I'm getting," he announced
with a naïve triumph, "awfully domestic. I got the hump the minute Ellen
left Edinburgh. I felt I must come down to you at once, so I went and
got the cycle and started off straight away, and I would have been here
by midnight if I hadn't had a smash at Upminster. No, I wasn't hurt. Not
a scrap. It was at the beginning of that garden suburb. God, it must be
beastly living in those new houses; like beginning to colour a pipe. I'm
glad we live in this old place. Well, a chap who'd bought some timber at
an auction down in Surrey, and was taking it home to Laindon, dropped a
log off his lorry, and I smashed into it and burst a tyre and broke half
a dozen spokes in my front wheel, so I had to hunt round till I found a
garage, and when I did I had to spend hours tinkering the machine up.
The man who owned the place came down in his pyjamas and a dressing-gown
and sat talking about his wife. She hadn't wanted to let him come down
because it was so late. 'Is that a woman who'll help a man in his
business, I ask you?' he kept on saying. Mustn't it be queer to have
womenfolk with whom one doesn't feel identical?" They exchanged a
boastful look of happiness, the intensity of which, however, seemed the
last effort he found possible. For his lids drooped, and he supported
his head on his hand and took a deep drink, and said drowsily, "I'm glad
to be here."

She went and stood beside him and stroked his hair. "I should have come
to you at Aberfay," she grieved. "But I knew I couldn't stand the
winter, and I would only have been a nuisance to you if I had been ill
all the time. Did the woman feed you properly, dear?"

He said, without looking up, "I wouldn't have let you come. It was a
God-forsaken hole. I couldn't have stood it if it hadn't been for"--he
gave it out with an odd hesitancy, almost as if he were boyishly
shy--"Ellen. And I had to stand it, so that I could pull this thing
off."

She asked, "What thing, my dear?" though she was not so very greatly
interested. By daylight her ambition for him was fanatic and without
limit. But in this stolen hour, when no one knew that they were
together, she let herself feel something like levity about his doings.
It seemed enough, considering how glorious he was, that he should merely
be.

He began to eat again and told the story tersely between mouthfuls. "You
know the reason that I stayed up in Edinburgh after I'd sent off Ellen
was that I thought I had to show the directors what I'd been doing at
Aberfay next Thursday. They were to come on to me after they'd paid
their visit to the Clyde works. Well, they came yesterday instead. Sir
Vincent has to go to America sooner than he expected, so he wanted to
get it over. When they saw what I'd been trying for during the last six
months they got excited. As a matter of fact it is pretty good. I wish I
could tell you about it, but you know I can't. Also I had told McDermott
that Dynevors, the Birmingham people, had heard my contract was up in
March, and wanted to buy me. So they got frightened, and offered me a
new contract that they thought would keep me." He had finished his meal,
and he pushed away his plate and stretched himself, looking up at her
and smiling sleepily.

"Have you taken it?"

"Rather. It couldn't have been better."

"What is it?"

"They've doubled my screw and given me an interest in the business."

"How?"

He shook his head, yawning. "A permanent agreement ...percentages ...I'm
too woolly-headed to tell you now."

"But what does it mean? You don't care about money or position as a
rule. You've always told me that your work was enough for you. Why are
you so pleased?" Though the moment before she had thought she cared
nothing for the ways that his soul travelled, she was in an agony lest
he had been changed by the love of woman and had become buyable.

He read her perfectly, and pulled himself out of his drowsiness to
reassure her. "No, I'm not being glad because I'm pleasing them; I'm
glad because now I can make them please me. It's what I've always been
working for, and it's come two years before I expected it. I've got my
footing in the biggest armament firm in England. I'm the youngest
director. I've got"--again he made that stiff, sweeping gesture of
arrogance that was not vanity--"the best brain of them all. In ten years
I shall be someone in the firm. In twenty years I shall be nearly
everybody. And think of what sport industry's going to be during the
next half-century while this business of capital and labour is being
fought out, particularly to a man like me, who's got no axe to grind,
who's outside all interests, who, thanks to you, doesn't belong to any
class. And you see I needn't be afraid of losing my power to work if I
meddle in affairs. I'm definitely, finally, unalterably a scientific
man. I've got that for good. That's thanks to you too."

"How could your stupid old mother do that?" she murmured protestingly.

"You're not stupid," he said, and bending down he kissed her head where
it lay on his shoulder. "Whatever good there is in me I've got from you.
You gave me my brain. And I'm able to do scientific work because of the
example you've been to me, though I'm rottenly unfit for it myself.
Mother, look at my hands. Do you see how they're shaking? They're steady
enough when I'm doing anything, but often when there's nothing to be
done they shake and shake. My mind's like that. When there's someone to
impress or govern I'm all right. But when I'm alone it shakes--there's a
kind of doubt. And there's such a lot of loneliness in scientific work,
when even science isn't there. Then that comes.... Doubt. Not of what
one's doing, but of what one is; or where one is. I never would have
kept on with it if it hadn't been for your example. I couldn't have
pushed on. I would have gone off and done adventurous things.

"Do you remember that French chap who wanted me to go with him into
British Guiana? I'd have liked that. There's nothing stops one thinking
so well as being a blooming hero; and it's such fun. And why should one
go on doing this lonely work that's so hellishly hard? Of course it's
important. Mother, Science is the most wonderful thing in the world.
It's a funny thing that if you think and talk about the spirit you only
look into the mind of man, but if you cut out the spirit and study
matter you look straight into the mind of God. But what good is that
when you know that at the end you're going to die and rot and there's
not the slightest guarantee which would satisfy anybody but a born fool
that God had any need of us afterwards? You can't even console yourself
with the thought that it's for the good of the race, because that will
die and rot too when the earth grows cold. One has to stake everything
on the flat improbability that service of the truth is a good in itself,
such a good that it's worth while sacrificing one's life to it.

"That's where you've been such a help to me. You had no justification
for supposing that life was worth living. You'd every reason to suppose
that the whole business was foul, and the only sensible thing to do was
to get all the fun one could out of it. If you had determined to be as
little a mother to me as you could I would have understood it,
considering of what I must have reminded you. You'd money, you were
beautiful, you've always been able to attract people. You might so
easily have gone away from here and made a life of your own and just
kept me in the corner of your eye, as lots of unhappily married women
that one meets keep their children. Instead you shut yourself up here
and gave yourself utterly to looking after me. I sometimes feel that the
reason I've grown up taller and less liable to illness than other men is
that you loved me so much when I was a child. You seemed to pour your
life into me. And you didn't just take pleasure in me. You trained me,
and I must have been a nasty little brute to train. Do you remember
licking me because I went to that circus? You took it out of yourself
teaching me to be straight and decent. If you'd been an ordinary married
woman who believed that you'd go to hell if you didn't do your duty by
your children, and who knew she'd get public respect and the devotion of
her husband as a reward for doing it, the way you did it would have been
magnificent. But to do it like that when you knew that there was no such
thing as justice in heaven or earth--I tell you, mother, it's kept me
going to think of the sacrifice you made for me--"

"Oh no," she cried. "It wasn't a sacrifice at all, my dear, to be with
you."

"It must have been," he said harshly, as if he were piling up a case
against a malefactor, "for you of all women." He drew her alongside of
him and stared up at her. "Weren't there bad times, when you hated being
cheated of your youth? When you longed for a husband--for some man to
adore you and look after you? When you felt bitter because it had all
been over so soon?" She averted her face, but his arm gripped her waist
more closely, and he asked pleadingly, "Mother, let me know everything
about you. I'll be married soon. There'll be no more talking like this
while the moon goes down after that. Let me know everything you've done
for me, everything you've given me. Why shouldn't I know how wonderful
you are? Tell me, weren't there bad times?"

Slowly and reluctantly she turned towards him a face that, wavering with
grief, looked strangely childish between her two greying plaits. "I
never went to a dance," she said unsteadily. "Isn't it silly of me I
mind that?... Till a few years ago I couldn't bear to hear dance
music...."

"Oh, you poor darling!--and you would have danced so beautifully!" he
cried in agony, and drew her into his arms. She tried to beat herself
free and twisted her mouth away from his consoling kisses, so that she
might sob, "But it wasn't a sacrifice, it wasn't a sacrifice! Those were
only moods. I never really wanted anything except to be with you!" But
her bliss in him had been too tightly strung by his sudden coming and by
his open speech of that concerning which they spoke as seldom as the
passionately religious speak of God, so for a little time she had to
weep. But presently she stretched out her hand and pressed back his
seeking mouth.

"Hush!" she said with a grave wildness. "We must not talk like this."

He lifted his face, which was convulsed with love and pain, and found
her stern as a priestess who defends her mystery from violation. Meekly
he let his arms fall from her body and turned away, resting his head on
his hand and staring at a blank wall.

She saw that she had hurt him. She drew close to him again, and murmured
lovingly, though still with defensive majesty: "Why should we talk of
it, my boy? It's all over now, and you're a made man. This contract
really does mean that, doesn't it?"

He answered, patting her hand to show that he submitted to her in
everything, "Oh, in the end it means illimitable power."

To give him pleasure she exchanged with him a brilliant and triumphant
glance, though at this moment she felt that her love for him concerned
itself less with ambition than she had ever supposed. Incredulously she
whispered to her harsh, sceptical mind that it almost seemed as if its
sphere were not among temporal things. But it gave her a real rapture to
perceive in his eyes the elder brother of the expression that had always
dwelt there in his childish days when he announced to her his
cricket-scores and his prizes; even so, she had thought then, the
adjutant of a banished leader might hand him down arrows to shoot on the
city that had exiled him. And indeed the success of their conspiracy had
been marvellous. In old times they had looked out of this house under
lowered and defiant brows, knowing there was none without who knew of
them who did not despise them. But now they could smile tenderly and
derisively out into this hushed moonlight that received the uncountable
and fatuously peaceful breaths of the sleepers who had been their
enemies and were to be their slaves. It was strange that at this of all
instants she should for the space of a heartbeat lose her sense of the
uniqueness of her fate and be confounded by amazement at the common lot
in which they two and the vanquished sleepers alike partook. Was it
possible that this could be? That this plethora of beings that coated
the careless turning earth like grains of dust on a sleeping top were
born--mysterious act!--and mated--act so much more mysterious than it
seemed!--and died--act which was the essence of mystery! She was dizzied
with astonishment, and to steady herself put out her hands and caught
hold of those broad shoulders, which, her marvelling mind recalled to
her, she had miraculously been able to make out of her so much less
broad body. She felt guilty as she recovered, for the habit of thinking
about subjects unconnected with her family had always seemed to her as
unwomanly as a thin voice or a flat chest. Penitently she dropped a kiss
on his forehead and muttered, "Richard, you're a good son. You've made
up for everything I've been through many times over...."

"Then stay up with me a little," he said. "Don't let's go to bed yet."
He stretched out his arm and moved a wicker armchair that stood on the
hearth till it faced the grate. "Sit down, dear, and I'll make you a
fire. Dear, do sit down. This is the last night we shall have
together." She obeyed, for he spoke with the sullenness which she knew
to be in him a mask of intense desire. He busied himself with the fire
and coal that the servants had left ready for the morning, and when he
had made a blaze he squatted down on the rug and rested his head on her
lap and seemed to sleep.

But he did not. Against the fine silk of her kimono she felt the sweep
of his eyelashes. "Why is he doing this?" she wondered; and discovered
happily, "Ah, he is going to tell me about Ellen." She waited serenely,
while the clock ticked.

Presently he spoke, but did not lift his head. "Mother, I like being
here...."

She was not perturbed because he then fell silent. It was natural enough
that he should be shy of speaking of his other love.

But he continued: "Mother, do you know why I would always have stuck to
my people, no matter how they'd treated me? I wonder if you'll think I'm
mad? I'd have stuck to them in any case--because they've got the works
on Kerith Island, and I've always wanted to work there. Think of it! I
shall be able to sleep here at night and go out in the morning to a
place I've seen all my life out of these windows. And all day long I'll
be able to put my head out of my lab. door and look along the hill to
our tree-tops. Mother, I do love this house," he said earnestly, raising
his head and looking round the kitchen as if even it were dear to him,
though he could not have been in it more than once or twice before.
"It's a queer thing, but though you've altered this completely from what
it was when I was a boy, it still seems the oldest and most familiar
thing in the world. And though it's really rather exposed as houses go,
hanging up here over the marshes, I feel when I come back to it as if I
were creeping down into some hiding-place, into some warm, closed place
where nothing horrible could ever find me. Do you feel like that,
mother?"

She nodded. "I might hate this house, considering all that's happened
here. But I, too ..." She spoke in the slightly disagreeable tone that a
reticent nature assumes when it is obliged to confess to strong feeling.
"Yes, I love it."

They looked solemnly into the crepitant blaze of the new fire. He
grasped her hand; but suddenly released it and asked querulously, as if
he had remembered certain tedious obligations: "And Ellen, does she like
the house?"

She was appalled, "Yes, yes! I think so," she stammered.

"Good," he said curtly, and buried his head in her lap again.

For as long as possible she endured her dismay; then, bending forward
and trying to twist his face round so that she could read it, she asked
unsteadily, "Richard, you do love Ellen, don't you?"

He sat up and met her eyes. "Of course I do. Have you been thirty-six
hours with her without seeing that I must? She--she's a lamp with a
double burner. There's her beauty, and her dear, funny, young little
soul. It's good to have someone that one can worship and befriend at the
same time. Yes, we're going to be quite happy." His eyes slid away from
hers evasively, then hardened and resolved to be honest, and returned
again. "Mother, I tell you this is the end." After that his honesty
faltered. He chose to take it that his mother was looking so fixedly at
him because she had not understood the meaning of his words, so he
repeated soberly, "I tell you, this is the end. The end of love making
for me. I shall never love any other woman but Ellen as long as I live."
And he turned to the fire, the set of his shoulders confessing what his
lips would not--that though he loved Ellen, though he wanted Ellen,
there was something imperfect in the condition of his love which made
him leaden and uneager.

"That's right, that's right; you must be good to her," Marion murmured,
and stroked his hair. "I don't think you could have done better than
your Ellen if you'd searched the whole world," she said timidly, trying
to give him a cue for praise of his love. "It's such astonishing luck to
find a girl whose sense will be as much solid good to you as a fortune
in the bank and who looks as pretty as a rose-tree at the same time."

He made no response. The words were strangled in her throat, and she
fell to tapping her foot rhythmically against the fender. Her eyes were
moist; this was so different from the talk she had expected.

Presently his shoulders twitched. "Don't do that, mother dear," he said
impatiently.

"I'm sorry, darling," she answered wearily. She threw herself back in
her chair and clenched her fists. Desperation fevered her, and she began
to speak vindictively. "Of course it was a great relief to me when I saw
the kind of girl Ellen is, considering how up till now you've sidled
past women of any sort of character as if you'd heard that men got sent
to prison for loving any but fools."

He laughed uneasily.

"Yes," she went on; "you always seemed to be looking carefully for
anything you could find that was as insipid as a water-melon. You can't,
you know, possibly count your love-affairs as amongst your successes."
She jerked her head back, her lips retracted in a kind of grin.
"Mariquita de Rojas!" she jeered.

He started, though not much. "I never knew you knew about that," he said
mildly.

"Of course I did." She quivered with exaggerated humiliation. "To see my
son spending himself on something so nearly nothing. And then the way
you moped and raged at her when she threw you over. Seeing the poor
woman was a fool, how else could you expect her to behave but like a
fool? It was undignified of you to put the burden of being the woman you
loved on a poor thing like her--like overworking a servant girl." She
perceived that she was hot and shaking, and that she was within an ace
of betraying the secret that there sometimes rose in her heart a thirst
to beat and hurt every woman that he had ever loved. Words would pour
out that would expose her disgusting desire to strike and scratch if she
did not substitute others. So she found herself crying in a voice that
was thinner than hers: "And a married woman! To see you doing wrong!"

The moment she said it she was ashamed and drew an expunging hand across
her lips. And as she had feared, he threw over his shoulder a glance
that humorously recognised the truths which she had insincerely
suppressed: that while she desired to hurt the woman whom he had loved,
she would gladly have murdered any woman who had refused to love him,
whether married or single; and that she had never cared what he had done
so long as he did not lose his physical and moral fastidiousness, and
did not lust after flesh that, having rotted its nerves with delight
unsanctioned by the spirit, knew corruption before death, and so long as
he had not pretended to any woman that he wanted her soul when he wanted
her body.

Seeing the tears in her eyes, he said kindly: "Well, I never thought
Mariquita's marriage counted for much. Do you remember how you took her
in one night when old de Rojas hid in a cloisonne vase on the verandah
for cover and potted at the stars with his gun?" But in his voice she
read wonder that for the first time in his life he should have found his
honest mother forging a moral attitude.

It was dreadful that, on this of all nights, and so soon after a special
illumination of their relationship, she should have set him making
allowances for her to cover up her insincerity. She stammered miserably:
"Well, Ellen's a dear, dear girl," and twisted her fingers in her lap,
and cried out in a fresh access of fever: "It's strange: this is a cold
night, and yet I feel hot and heavy and sticky as I did in Italy when
the sirocco blew."

He slid his hand into hers again and altered his position so that he
could smile up into her face. "Yes, she's a dear girl," he agreed
comfortingly.

"Then marry her soon!" she begged. "You're thirty. It's time you had a
life of your own. You must make the ties that will last when I am dead.
Marry her soon."

"Yes," he said. "I will marry her soon."

"At once!" she urged. "You can be married in three weeks, you know, if
you set things going immediately. You'll see about it to-morrow, won't
you?"

He said nothing, but stroked her hand.

"You will do that?" she almost shrieked.

He moistened his dry lips. "I hadn't thought ... quite so soon...."

"Why not? Why not?"

"She is so very young," he mumbled, and turned away his face.

"Why, Richard, Richard!" she exclaimed softly. "God knows I'm not in
love with old-fashioned ideas. I've only to put up my hand behind my ear
to feel a scar they gave me thirty years ago when I was hunted down
Roothing High Street. But it seems to me that the new-fashioned ideas
are as mawkish as the old ones were brutal. And worst of all is this
idea about marriage being dreadful." She blushed deeply. "It's not. What
you make of it may be, but the thing itself is not. If Ellen's old
enough to love you, she's old enough to marry you. Oh, if you
miscall--that, you throw dirt at everything." She paused; and it rushed
in on her that he, too, had told a lie. To make an easy answer to her
inconvenient question he had profaned his conviction that the life of
the body was decorous and honourable. Why were they beginning to lie to
each other, like other mothers and sons?

He liked his error as little as she liked hers. "It's all right,
mother," he said drearily; and, after some seconds, added with false
brightness: "I'm sorry in a way I didn't wait till to-morrow morning in
town. I wanted to buy something for Ellen. I've never given her anything
really good. It cost me next to nothing to live in Scotland. I've got
lots of money by me. I thought a jade necklace. It would look jolly with
her hair. Or, better still, malachite beads. But they're more difficult
to get."

"Ah, jewellery," she said.

"Well, I suppose it's the best thing to give a girl," he assented,
unconscious of her irony.

Now that she had heard him designing to give jewels to his little Ellen,
that earnest child who thought only of laying up treasure in heaven and
would say bravely to the present of a string of pearls, "Thank you,
they're verra nice," and grieve silently because no one had thought to
give her a really good dictionary of economic terms, she knew for
certain that he had travelled far out of the orbit of his love. The
heart is a universe, and has its dark, cold, outer space where there are
no affections; and there he had strayed and was lost. It was not well
with him. Furtively she raised her handkerchief to her eyes. This was
not the hour that she expected when she had opened the door and seen her
son, and beyond him the gleaming night that had seemed to promise
ecstasy to all that were about and doing in its span. Well, outside the
house that perfect night must still endure, though it would be falling
under the dominion of the dawn. The shadows of the trees would be
lengthening on the lawn like slow farewells; but the fields were still
suffused with that light which proceeds from the chaste moon's
misconceptions of human life and love. For the moon sees none but
lovers, or those who stay awake by bedsides out of mercy, or those who
sleep; and men and women when they sleep look pitiful and innocent. So
it sends down on earth this light that is as beautiful as love, and soft
as mercy, and the very colour of innocence itself. It had seemed to
Marion that often those who walked in those beams tried to justify the
moon's faith in them. Harry had been the sweeter lover when the nights
were not dark; when there was this noble glory in the sky his passion
had changed from greed for something as easily attainable as food, to
hunger for something hardly to be attained by man. Perhaps his son, if
he would walk in the moonlight, would remember that which he had
forgotten. She said eagerly: "Richard, before you go to bed, let us go
out into the garden, and look at the moon setting over Kerith Island."

"No," he said obstinately, and laid his head on her lap. She began to
rock herself with misery, until he made a faint noise of irritation.
There followed a long space when the clock ticked, and told her that
there was no hope, things never went well on this earth. Then he
exclaimed suddenly, "Marion."

"Yes?"

She had hoped that there had come into his mind some special aspect of
Ellen's magic which he loved and desired to share with her. But he
muttered, "That box on the dresser. Up there on the top shelf."

She followed his eyes in amazement. "The scarlet one in the corner? That
belongs to cook. I think it's her workbox. What about it?"

He stared at it with a drowsy smile. "You had a cloak that colour when I
was a child," he murmured, and again buried his head in her lap.

"Why, so I had," she said softly, and thought proudly to herself, "How
he loves me! He speaks of trifling things about me as if they were good
ale that he could drink. He speaks like a sweetheart...." And then
caught her breath. "But that," she wept on, "is how he ought to speak of
Ellen, not of me." A certain gaunt conviction stood up and stared into
her face She wriggled in her seat and looked down on her strong,
competent hands, and said to herself uneasily: "I wish life could be
settled by doing things and not by thinking...." But the conviction had,
by its truthfulness, rammed in the gates of her mind. She cried out to
herself in anguish: "Of course! Of course! He cannot love Ellen because
he loves me too much! He has nothing left to love her with!" A tide of
exultation surged through her, but she knew that this was the movement
within her of the pride that leads to death. For if Richard went on
loving her over-much, the present would become hideous as she had never
thought that the circumstances of her splendid son could do. The girl
would grieve; and she would as soon that Spring itself should have its
heart hurt as dear little Ellen. And there would be no future. She would
have no grandchildren. When she died he would be so lonely.... And it
was her own fault. All her life long she had let him see how she wanted
love and how she had been deprived of it by Harry's failure; and so he
had given her all he had, even that which he should have kept for his
own needs. "What can I do to put this right?" she asked herself. "What
can I do?"

She found that his eyes were staring up at her from her lap. Compassion
moves My breast.

(_Aloud._) Unhappy man, what is thy name?

What King calls himself father unto thee?
CALAF (_at first somewhat confused, then with a noble bow_).
Sire, let me beg a boon: that for the nonce My name be covered up
with dark.His face grew dark, as it always did when he thought of his father.
"Well, if you had done that I should have had a pretty bad time."

It occurred to her that there was a way, an easy way, by which she could
free Richard from his excessive love for her. He would not love her any
more if she told him.... "But, oh, I couldn't tell him that," her spirit
groaned. "It is against nature that anyone but me should know of that.
It would spoil it to speak of it." But there was no other way. If she
were to go away from him he would follow her. There was no other way.

She shivered and smiled down on him, into his answering eyes. It was
strange to think that this was the last time they would ever look at
each other quite like that. She prepared to bring herself down like a
hammer on her own delicate reluctances.

"Hush, Richard," she said. "You shouldn't talk like that. Perhaps I
ought to have told you long ago that your father and I made it up before
he died."

He picked himself up and stood looking down on her.

"Yes, the day before he died we made it up," she began, but fell silent
because of the beating of her heart.

Presently he broke out. "What do you mean? Tell me what you mean."

"Why, let's see, it was like this," she continued. "It was in the
afternoon. Half-past two, I think. I was baking a cake for your tea. Of
course that was in the old kitchen, on the other side of the house,
which opened into the farmyard. Well, I looked up and saw your father
standing in the doorway. I knew that meant that something strange was
happening. From his coming at all, for one thing. And because he hadn't
got the dogs with him. I knew that meant he'd wanted to be alone, which
he hardly ever did. Those were the two greyhounds he had after Lesbia
and Catullus died. How funny--how funny to think I never knew their
names." This measure of how utterly she and her lover had been exiled
from each other's lives filled her eyes with tears. She encouraged them,
so that Richard might see them and be angry with her.

Something about his silence assured her that she had succeeded. She went
on chokingly: "He said, 'Well, Marion?' I said, 'Well, Harry? Come in,
if you wish to.' But I went on baking my cake. He came and stood quite
close to me. There was a pile of sultanas on the table, and he helped
himself to one or two. Then, all of a sudden, he said, 'Marion, I've got
to have an operation, and they say I'm pretty bad. I did so want to come
and see you.'"

Richard spoke in a voice as quiet as hers. "The whining cur! The
snivelling cur! To come to you when he was afraid, after what he'd left
you to for years."

"Oh, hush!" she prayed. "He is dead, and he was your father. Well, I
took him into the other room and gave him a cup of tea, and he told me
all about it. Poor Harry! He'd had a lot of pain. And dying is a
dreadful thing, if you aren't old. I'm fifty, but I should be terribly
frightened to die. And Harry was not much over forty. I remember him
saying just like a child, 'I wonder, now, if there is another world,
will it be as jolly as this?'"

"The brute! The beast! A jolly world he'd made for you!"

"Oh, Richard, don't be too hard on him. And don't you see that he said
that sort of thing because he really was like a child and didn't realise
what life was, and consequently he hadn't ever had any idea what it had
been like for me? Really, really he hadn't understood."

"Hadn't understood leaving you to Peacey? Mother--if I'd done that to a
woman, what would you have said?"

"But, dear, of course one has a higher standard for one's son than for
one's husband. One expects much more."

"Why?"

"Perhaps because one's sure of getting it." She tried to smile into his
eyes and coquette with him as she had used to do. But he was like a
house with shuttered windows. She trembled and went on: "Well, we
talked. He asked a lot about you. Dear, you can't think what it meant to
him not to have you with him. You don't care about children. I've been
worried about that sometimes. But that'll come. I'm sure it will. But
men like him ache for sons. If they haven't got them they feel like a
mare that's missed her spring. Daughters don't matter. That's because a
son's a happier thing than a daughter--there's something a little sad
about women, don't you think, Richard? I suppose it's something to do
with this business of having children--and men like that do so love
happiness. He had coveted you most terribly when he saw you about the
lanes. Truly he had. Then he said he felt tired, and he lay down on the
couch. I covered him with a rug, and he had a little sleep. Then he woke
up and said he must go because there was a solicitor coming at four,
and he was going to settle everything so that it was all right for you
and me. Then we said good-bye. And on the step he turned round and asked
if I thought you would like a Sealyham pup. And I said I thought you
would."

"Mother, it wasn't Punch?"

"Yes. It was Punch."

She noted the murderous gesture of his hands with bitter rapture. He had
loved that dog, but now he wished he could hail it out of death so that
he could send it back there cruelly. He was then capable of rooting up
old affections. She was not permitted to hope for anything better.

She pretended anger. "You've taken more than a dog from him. You know
that it's his money that's made life so easy for us."

"I should have had that by right. And you should have been at Torque
Hall."

The thought of what Torque Hall would have been at this hour if he had,
so full of lovely sleeping sons and daughters, made her sigh. She went
on dully: "Well, that's all. He turned at the gate and waved good-bye.
And the next day when you came in from school you told me he was dead."
For a time she looked down into the depths of her old sorrow. When she
raised her eyes, she was appalled by his harsh refusal to believe that
there was any beauty in her story, and she forgot why she was telling
it, and stammered out: "Richard, Richard, don't you understand? Don't
you feel about Ellen that there was a part of you that loved her long
before you ever met? It was like that with Harry and me. There was a
part in each of us that loved the other long before we knew each
other--and though Harry left me and I was bitter against him, it didn't
matter. That part of us went on loving all the time, and making
something--something--" Her hands fluttered before her; she gasped for
some image to express the high spiritual business that had been afoot,
and her eyes rolled in ecstasy till they met his cold glance. "It is
so!" she cried defiantly.

The silence throbbed and was hot. She dropped her head on her hand and
envied the quiet, moonlit marshes.

He shrugged his shoulders and moved towards the door. "I'm going to
bed," he said.

"That's right," she agreed, and rose and began to clear the table.
Uneasily he stood and watched her.

"Where does the Registrar live?" he asked suddenly.

"The Registrar?"

"Yes. I want to go to-morrow and put up the banns, or whatever it is one
does."

"Of course, of course. Well, the registrar's named Woodham. He lives in
the house next the school. 'Mizpah,' I think they call it. He's there
only in the afternoon. Did you specially want to go to-morrow?"

"Yes," he said. "Good-night."

When he had gone upstairs she lifted her skirts and waltzed round the
table. "Surely I've earned the right to dance a little now," she thought
grimly. But it was not very much fun to dance alone, so she went up to
her room, shielding her eyes with her hand as she passed his door. She
flung herself violently down on the bed, as if it were a well and there
would be the splash of water and final peace. She had lost everything.
She had lost Richard. When she had trodden on that loose board in the
passage, that shut door might so easily have opened. She had lost the
memory that had been the sustenance of her inmost, her most apprehensive
and despairing soul. For it was the same memory now that she had spoken
of it. Virtue had gone out of it. But she was too fatigued to grieve,
and presently there stood by her bedside a phantom Harry, a pouting lad
complaining of his own mortality. She put out her hand to him and
crooned, "There, there!" and told herself she must not fidget if he were
there, for the dead were used to quietness; and profound sleep covered
her.

Suddenly she awoke and found herself staring towards panes exquisite
with the frost's engravings, and beyond them a blue sky which made it
seem that this earth was a flaw at the heart of a jewel. Words were on
her lips. "Christ is risen, Christ is risen." It was something she had
read in a book; she did not know why she was saying it. The clock said
that it was half-past eight, so she leaped out of bed into the vibrant
cold, and bathed and dressed. Her sense of ruin was like lead, but was
somehow the cause of exultation in her heart as the clapper is the cause
of the peal of a bell. She went and knocked on Ellen's door. There was
no answer, so she stole in and stood at the end of the bed, and looked
with laughter on the heap of bedclothes, the pair of unravelling plaits
that were all that was to be seen of the girl.

"Ellen," she said.

The child woke up as children do, stretching and sulking. Marion loved
her. She must suffice instead of the other child, the boy that should
have slept in the room of the corridor in Torque Hall.

"Ellen, something wonderful has happened. Guess what it is."

Ellen lay on her back and speculated sleepily. Her little nose waggled
like a rabbit's. Suddenly she shot up her head.

"I know. We've got the vote."

"Not quite as good as that. But Richard's come."

The girl sat up. "When did he come?"

"Last night."

"Last night? Would I have seen him if I'd stayed up longer?"

"No. He came very late indeed. It was really this morning."

Ellen sighed with relief. "Then the occasion's pairfect, for I've
nothing to reproach myself with." She put her hand on one side and said
shyly, "Please, I'd like to get up." Marion still hovered, till she
noticed the girl's eyes were unhappy and that she was holding the sheet
high up to the base of her white throat, and perceived that she was too
modest to rise when anyone else was in the room. "How wise you are, my
dear," she thought, and she left the room. "You are quite right; secrets
lose their value when they are disclosed...."

She went down and ate her breakfast before a long window that showed a
glittering, rimy world and in the foreground a plump, strutting robin.
Ordinarily she would not have been amused by his red-waisted convexity,
for she regarded animals with an extreme form of that indifference she
felt for all living beings who were not members of her family, but
to-day, she scattered it some crumbs. After that she walked to the end
of the garden and looked down on the estuary's morning face. It was a
silver plate on which there lay but a drop of deeply blue water, and the
floating boats seemed like flies settled there to drink. The shining
green marshes were neatly ruled with lines of unmelted frost that scored
the unsunned westerly side of every bank, and the tiny grizzled trees
and houses here and there might have been toys made of crockery, like
the china cottages that stand on farmstead mantelpieces. From the
chimneys above the rime-checkered slates of the harbour houses a hundred
smoke-plumes stood tenuous and erect, like fastidious and honest souls,
in the crystalline air. This was an undismayed world that had scoured
itself cheerfully for the dawn, no matter what that might bring. She
nodded her head, seeing the lesson that it read to her.

Ellen ran across the lawn to her, beetle-black in her mourning, but
capering as foals do.

"I'll not have my breakfast till he does," she announced. "Is there
anything I can do for him?"

"Nothing, my dear, I'm afraid. But look at the view. Isn't it lovely?"

The girl clapped her hands. "Oh, it's bonny. And it's neat. It's redded
itself up for Richard's coming."

"'Redded itself up'? What does that mean?"

"Don't you use the word here? English seems to be a terribly poor
language. Redding up means making everything tidy and neat, so that
you're ready for anything."

That was what one must do: red oneself up. It was true that it was no
use doing that for Richard any more, and that there was no one else in
the world for whom she wished to be ready. But she must be schooled by
the spectacle of the earth, for here it was shining fair, and yet it had
nothing to expect; it was but the icing of a cake destined for some
sun's swallowing.

"Is Richard a good riser?" asked Ellen, adopting a severe,
servant-engaging tone to disguise the truth that she was trembling with
desire to see her lover.

"Usually, but he may be late to-day since he went to bed such a short
time ago. He evidently isn't up yet, for his blind's still down. That's
his room on the left."

But as they gazed the blind went up, and they saw him turning away from
the window.

"Oh, why didn't he look at us!" cried Ellen. "Why didn't he look at us?"

"Because he is thinking of nothing but how soon he can get down to
breakfast and meet you," said Marion; but being aware of the quality of
her blood, which was his, she knew that he had not seen his women and
the glittering world because he had risen blind with sullenness.

"Will he be long, do you think?" she pondered. "Not that I'd want him to
miss his bath." She broke into a kind of Highland fling, looking down on
the blue and silver estuary and chanting, "Lovely, lovely," but desisted
suddenly and asked: "Mrs. Yaverland, do you think there's a future
life?"

Marion said lazily, "I shouldn't have thought you need to think out that
problem yet awhile."

"Oh, I'm not worrying for myself. But on a fine day like this I just
hate to think my mother's not getting the benefit of it somewhere. And
seeing your age, I thought you might have begun to give the matter
consideration."

Marion resolved to treasure that remark for repetition to Richard; and
was dashed to remember that it was probable in future they would not
share their jokes. "Well, I don't think there's any evidence for it at
all," she said aloud; "but I don't think that proves that there isn't
one. I don't think we would be allowed to know if there was one, for I'm
sure that if most people knew for certain there was going to be another
world they wouldn't make the best of this." But she saw, from the way
that Ellen continued to stare down at her toes, that that abstract
comfort had not been of any service, so she parted with yet another
secret. "But I do know that when Richard's father died all the trees
round the house seemed to know where he had gone."

Ellen raised wet but happier eyes. "Why, I felt like that when they
brought mother's coffin out of the Fever Hospital. Only then it was the
hills in the distance that knew--the Pentland Hills. But do you really
think that was true?"

"I knew it was then," said Marion. "If I am less certain now it is only
because I have forgotten."

They nodded wisely. "After all, there must be something."

"Yes, there must be something...."

Ellen began to dance again. Marion turned aside and tried to lose the
profound malaise that the reticent feel when they have given up a secret
in thinking how well worth while it had been, since Ellen was such a
dear, young, loving thing. She found consolation in this frost-polished
morning: the pale, bright sky in which the light stood naked, her
abandoned veil of clouds floating above the horizon; the swoop and dance
over the marshes of the dazzling specks that were seagulls; the fur of
rime that the dead leaves on the hedgerow wore, and the fine
jewellery-work of the glistening grass tufts in its shadow. The world
had neglected nothing in its redding up.

At her elbow Ellen spoke shyly. "Richard's come down at last. May I go
in to him, Mrs. Yaverland?"

"Of course you may. You can do anything you like. From now onwards he's
yours, not mine."

Ellen ran in and Richard came to the window to meet her. As he drew her
over the threshold by both hands he called down the garden, "Good
morning, mother." But Marion had perceived that from the moment of
seeing her his face had worn the dark colour of estrangement. She turned
and walked blindly away, not noticing that Mabel had come out to bring
her the morning post, and was following at her heels, till the girl
coughed.

There were four letters. She opened them with avidity, for they were
certificates that there were other things in life as well as Richard
with which she could occupy herself. Two were bills, the first from her
dressmakers and the other from the dealer who had sold her some coloured
glass a few weeks before; and there was a dividend warrant for her to
sign and send to her bankers. Sweeping about the lawn as on a stage, she
resolved to buy clothes that would make her look like other untormented
women, and more hangings and pictures and vases to make her house look
gay. Then she observed that the fourth envelope was addressed in the
handwriting of the son whom she could not love.

She looked towards the house and saw the son whom she loved, but he did
not see her. Ellen's red head was close to his shoulder.

It was horrible handwriting outside and inside the envelope: a weak
running of ink that sagged downwards in the second half of every line
and added feeble flourishes to every capital that gave the whole an air
of insincerity. It had the disgusting appearance of a begging letter,
and indeed that was what it was. It begged for love, for condonation of
the writer's loathsomeness. She held it far off as she read:

"DEAR MOTHER,

"You will be wondering why I had not written to you. You will know soon
that something you would not have expected has happened to me. I am not
sure how you will take it. But I will be with you in two days, and then
you will see for yourself. I hope you will not harden your heart against
me, dear mother.

"Your loving son,

"ROGER."

There was no address, but the postmark was Chelmsford. No doubt he had
written in the cells. For the letter could have no other meaning but
that the disgrace she had foreseen had at last arrived.

She could not bear to be out there alone on that wide lawn, in the
bright light, in the intense cold. She ran to the window, and not daring
to look in lest they should be very close together, she called,
"Richard, Roger is coming."

There was a noise of a chair being pushed back, and Richard stood over
her, asking: "When? Has he written?"

She held out the letter.

There was the rustling of paper crushed in the hand, and she looked up
into his burning and compassionate eyes. Her head dropped back on her
throat; she grew weak with happiness. He was her own once more, if she
would but disclose in what great fear and misery she stood. But in the
room behind there sounded the chink of china. Little Ellen was bending
over the table, putting the tea-cosy over Richard's egg.

Marion said levelly: "Well, I shall be glad of Roger's company while
you're occupied with Ellen." She added reprovingly, as if she were
speaking to a child: "You mustn't be jealous of the poor thing. I saw
last night that you can be jealous...."

His eyes blazed at the indecency. He stepped back from the window.


CHAPTER VIII


Ellen was very glad that Marion was going out for the whole of the
afternoon, for then she would be alone with Richard; and though they had
been out together all the morning, there had been that in the atmosphere
which made a third. The whole time it had been apparent that the coming
of this Roger, who must be an awful man, was upsetting him terribly.
When he had taken her out into the garden after breakfast he had looked
up into the vault of the morning and had put his hand to his head,
making a sound of envy, as if he felt a contrast between its crystal
quality and his own state of mind. He had liked standing with her at the
edge of the garden and setting names to the facets of the landscape,
which he plainly loved as he had never told her that he did. He really
cared for the estuary as she did for the Pentlands; she need never be
afraid of telling him anything that she felt, for it had always turned
out that he felt something just like it. But that pleasure had not
lasted long. He had shown her the gap where the Medway found its way
among the low hills on the Kentish coast, and had told her that the
golden filaments the sunlight discovered over the water were the masts
and funnels of great ships, and he was pointing westward to the black
gunpowder hulks that lay off Kerith Island, when his forefinger dropped.
Something in the orchard below had waylaid his attention. Ellen looked
down the steep bank to see what it was, and saw Marion sitting in the
low crook of an apple-tree. She snatched at contemptuous notice of the
way that the tail of the woman's gown, which anyway was far too good for
any sensible person to wear just going about the house and garden in the
morning, was lying in a patch of undispersed frost; but fear re-entered
her heart. Marion was sitting quite still with her back to them, yet the
distant view of her held the same terrifying quality of excess as her
near presence.

There could be no more looking at this brilliant and candid face of the
earth, because there was not anywhere so much force as in this squat,
stubborn body, clayish with middle-age.

Richard said: "No, she isn't crying. She isn't moving. I should feel a
fool if I went down and she didn't want me." And because his voice was
thin and husky like a nervous child's, and because he was answering a
question that she had not asked, Ellen was more afraid. This woman was
throwing over them a net of events as excessive as herself....

       *       *       *       *       *

But these were only the things that one thought about life. As soon as
one stopped thinking about them they ceased to be. The world was not
really tragic. When he drew her back to the middle of the lawn where
they could not see Marion she was happy again, and hoped for pleasure,
and asked him if it were not possible to go boating on the estuary even
now, since the water looked so smooth. He answered that winter boating
was possible and had its own beauty, and told her, with an appreciation
that she had to concede was touched with frenzy in its emphasis, but
which she welcomed because it was an escape from worry, of a row he had
had one late December afternoon. He spoke of finding his way among white
oily creeks that wound among gleaming ebony mud-banks over which showed
the summits of the distant hills that had been skeletonised by a thin
snowfall; and of icy air that was made glamorous as one had thought only
warmth could be by the blended lights of the red sun on his left and the
primrose moon on the right. She leaped for joy at that, and asked him to
take her on the water soon, and he told her if she liked he would take
her down to Prittlebay and show her his motorboat which was lying up in
the boathouse of the Thamesmouth Yacht Club there.

Their ambulations had brought them to the orchard gate again, but he
turned on his heel and said, with what struck her as a curious
abandonment of the languor by which he usually asserted to the world
that he refused to hurry, "Go and put on your hat and we'll start at
once." So they went out and hastened through the buoyant air down to the
harbour and along the cinder-track to Prittlebay esplanade, where she
forgot everything in astonishment at the new, bright, arbitrary scene.
There was what seemed to her, a citizen of Edinburgh, a comically
unhistoric air about the place. The gaily-coloured rows of neat
dwellings that debouched on the esplanade, and the line of hotels and
boarding-houses that faced the sea, were as new as the pantomime songs
of last Christmas or this year's slang. One might conceive them being
designed by architects who knew as little of the past as children know
of death, and painted by fresh-faced people to match themselves, and
there was a romping arbitrariness about the design and decoration of the
place which struck the same note of innocence.

The town council who passed the plans for the Byzantine shoulder the
esplanade thrust out on to the sand on the slender provocation of a
bandstand, the man who had built his hotel with a roof covered with
cupolas and minarets and had called it "Westward Ho!" must, Ellen
thought, be lovely people, like Shakespearean fools. She liked it, too,
when they came to the vulgarer part of the town and the place assumed
the strange ceremented air that a pleasure city wears in winter. The
houses had fallen back, and the esplanade was overhung now by a steep
green slope on which asphalt walks linked shelters, in which no one sat,
and wandered among brown and purple congregations of bare trees, at its
base were scattered wooden chalets and bungalows, which offered to take
the passer-by's photograph or to sell ice-cream. The sea-salt in the air
had licked off the surface of the paint, so that they had a greyish,
spectral appearance. The photographs in the cracked show-cases were
brown and vaporous, and the announcements of vanilla ice-cream were but
breaths of lettering, blown on stained walls. It seemed a place for the
pleasuring of mild, unexigent phantoms, no doubt the ghosts of the
simple people who lived in the other part of the town.

She was amused by it all, and was sorry when they came to the
Thamesmouth Yacht Club, a bungalow glossy with new paint which looked
very opaque among the phantasmic buildings. With its verandah, that was
polished like a deck, and its spotless life-belts and brilliant
port-hole windows, it had the air of a ship which had been exiled to
land but was trying to bear up; and so, too, had the three old captains,
spruce little men, with sea-reflecting eyes and pointed, grizzled
beards, whom Richard brought out of the club after he had got the
boathouse keys. Ellen liked them very much indeed. She had never before
had any chance of seeing the beautiful and generous emotion that old men
who have lived bravely feel for young men whom they see carrying on the
tradition of brave life, and it made her want to cry to see how
crowsfeet of pleasure came at the corners of their eyes when they looked
at Richard, and how they liked to slap his strong back with their rough
hands, which age was making delicate with filigree of veins and
wrinkles. And she could see, too, that they liked her. They looked at
her as if they thought she was pretty, and teased her about the
Votes-for-Women button she was wearing, but quite nicely.

When they were standing under the dark eaves of the boathouse, looking
up at the gleaming tawny sides of the motor-launch, one of the old men
pointed at the golden letters that spelt "Gwendolen" at the prow, and
said, "Well, Yaverland, I suppose you'll have forgotten who she is these
days." Another added: "He'd better, if he's going to marry a
Suffragette." And all broke into clear, frosty laughter. She cried out
in protest, and told them that Suffragettes were not really fierce at
all, and that the newspapers just told a lot of lies about them, and
that anyway it was only old-fashioned women who were jealous, and they
listened with smiling, benevolent deference, which she enjoyed until her
eyes lighted on Richard, and she saw that he was more absorbed in her
effect on his friends than in herself.

For a moment she felt as lonely as she had been before she knew him, and
she looked towards the boat and stared at the reflection of the group in
the polished side and wished that one of the dim, featureless shapes she
saw there had been her mother, or anyone who had had a part in her old
life in Edinburgh. She turned back to the men and brought the
conversation to an end with a little laughing shake of the head, giving
them the present of an aspect of her beauty to induce them to let her
mind go free. Again she felt something that her commonsense forbade to
be quite fear when he did not notice for a minute that she was wistfully
asking him to take her away. It was all right, of, course.

When they had said good-bye to the happy old men and were walking along
the promenade, he asked: "What was the matter, darling? Didn't you like
them? They're really very good old sorts"; and understood perfectly when
she answered: "I know they are, but I don't want anybody but you." There
was indeed vehemence in his reply: "Yes, dear, we don't want anybody but
ourselves, do we?" Undoubtedly there was a change in the nature of the
attention he was giving her. Instead of concentrating in that steady
delighted survey of herself to which she was accustomed, he alternated
between an almost excessive interest in what she was saying and complete
abstraction, during which he would turn suddenly aside and drive his
stick through the ice on the little pools at the sagging outside edge of
the promenade, his mouth contracting as if he really hated it. She
hovered meekly by while he did that. If one went to see a dear friend,
whose charm and pride it was to live in an exquisitely neat and polished
home, and found him pacing hot-eyed through rooms given up to dirt and
disorder, one would not rebuke him, but one would wait quietly and
soothingly until he desired to tell what convulsion of his life
explained the abandonment of old habit. But her eyes travelled to the
luminous, snow-sugared hills that ran by the sea to the summit where
Roothing Church, an evanescent tower of hazily-irradiated greyness,
overhung the shining harbour; and her thoughts travelled further to the
hills hidden behind that point, and that orchard where there sat the
squat woman who was so much darker and denser in substance than anything
else in the glittering, brittle world around her.

Ellen drooped her head and closed her eyes; the crackle of the ice under
Richard's stick sounded like the noise of some damage done within
herself. She found some consolation in the thought that people were
always more moderate than the pictures she made of them in their
absence, but she lost it when she went back into the high, white,
view-invaded dining-room at Yaverland's End. For Marion stood by the
hearth looking down into the fire, and as Richard and Ellen came in she
turned an impassive face towards them, and asked indifferently, "Have
you had a nice walk?" and fell to polishing her nails with the palm of
her hand with that trivial, fribbling gesture that was somehow more
desperate than any other being's outflung arms. She was all that Ellen
had remembered, and more. And she had infected the destiny of this house
with her strangeness even to such small matters as the peace of the
midday meal. For Mabel came in before they had finished the roast
mutton, and said: "Please, ma'am, there's a man wanting to see you." And
Marion asked, with that slightly disagreeable tone which Ellen had
noticed always coloured her voice when she spoke to the girl: "Who is
he?" Mabel answered contemptuously: "He won't give his name. He's a very
poor person, ma'am. His boots is right through, and his coat's half off
his back. And he says that if he told you his name you mightn't see him.
Shall I tell him to go away?"

But Marion had started violently. Her eyes were looking into Richard's.
She said, calmly: "Yes, I'll see him. Tell him I'll come through in a
minute."

Mabel had left the room. Marion and Richard continued to stare at each
other queerly.

She murmured indistinctly, casually: "It may be. Both Mabel and cook
haven't been with me long. They never saw him here. They probably
haven't seen him since he was a boy."

"It is the kind of thing," said Richard grimly, "that Roger would say at
the back door to a servant just to make his arrival seem natural and
unsuspicious."

Marion's head drooped far back on her throat; her broad, dark face
suffused with the bloom of kind, sad passion, and lifted towards her
son's pitying eyes, made Ellen think of a pansy bending back under the
rain. But her mouth, which had been a little open and appealing, as if
she were asking Richard not to be bitter but to go on being pitiful,
closed suddenly and smiled. She seemed to will and to achieve some
hardening change of substance. An incomprehensible expression irradiated
her face, and she seemed to be brooding sensuously on some private hoard
of satisfaction. Lightly she rose, patting the hand Richard had
stretched out to her as if it were a child's, and went out into the
kitchen.

"Richard!" breathed Ellen.

He went on eating.

"Richard," she insisted, "why did she look like that? So happy. Does
she want it to be Roger?"

"God knows, God knows," he said in a cold, sharp-edged voice. "There are
lots of things about her that I don't understand."

Some moments passed before Marion came back. Her face was easy, and she
said placidly: "My purse, my purse. I want my purse."

"It's on the desk," said Richard, and rose and found it for her. He
stood beside her as she opened it and began taking out the money slowly,
coin by coin, while she hummed under her breath. "Mother!" he burst out
suddenly. "Who is it?"

"A ten-shilling piece is what I want," she murmured. "Yes, a
ten-shilling piece. I thought I had one.... Oh, who is it? Oh, it's
Henry Milford. Do you remember poor Milford? He was the last cattleman
but one in the old days when we ran the farm. I had to send him away
because he drank so terribly. Since then he's gone down and down, and
now he's on the road. I must give him something, poor creature. Such a
nice wife he had--he says she's in Chelmsford workhouse. I'll send him
on to old Dawkins at Dane End; I'll get him to give the poor wretch a
few days' work."

Ellen disliked her as she left the room. She looked thick and ordinary,
and was apparently absorbed in the mildly gross satisfaction of a
well-to-do woman at being bountiful. Moreover, she had in some way hurt
Richard, for his face was dark when he came back to the table.

But an amazement struck Ellen as she thought over the scene. "Richard,"
she exclaimed excitedly, "is it not just wonderful that this man should
come to your mother for help after she'd put him to the door? I'm sure
she'd make a body feel just dirt if she was putting them to the door. It
would be a quiet affair, but awful uncomfortable. But she's such a good
woman that, even seeing her like that, he knew she was the one to come
to when he was really in trouble. Do you not think it's like that?"

"Oh yes," he almost groaned. "Even when she's at her worst you know that
she's still better than anyone else on this earth."

When Marion came back she sat down at the table without noticing what
seemed to Ellen his obvious dejection, and began to talk about this man
Milford, telling of the power he had over his beasts and how a prize
heifer that they then had, by the name of Susan Caraway, had fretted for
three weeks after he had left. She said that he gained this power over
animals not by any real love for them, for he was indifferent to them
except when he was actually touching them, and would always scamp his
work without regard for their comfort, but simply by some physical
magnetism, and pointed out that there it resembled the power some men
have over women. It surprised Ellen that she laughed as she said that,
and seemed to find pleasure in the thought of such a power. When the
meal was over she sat for a moment, gathering together the breadcrumbs
by her plate, and said pensively: "Yes, it might quite easily have been
Roger." Ellen wondered how it was that Richard had always spoken of his
mother as if she needed his protection, when her voice was so nearly
coarse with the sense of being able to outface all encounterable events,
and she felt a flash of contempt for his judgment. She wished, too, that
when Marion rose from, the table he had not followed her so closely
upstairs and hovered round her as she took up her stand on the
hearthrug, with her elbow on the mantelpiece and her foot in the fender,
and kept his eyes on her face as she settled down in an armchair. It was
just making himself cheap, dangling after a woman who was perched up on
herself like a weathercock.

When she said, "I'm going to walk over to Friar's End. Old Butterworth
wants me to do some repairs which I don't feel inclined to do, so I want
to have a look at the place for myself," the announcement was so little
tinged by any sense of the persons she was addressing that she might as
well have held up a printed placard. Ellen thought he was a little
abject to answer, "So far as I can remember, Butterworth's rather a
rough specimen. Wouldn't you like us to come with you?" and almost
deserved that she did not hear. Such deafness argued complete
abstraction; and indeed, as she turned towards them and stood looking
out towards the river, her face again wore that incomprehensible
expression of secret and even furtive satisfaction. The sight of it
fell like a whip on Richard. He lowered his head and sat staring at the
floor. Ellen cried out to herself, "She's an aggravating woman if ever
there was one. It's every bit as bad as not saying what you feel, this
not saying what you look," and tried to pierce with her eyes the dreamy
surface of this gloating. But she could make nothing of it, and looked
back at Richard; and shuddered and drew her hands across her eyes when
she saw that he had lifted his head and was turning towards her a face
that had become the mirror of his mother's expression. He, too, was
wrapped in some exquisite and contraband contentment. She raised her
brows in enquiry, and mockingly he whispered back words which he knew
she could not hear.

"I think I'll go now," said Marion, from her detachment, and left them.
Ellen stretched out her arms above her head and cried shudderingly: "Why
are you looking at me like that?" But he would not answer, and began to
laugh quietly. "Tell me!" she begged, but still he kept silence, and
seemed to be fingering with his mind this pleasure that he knew of but
would not disclose. It struck her as another example of Marion's
dominion over the house that her expression should linger in this room
after she had left it and that it should blot out the son's habitual
splendid look, and she exclaimed sobbingly: "Oh, very well, be a
Cheshire cat if you feel called to it," and went and pretended to look
for a volume in the bookcase. It was annoying that he did not come after
her at once and try to comfort her, but he made no move from his seat
until there sounded through the house the thud of the closing front
door.

She saw, a second after that, the reflection of his face gleaming above
the shoulder of her own image in the glass door of the bookcase, and was
at first pleased and waited delightfully for reconciling kisses; but
because the brightness of its gleam told her that he was still smiling,
she wished again, as she had that morning when she had stood beside the
smooth, sherry-coloured boat, that among the dim shapes of the mirrored
world might be one that was her mother. She knew that it was too much to
ask of this inelastic universe that she should ever see her mother again
in this world, standing, as she had lived, looking like a brave little
bird bearing up through a bad winter but could not understand how God
could ever have thought of anything as cruel as snow. "And quite right
too," she said to herself. "If there were ghosts we would spend all our
time gaping for a sight of the dead, and we'd not do our duty by the
living. But surely there'd be no harm just for once, when I'm so put
about with this strange house, in letting me see in the glass just the
outline of her wee head on her wee shoulders...." But there was nothing.
She sobbed and caught at Richard's hands, and was instantly reassured.
For the hand is truer to the soul than the face: it has no moods, it
borrows no expressions, and she read the Richard that she knew and loved
in these long fingers, stained by his skeely trade and scored with cuts
commemorative of adventure and bronzed with golden weather, and the
broad knuckles that were hollowed between the bones as usually only
frail hands are, just as his strong character was fissured by reserve
and fastidiousness and all the delicacies that one does not expect to
find in the robust. "You've got grand hands!" she cried, and kissed
them. But he wrested them away from her and closed them gently over her
wrists, and forced her backwards towards the hearth, keeping his body
close to her and shuffling his feet in a kind of dance. She was
astonished that she should not like anything that he did to her, and
felt she must be being stupid and not understanding, and submitted to
him with nervous alacrity when he sat down in the armchair and drew her
on to his knee and began to kiss her.

But she did not like it at all. For his face wore the rapt and vain
expression of a man who is performing some complicated technical process
which he knows to be beyond the powers of most other people, and she had
a feeling that he was not thinking of her at all. That was absurd, of
course, for he was holding her in his arms, and whispering her name over
and over again, and pressing his mouth down on hers, and she told
herself that she was being tiresome and pernickety like the worst kind
of grown-up, and urged herself to lend him a hand in this business of
love-making. But she could not help noticing that these were the poorest
kisses he had ever given her. Each one was separate, and all were
impotent to constrain the mind to thoughts of love; between them she
found herself thinking clearly of such irrelevancies as the bare,
bright-coloured, inordinate order of the room and the excessive view of
tides and flatlands behind the polished window-panes. The kisses had
their beauty, of course, for it was Richard who was giving them, but it
was the perishing and trivial beauty of cut flowers, whereas those that
he gave her commonly had been strongly and enduringly beautiful like
trees.

Always when he took her in his arms and she lifted her mouth to his it
was like going into a wood, or, rather, creating a wood. For at first
there was darkness, since one closed one's eyes when one kissed as when
one prayed; and then it seemed as if at each kiss they were being a
tree, for their bodies were pressed close together like a tree-trunk,
and their trembling, gripping arms were like branches, and their faces
where love lived on their lips were like the core of foliage where the
birds nest. She would see springing up in the darkness around her the
grove of the trees that their kisses had created: the silver birches
that were their delicate, unclinging kisses; the sturdy elms that were
their kisses when they loved robustly and thought of a home together;
the white-boled beeches with foliage of green fire that they were when
they loved most intensely. But to-day they did not seem to be making
anything; he was simply moving his lips over her skin as a doctor moves
his stethoscope over his patient's chest. And, like the doctor, he
sometimes hurt her. She hated it when he kissed her throat, and was glad
when he thought of something he wanted to say and stopped.

"Next time I go to London," he said, "I'm going to buy you a jade
necklace, or malachite if I can get it. The green will look so good
against your white, white skin."

"That's verra kind of you, but the money may as well lie by," she told
him wisely, "for I couldn't go wearing a green necklace when I'm in
mourning."

"But you won't be in mourning much longer."

"Six months in full mourning, six months half. That's as it should be
for a mother."

"But what nonsense!" he exclaimed irascibly. "When you're a young little
thing you ought to be wearing pretty clothes. It doesn't do your mother
any good, your going about in black."

"I know well it doesn't, but, remember, mother was old-fashioned Scotch,
and she was most particular about having things just so. Specially on
melancholy occasions. I remember she was most pernickety about her
blacks after my father's death. And though she's entered into eternal
life, we've no guarantee that that makes a body sensible all at once."
She saw on his face an expression which reminded her that he had been
careful never to acquiesce when she spoke of the possibility of a future
life, and she cried out: "You needn't look so clever. I'm sure she's
going on somewhere, and why you should grudge it to the poor woman I
don't know. And your mother thinks there's something after death, too.
She told me this morning in the garden that she was quite certain of it
when your father died. She said that all the trees round the house
seemed to know where he had gone."

"Oh, she said that, did she?" His arms released her. He stared into her
face. "She said that, did she?" he repeated in an absent, faintly
malevolent murmur; and clasped her in his arms again and kissed her so
cruelly that her lips began to bleed.

"Let me go, let me go!" she cried. "You're not loving me, you're just
taking exercise on me!"

He let her go, but not, she knew from the smile on his face, from any
kindness, but rather that he might better observe her distress and gloat
over it. She moved away from the heat of the fire and from that other
heat which had so strangely been engendered by these contacts which
always before engendered light, and went to the window and laid her
forehead against the cold glass. The day had changed and lost its smile,
for the sky was hidden by a dirty quilt of rain-charged clouds and the
frost had seeped into the marshes and left them dark, acid winter green,
yet she longed to walk out there in that unsunned and water-logged
country, opening her coat to the cold wind brought by the grey, invading
tides, making little cold pools where she dug her heels into the sodden
ground, getting rid of her sense of inflammation, and being quite alone.
That she should want not to be with Richard, and that she should not be
perfectly pleased with what pleased him, seemed to her monstrous
disloyalty, and she turned and smiled at him. But there was really
something wrong with this room and this hour, for as she looked at him
she felt frightened and ashamed, as if he were drunk, though she knew
that he was sober; and indeed his face was flushed and his eyes wet and
winking, as if smoke had blown in them. For some reason that she could
not understand he reminded her of Mr. Philip.

She cried out imploringly. "Take me down to the marshes, Richard!"

He shook his head and laughed at some private joke. She felt desolate,
like a child at school whom other children shut out from their secrets,
and drooped her head; and heard him say presently: "We are going out
this afternoon, but not on the marshes."

"Where?"

He was overcome with silent laughter when she stamped because he would
not answer. She ran over to him and began to slap him, trying to make a
game of it to cover her near approach to tears. Then he told her, not
because he was concerned with her distress, but because her touch seemed
to put him in a good humour. "We're going to the registrar, my dear, to
fix up everything for our marriage in three weeks' time."

The sense of what he had said did not reach her, because she was gazing
at him to try and find out why he was still reminding her of Mr. Philip.
He was, for one thing, wearing an expression that would have been more
suitable to a smaller man. Oh, he was terribly different to-day! His
eyes, whose wide stare had always worked on her like a spell, were
narrow and glittering, and his lips looked full. She screamed "Oh, no!
Oh, no!" without, for a second, thinking against what thing she was
crying out.

He laughed and pulled her down on his knees. He was laughing more than
she had ever known him laugh before. "Why, don't you want to, you little
thing?"

Her thoughts wandered about the world as she knew it, looking for some
reason. But nothing came to her save the memory of the cold, wet,
unargumentative cry of the redshanks that she had heard on the marshes.
She said feebly, as one who asks for water: "Please, please take me down
to the sea-wall."

His voice swooped resolutely down with tenderness. "But why don't you
want to come and see about our marriage? Are you frightened, dear?"

Now, strangely enough, he was reminding her of Mr. Mactavish James, as
he used to be in those long conversations when he seemed so kind, and
said: "Nellie, ma wee lassie, dis onything ail ye?" and yet left her
with a suspicion that he had been asking her all the time out of
curiosity and not because he really cared for her. She was dizzied.
Whoever was speaking to her, it was not Richard. She muttered: "Yes, a
little."

He pressed her closer to him, covering her with this tenderness as with
a hot cloth rug, heavy and not fine. "Frightened of me, my darling?"

She pulled herself off his knee. "I don't know, I don't know."

"Why? Why?"

She moved into the middle of the room and looked down on the sea and the
flatlands with a feeling like thirst; and turned loyally back to
Richard, who was standing silently on the hearth-rug watching her. The
immobility of his body, and the indication in his flickering eyes and
twitching mouth that, within his quietness, his soul was dancing madly
because of some thought of her, recalled to her the night when Mr.
Philip had stood by the fire in the office in Edinburgh. That man had
hated her and this one loved her, but the difference in their aspects
was not so great as she would have hoped. She could bear it no longer,
and screamed out: "Oh! Oh! That's how Mr. Philip looked!"

It took him a minute to remember who she meant. Then his face shadowed.
"Don't remind me of him, for God's sake!" he said through his teeth. "Go
and put on your things and come out with me to the registrar."

She drew backwards from him and stood silent till she could master her
trembling. He was very like Mr. Philip. Softly she said: "You sounded
awful, as if you were telling me."

"I was."

She began to want to cry. "I'll not do anything that I'm told."

He made a clicking noise of disgust in his throat. It struck her as a
mark of debasement that their bodies were moving more swiftly than their
minds, and that each time they spoke they first gesticulated or made
some wordless sound. He burst out, more loudly than she had ever heard
him before: "Go and put on your things."

"Away yourself to the registrar," she cried more loudly still, "and tell
him he'll never marry you to me."

The ringing of her own voice and his answering clamour recalled
something to her that was dyed with a sunset light and yet was horrible.
She drew her hands across her face and tried to remember what it was;
and found herself walking in memory along a street in Edinburgh towards
a sunset which patterned the west with sweeping lines of little golden
feathers as if some vain angel, forbidden to peacock it in heaven, had
come to show his wings to earth. On the other side, turned to the colour
of a Gloire de Dijon rose, towered the height of the MacEwan Hall, that
Byzantine pile which she always thought had an air as if it were
remembering beautiful music that had been played within it at so many
concerts; and at its base staggered a quarrelling man and woman. The
woman was not young and wore a man's cloth cap and a full, long, filthy
skirt. They were moving sideways along the empty pavement about a yard
apart, facing one another, shouting and making threatening gestures
across the gap. At last they stopped, put their drink-ulcerated faces
close together, and vomited coarse cries at one another; and she had
looked up at the pale golden stone that was remembering music, and at
the bright golden sky that was promising that there was more than
terrestrial music, as one might look at well-bred friends after some
boor had stained some pleasant occasion with his ill manners. Then have
the names.
And all shall be a secret, mine and yours.

TURANDOT (_uncertain and excited, aside_).

What shall I do? Depend upon Adelma?

Or shall I let my father tell the names, And bow my head to the
yoke?...

Less is the shame, Beyond all doubt, to yield to one's own father.

But what if wise Adelma had succeeded Already, and my oath had been too
soon?

ALTOUM.

Why will you rack your brains when all is clear?
Let not irresolution harry you!
Would you still have me think you know the names?
Child, be persuaded!

TURANDOT (_aside_).

No, I will wait for Adelma.
My father urges me. This is a sign The mystery is not impenetrable.
He is in league with that strange man, and seeks To talk me over.

ALTOUM.

Hesitate no longer!
Make up your mind! Rein in your rearing pride!
Torture yourself no more.

TURANDOT.

I _am_ resolved.
Call the Divan together in good time.
I have no more to say.

ALTOUM.

You are resolved Rather to yield to force than to your father!

TURANDOT.

I am resolved to fight.

ALTOUM (_in a rage_).

Fool without heart!
I will indeed call the Divan together To be your temple and your altar
too.
And I will summon priests, to celebrate Your marriage while a crowd looks
on and mocks.
Yea, have your will, you stupid fool! Good night.

(_Exit._)

SCENE IX
_Scene shifted._ _A magnificent apartment with several doors._ _In
the middle of the room an Oriental divan, which serves_ CALAF _as a
bed_.
_Deep night._
BRIGELLA, CALAF.

BRIGELLA.

(_With a candlestick in his hand._) Three hundred and seventy-seven, three
hundred and seventy-eight, three hundred and seventy-nine.
It's already three o'clock in the morning, your Royal Highness, and
you've walked now exactly three hundred and eighty times from one corner
of the room to the other. To be quite frank, I'm done up, and if
you _would_ lie down a little, it would do us both good. You're in
safety here.

CALAF.

Yes, you are right. But my excited mind Gives me no peace. Forgive me!
Leave me!
Go!

BRIGELLA.

I should like to give you a piece of advice, my dearest Royal Highness:
if a ghost pays you a visit, be prudent, be prudent; _try_ to be
prudent.

CALAF.

Ghosts, do you say? What ghosts? Is the place haunted?

BRIGELLA.

Well.... H'm.... We have the most stringent orders to admit nobody, under
penalty of death. H'm.... Poor servants _we_ are, poor servants! The
Emperor is the Emperor, you understand, but the Princess, she is the
Empress, so to speak. Poor servants... it's hard to have to pick your
way between two puddles. Not half! If you only knew it, we've always got
our heads between the hammer and the anvil.
We don't want to get into _anybody's_ bad graces.

I'm sure you understand me. And a man wants to put something aside for
his old days. And so you see we poor devils are in the hell of a hole.
Not half!

CALAF.

What are you driving at? Is my life in danger?

BRIGELLA.

I won't say that; but you are aware of the blessed interest people about
here take in your name. By way of example it might possibly happen that
a hobgoblin or a fairy steps in through the keyhole and leads you into
temptation.
Keep a tight rein on your five senses, that's all.

You see what I mean, don't you? Poor servants _we_ people! Poor devils!
Not half!

CALAF.

Go. Have no fear.

I stand upon my guard.

BRIGELLA.

(_Slapping him on the back._) That's right, your Highness, that's
right.

I commend myself to your most gracious protection. (_Aside._) I
_have_ heard that some people can find it in their hearts to refuse a
purse of florins. _I_ have done my very best, but I can't find it in
my heart. So help me, God! A man can only do what he can do. I can't do
it; no, I can't do it.

(_Exit._)

SCENE X

CALAF.

CALAF.

What is this fellow warning me against?
Who is to visit me?

Well, I can fight, Yea, fight the very devil, if he come.
My thoughts are all for her. Short time remains Of fearing and of torment:
Dawn is nigh!

And can it be her heart is still so hard And pitiless? Well, let us try
to sleep.

SCENE XI
ZELIMA, CALAF.

_Enter_ ZELIMA.

ZELIMA.

My Prince, I am a slave of Turandot, And hither come by ways which even
to her Are closed. Good news I bring you.

CALAF.

Slave, you lie.
The heart of Turandot is pitiless.

ZELIMA.

You speak the truth. And yet: you are the first That ever touched it.
You believe me not, And yet it is quite true. She says she hates you,
And she already loves you. May the earth Swallow me if it is not true she
loves you.

CALAF.

The news _is_ good. I will believe. What next?

ZELIMA.

She bids me tell you, only her ambition Drives her to desperation. Now
she sees That what she undertook she cannot do, But thinking of to-morrow
and its shame She is consumed.... May the earth swallow me, If here I
lie!

CALAF.

Enough, my pretty slave.

I will believe. Go! Tell her: it is easy To give the contest up. And
she would win Fairer renown by softening her heart, And giving of
her own free will the hand He longs for to the man who loves her
true.

Is this the message, haply, that you bring?

ZELIMA.

No, Prince. My message runs not so. We ask Consideration for our
weaknesses.

The Princess begs you for a favour. Spare Her vanity. Help her to say
those names In the Divan to-morrow.

Then she herself Will from her throne descend, and reach to you Her right
hand. You it costs so little. Say The names, and in this manner win her
heart.

CALAF (_with a smile_).

H'm! Pretty slave, where is the speech's end?

ZELIMA.

What speech's end, your Highness?

CALAF.

"Let the earth Swallow me if I lie in this."

ZELIMA.

You doubt it?

CALAF.

I do a little doubt it--just so much That I refuse to do what you
desire.

Go, tell your mistress, if I hide the names It is because a lover must
be cautious-- I do not hide them with intent to pain her.

ZELIMA (_violently_).

Fool, fool!

you little know what this will cost you!

CALAF.

And if it cost my life!

ZELIMA.

You soon will see.
Good-night.

(_Aside._)
The fool! He has made a fool of me.

(_Exit in a rage._)

CALAF.

Be steadfast, heart! Only a few hours more The skies will clear, and fear
will have an end.
That I could sleep.... My tortured spirit yearns For rest. Sink down
upon me, gentle sleep!

(_Goes to sleep._)

SCENE XII
CALAF, TRUFFALDINO.

TRUFFALDINO.

(_Comes creeping in cautiously from right, creeps under the divan._)
Well, thank God! he's gone to sleep at last.
'Sh! 'Sh! (_In the front of the stage before the footlights._) As my poor
old mother used to say, "A good name is worth a fortune." What a good
name this idiot of a Prince must have, considering how my gracious
Princess is throwing all her money away on him! Skirina's got some,
Zelima's got some, Brigella's got some. I've got some, and I'm going to
get two purses extra if I get this young hopeful's name. And I shall
get it! You watch me. I'm going to! (_With much ceremony he pulls
a big turnip, wrapped in a strip of paper, out of his dress._) Here
I have the famous magic root mandragora. The Universal Doctor and Great
Herbalist Pimpernel, Market Square, second door to the right, let me have
it for a tanner. Warranted, of course.
Warranted to go two years. Printed instructions for use attached.
(_Unwraps the turnip, reads:_) "The root mandragora opens all doors,
bursts all locks, raises hidden treasure, confers riches and wisdom...."
(_Looks up._) Aha! just what I want. (_Reads on:_) "It has influence
over the constellations and the planets, makes the blind to see and the
deaf to hear, is a protection against the evil eye, heals all maladies
of the mind, depression in men and melancholy in women...." (_Looks
up._) Aha! Depression, quite so. Melancholy, quite so. (_Reads
on:_) "It confers the gift of second sight, reveals hidden secrets...."
(_Looks up._) Ah! now we have it. Hidden secrets.... "Let it be
placed under the pillow of the person, whether male or female, whose
secret it is desired to know, when the said person is asleep. Then
the person aforesaid..." Hurrah! (_jumps for joy_) "will, by dreaming
aloud, communicate what it is desired to know." Did you hear that?
Isn't that the very thing? (_Creeps up to_ CALAF'S _bed, and, with
excessive caution, places the turnip under his pillow_.) 'Sh!
'Sh!
(_Draws back a little, and waits, in the greatest excitement, for
what is going to happen._ CALAF _does not utter a sound_. _With a
disappointed face_ TRUFFALDINO _creeps nearer the bed again_. CALAF
_remains dumb_.)
Do say something, my dear boy! Do say something, please! (_Waits a
little._) Out with the name, my sweet little lambkin.
(_With transfigured face_ CALAF _whispers terms of endearment_.)
What's he saying now? Tu... Tu...
Turandot. Oh, bother! I know that name already, the name of my
adored Princess. It's _your_ name I want to know, my darling
boy.
(CALAF _goes on whispering excitedly_. _He smiles in his happy
dream, and raises himself on his elbow during the following without
opening his eyes_.)
Tu... nothing but Turandot! Well, then, here I am, duckie. Here I
am, lovey, here I am--my own very self, your own little lovey duckie
Turandot. (_Purses up his lips._ CALAF _smiles as though in rapture_.)
What wouldst thou have of me, my sweetest heart? Eh? Well, what?
Something like this? (_Smacks his lips._) Well, then, you _shall_
have it, and more besides.
But first of all, darling, you must tell me your name, your own
delightful, sweet little name, my honey!...
(CALAF _sinks back and lies dumb again, sulkily_.)
Oh, you won't, won't you? You really won't?
How nasty of you, my love! Just look at me.
See how pretty I am! (_Trips coquettishly up and down in front of
the bed._) Look at my lovely white arms and my lovely plump legs,
and my glorious hair hanging all down my back!
...Just look at it, my sweet little chick!
(CALAF _begins to whisper excitedly, raising himself the while_.)

That's right, that's right, quite so: talk, talk, my bonny babe!
(_Bends down again, till his mouth almost touches the sleeper's._)
Once again, my sweet one! Say it once again, my little white lambkin!
It shall have its kiss, it shall, right away.
(CALAF _turns suddenly and violently round on the other side, and
deals him a ringing box on the ear_. (_Squeaking noisily_, TRUFFALDINO
_runs away_. CALAF _sits up for a moment in astonishment, opens his
eyes, shuts them again immediately, and sinks back on his couch_.)
SCENE XIII 
ADELMA, _veiled, with a lantern in her hand_.
CALAF _sleeping_.

ADELMA (_aside_).
O moment I have sighed for long! O love, That lendest cunning courage
unto me!
And Fortune, thou that through all obstacles Hast led me hither:
help a lovesick maid!
Oh, bring me to the goal of my desires!
Silence this yearning, love! And, Fortune, break These galling
fetters....
(_She lets the light of her lantern rest on_ CALAF, _and gazes at
him_.) 
My belovèd sleeps.
Oh, burst not, heart! Dear eyes, how loth I am To trespass on the
rest possessing you!
And yet I must. At once. The short night flees.
(_She puts her lantern down._) 
Stranger, awake!
CALAF (_starts up in a fright_).

Whose voice awakens me?
What seekest thou again, thou creeping ghost?
Why are my eyes denied their sleep?

ADELMA.

Be calm!
Only a wretched woman stands before you.
And she does not come, as the other did, To lure the names from you
by trickery.

CALAF.

Let be! You cannot cheat me.

ADELMA.
I cheat _you_?
Has not a slave been here with such intent?
(_Puts her lantern down._) 

CALAF.
Yes, and she went as wise, as when she came, And you will go as
wise as when you came.

ADELMA.
You know me ill to be so rude. Sit up And listen.
(_Sits down on the divan._) 

CALAF.
Well, then, what is your desire?

ADELMA.
First look at me, and then.... Prince, tell me now, Who do you think
I am?

CALAF.
In shape and bearing Noble you seem, but by your dress a slave.
And as a slave I saw you yesterday In the Divan.

ADELMA.
Five years since I saw you, And then _you_ were a slave.
(_Raises her veil._) 
Look at this face!
Do you not know it?

CALAF.
Adelma! How! Adelma, Whom I thought dead!

ADELMA.
She is a serving-maid, Who was the daughter of King Kaikobad.

CALAF.
Adelma! A slave!

ADELMA.

A slave! I'll tell you why.
I had a brother, blind with love, as you are, For Turandot. In the
Divan he met her.

(_Weeps._)
You saw his head above the city gate With all the others.

CALAF.
It is true, then, true.

ADELMA.
My father Kaikobad, in fury bold, Led his array against Altoum.
Fortune, The fickle jade, lured him to his defeat And death. Altoum's
general devised At one fell stroke to extirpate our race.
My brothers he assassinated. Me, Together with my mother and three
sisters, He cast into the river, then in spate.
The gentle Emperor, coming on the scene, Ordered his guards to fish
us out again.
I was the only one brought to the shore, And I was led in the
triumphal train, And given as a slave to Turandot, To wait on the
hard-hearted woman who Was cause of all my griefs. Now, Calaf,
speak, Am I not worth compassion?

(_Weeps._) 

CALAF (_moved_).
Indeed you are, Adelma, Princess of the Carcasenes!
But what can so unfortunate a man As I am do for you? If fortune
smile On me to-morrow, I will promise help For you, and freedom.
And your grieving now Can only heap the measure of my own.

ADELMA.
You know me now, my destiny, my race.
May you the better credit a King's daughter, What pity--I will not
say love--constrains her Now to confide to you. False Turandot,
Malicious, cunning, cruel Turandot, Soon as the morning dawns, will
have you murdered.
All orders are already given. So much From her, who is the mistress
of your dreams.

CALAF (_starts up savagely_).
She will have me murdered, do you say?

ADELMA.
(_Rises likewise, with the most solemn emphasis._) 
Yes, murdered:
While you are on your way to the Divan.
A score of swords await your setting out.

CALAF (_beside himself_).
I will call the guards.

(_Makes for the door._)
ADELMA (_holds him back_).

Bethink yourself, rash man!
The guards? They have been bought by Turandot!
CALAF (_in blind despair_).
Timur, my wretched father, thus it stands.
With Calaf, thy proud son; he that set out To seek good fortune for
himself and thee!

(_Covers his face with his hands._)
ADELMA (_aside_).
Haha! Timur... Calaf.... Be thrice blest, lie That lured this forth.
Doubly I hold him now.

CALAF.

Can it be possible that Turandot...
How _can_ it be that such an angel's face Should hide such
devilry?...

(_Contemptuously._)
No. You deceive me, Adelma. Go!

ADELMA.
I will forgive your doubt.
An angel's face? Oh, would that you had seen her As I have! In the
harem rages she, And like a snapping bitch runs to and fro, Green
in the face, and with her bloodshot eyes Shining with hate under
distorted brows.
Doubt if you will. That you should doubt my words Is not such pain
as your approaching death.

(_Weeps._) 

CALAF.
What treachery! By the very guards betrayed Appointed to protect
me! He spake right, That rascal of a captain: Gold kills duty.
Life, fare thee well!

ADELMA.
And yet you may escape Your evil star. Up, I will show the way.
By saving you from death, I save myself From slavery. With my jewels
I have bought Two of the guards, an escort I have hired, And horses
are in readiness. The Khan Of Berlas is my kinsman. Leagued with
him Let us invade and seize my kingdom--yours, If so you will. And
this my hand be yours, If you will have it. But if you will not,
The Tartar Kings are not unblest with daughters, Fair maidens full
of love and fit for you.
Be you the King, and I will be your subject.
Only flee, death. Only deliver me.
And I will conquer even my love, which now, Crimson with shame, I
have confessed.....
Day dawns!
Day dawns! My head swims.... Stranger, flee with me!

CALAF.
In vain. I have resolved to stay and die.

ADELMA.
Then I will, too, stay for a little while In slavery yet. And soon
it will be seen Which of us two is readier to die.
(_Aside._) 
Often persistent love attains at last!
Calaf, Timur's son?

(_Aloud._) 
Stranger Prince, good-night!
(_Exit._) 

CALAF.

Oh, will this night of horrors never end?
And this fight of the soul that is consumed In burning love? By
Fortune cast away-- Cast into perils, by her hate pursued, I tarry
for the dawn and traitorous knives.
(_The scene grows light._)
See, the sun rises. Now the hour is come For her to feed her pleasure
on my blood, The hour has come that sees my torment end!
SCENE XIV 
BRIGELLA, GUARDS, CALAF.

BRIGELLA.
Time's up, your Highness. Fun begins in a minute.

CALAF.
Oh, is it you? Well, carry out your orders!
Be quick! It doesn't matter. Get it over.

BRIGELLA (_astonished_).
What orders? Eh? I haven't got any orders.
The only order I've got is to escort you to the Divan. Double quick!
The Emperor has already combed his beard and may appear in the Divan
any minute.

CALAF (_in a tragedy tone_).
Up, then, to the Divan! What though I do not Reach it alive? What
matters it? See here, Am I the man to be afraid of death?
(_Casts his sword away._)
I need no weapon. Let the Princess know That I have offered of my
own free will To her assassins my defenceless breast
(_Exit._) 

BRIGELLA.
What the devil _is_ the fellow raving about?
Women, those damned women! They've been at him the whole night, not
half, and his brain's collapsed! Hello, you! Present arms! Dress
your ranks! March!
(_Exeunt._ _Music of drums and other instruments of war._)
END OF THE SECOND ACT.

THE THIRD ACT 

SCENE I
_The great hall of the imperial Divan. In the "background, covered
by a curtain, an altar with a Chinese idol; two priests standing
beside it._ ALTOUM _on his throne, the doctors on their cushions_,
PANTALONE _and_ TARTAGLIA _on each side of the_ EMPEROR.
ALTOUM, PANTALONE, TARTAGLIA, _the_ DOCTORS, _the_ GUARDS. _Later_
CALAF.
(_Enter_ CALAF _excitedly from right_. _He looks round uneasily and
suspiciously._ _When he arrives at the middle of the room he bows
to_ ALTOUM.) 

CALAF (_aside_).
How's this? No trace of ambushed murderers?
Did the slave lie? Can Turandot have found The names out, and
rescinded her commands?
Then I lose all. Death had been better far.

ALTOUM.
My son, you seem excited and in fear, And I were fain had you a
merry face.
Now all is well. Your sorrows are at end.
Glad tidings that concern you I will save A little while. As for
my daughter, she Is yours. She sent to me thrice in the night
Petitioning release from this encounter.
Therefore I charge you, son, be of good cheer!

PANTALONE.
Heaven knows, my dearest Royal Highness, I myself had to trot off
in the night to pay a call on her Royal Highness in the Seraglio
and receive her most illustrious commands. I didn't even have the
time to tumble into my slippers and get dressed properly. And it
was so cold, Heaven knows (_coughs_), I'm shivering yet. Never mind!
Never mind!

TARTAGLIA.
They fetched me out of bed at 5 a.m. It was just beginning to get
light a bit. She made me stand in front of her half an hour while
she went on whining something or other. For sheer cold and vexation
I talked the most clotted nonsense to her.She laid her hand on Richard's arm and cried: "If it's not
impudence, it's the next thing to it, staring like that into a pairson's
room! They're collecting, I suppose. Away and give them a penny."

"No," said Richard. "They are not collecting. That is Roger."


CHAPTER IX


Ellen could not understand why Richard whispered explosively as they
turned away from the window: "Pin up your hair! Quickly! We must go down
at once!" or why he hurried her downstairs without giving her time to
use her brush and comb. When they got down into the old parlour Richard
went to the side door that opened into the farmyard and flung it open,
beginning a sentence of greeting, but there was nothing to be seen but
the grey sheds, the wood-pile, and the puddle-pocked ground. He uttered
an exasperated exclamation, and drew it to, saying to Ellen: "Open the
front door! Please, dear." She did so, but saw nothing save the dark and
narrow garden and the black trees against the white north sky. "What in
Christ's name are they doing?" Richard burst out, and flung open the
side door again. Both put their heads out over the threshold to see if
the two visitors were standing about anywhere, and a gust of wind that
was making the trees beat their arms darted down on the house and turned
the draught between the two open doors into a hurricane. Ellen squealed
as her door banged and struck her shoulder before she had time to steer
clear of it. "Oh, my poor darling!" said Richard, and he was coming
towards her, when they heard the glug-glug-glug of water dripping from
the table to the floor, and saw that the draught had overturned a vase
filled with silver boughs of honesty. He picked it up and uttered
another bark of exasperation, for it had cracked across and he had cut
his hand on the sharp edge of the china.

"Oh, damn! oh, damn! oh, damn!" he cried, in a voice that rage made
high-pitched and childish, sucking his finger in between the words.
"What a filthy mess!" He looked down on the wet tablecloth and the two
halves of the vase lying in the bedabbled leaves with an expression of
distaste so far out of proportion to its occasion that Ellen remembered
uneasily how several times that day she had noticed in him traces of a
desperate, nervous tidiness like Marion's. "If you ring for one of the
maids she'll soon clear it up," she said soothingly, and moved towards
the bell. But he took his bleeding finger away from his lips and waved
it at her, crying: "No! no! I don't want either of the servants round
till I've found that fool and that woman! This is some new
folly--probably I'll have to get him away before mother comes! Come on!
Perhaps they're hanging about the garden, though God knows why!" After
making a savage movement towards the broken vase, as if he could not
bear to leave the disorder as it was, and checking it abruptly,
jarringly, he rushed into the dining-room, and Ellen followed him.

The two were there, their faces pressed against the window-panes. Behind
them the grey waste of stormy shallow waters, and the salt-dimmed
pastures, and the black range of the Kentish hills, hung with
grape-purple rainclouds, made it apparent how much greater dignity
belongs to the earth and sea than to those who people them. As Richard
and Ellen halted at the door the faces receded from the glass. The woman
stepped backwards and, looking as if she were being moved on by a
policeman, passed suddenly out of sight beyond the window's edge.
Richard crossed the room and opened the French window, but by the time
he had unlocked it the man in uniform, who had been beckoning to his
companion with long bony hands, had gone in search of her. As Richard
put his head round the door to bid them enter, the wind, which was now
rushing round the house, made itself felt as a chill commotion, an icy
anger of the air, in which both he and Ellen shivered. Presently the
pair in uniform appeared again, but at some distance across the lawn,
and too intensely absorbed in argument to pay any attention to him.

"Oh, damn! oh, damn!" sobbed Richard. The wind was blowing earth-daubed
leaves off the flowerbeds through the open door into the prim room. He
stepped into the gale and shouted: "Roger! Roger! Come in!"

Roger waved his arms, which were too long for the sleeves of his coat,
and from his mouthings it was evident that he was shouting back, but the
wind took it all. In anger Richard stepped back into the room and made
as if to close the doors, and at that the two on the lawn ran towards
the house, with that look which common people have when they run for a
train, as if their feet were buckling up under them. Richard held the
door wide again, but when the couple reached the path in front of the
house they were once more seized with a doubt about entering and came to
a standstill.

"Come in," said Richard; "come in."

The man took off his cap and ran his hands through his pale, long hair.
"Is mother in?" he demanded in a thin, whistling voice.

"Come in," said Richard; "come in."

The man began: "Well, if mother's not in, I don't know--"

Richard fixed his eyes on the woman's face. "Come in," he said softly,
brutally, loathingly. Ellen shivered to hear him speak thus to a woman
and to see a woman take it thus, for at once the stranger moved forward
to the window and stepped into the room. As she brushed by him she
cringingly bowed her shoulders a little, and looked up at him as he
stood a head and shoulders higher than herself. He looked back steadily
and made no sign of seeing her save by a slight compression of the lips,
until she passed on with dragging feet and stood listlessly in the
middle of the room. It was evident that they completely understood one
another, and yet their understanding sprung from no recollection of any
previous encounter, for into the eyes of neither did there come any
flash of recognition. There could be no doubt that Richard was feeling
nothing but contempt for this woman, and her peaked yet rich-coloured
face expressed only sick sullenness; yet Ellen felt a rage like
jealousy.

Richard turned again to the garden, and said: "Come in."

"Now don't be high-handed, old man," expostulated the stranger. But then
he seemed to remember something, and stretched out both his arms, held
them rigid, and opened his mouth wide as if to speak very loudly. But no
sound came, and his arms dropped, and his long bony hands pawed the air.
Then suddenly his arms shot out again, and he exclaimed very quickly in
a high, strained voice: "Pride has always been your besetting sin,
Richard. You aren't a bad chap in any way that I know of. But you're
proud. And it doesn't become any of us to be proud"--his spirit was
shaking the words out of his faltering flesh--"for we're all miserable
sinners. You needn't order me"--he spoke more glibly now, the flesh and
the spirit seemed in complete agreement--"to come out of the garden like
that. I wish Poppy hadn't gone in." He caught his breath with something
like a sob; but the woman in uniform made no movement, and turned her
eyes to Richard's face as if it were he that must give the order. "I've
got a reason for staying out here. I know mother's not got Jesus. If
she's ashamed of me now that I'm one of Jesus' soldiers, I won't come
in. I'll go and wrestle on my knees for her soul, but I won't hurt her
by coming in. So here I stay till she tells me to come in."

"But she's out," said Richard.

The man in uniform was discomfited. The light went out of his face and
his mouth remained open. He shifted his weight from one foot to the
other and muttered: "Ooh-er, is she?"

"Yes," said Richard pleasantly. "She's gone over to Friar's End, but
she'll be back any time now. I wish you'd come in. I haven't seen you
for years, and I'd like to swap yarns with you about what we've been
doing all the time."

"You'd have the most to tell," answered the other wistfully. "You've
been here, there, and everywhere in foreign parts. And I haven't been
doing nothing at all. Except--" he added, brightening up, "being saved."

"That's your own fault," Richard told him. "I've often wondered why you
didn't try your luck abroad. You'd have been sure to hold your own.
Well, anyway, come in and have some tea. I don't know what mother would
say to me if she came in and found I'd let you stay out in the cold.
She'd be awfully upset."

"Do you think she would?" the man in uniform asked, and seemed to
ponder. He looked up at the grey sky and shivered. "'Tis getting
coldish. And the cloth this uniform is made from isn't the sort that
keeps out cold weather. God knows I don't want to grumble at the uniform
I wear for Jesus' sake, but me having been in the drapery, I can't help
noticing when a thing is cheap." He stared down at his toes for a time,
lifting alternately his heels and pressing them down into the wet
gravel; then raised his head and said nonchalantly: "Well, old man, I
think I will come in after all." But he halted yet again when he got one
foot over the threshold. "Mind you, I'm not coming in just because it's
cold," he began, but Richard, exclaimed, "Yes, yes! Of course I know
you're not!" and gripped him by the arm and pulled him into the room. He
did not seem to resent the rough treatment at all, and went over at once
to the woman in uniform, and, looking happily about him, cried: "Isn't
this a lovely home? I always say there's nobody got such a nice home as
my mother."

His voice whistled; and Ellen in her mind's eye saw a vision of some
clumsy, half-bestial creature wandering in primeval swamps, feeling joy
and yet knowing no joyful word or song, and so plucking a reed and
breathing down it, and in his ignorance being pleased at the poor noise.
She felt pity and loathing, and looked across the room at Richard,
meaning to tell him by a smile that she would help him to be kind to
Roger. But Richard was still occupying himself with the window,
examining with an air of irascibility a stain of blood which his cut
finger had left on the white paint near the lock. His eyes travelled
from it to the muddy footprints of the two who had come in from the
garden and to the spatter of earth-daubed leaves on the polished floor,
and his mouth drew down at the corners in a grimace of passion that made
Ellen long to run to him and kiss him and bid him not give way to the
madness of order so prevalent in this house. But he did not even look at
her, so she could do nothing for him.

He went forward to Roger, determinedly sweetening his face, and shook
his hand heartily. "It's good that you should have turned up just at
this moment, for I'm going to be married before long to Miss Melville,
whom I met in Scotland when I was working at Aberfay. Ellen, this is my
brother, Roger."

Roger took Ellen's hand and then seemed to remember something. After
exchanging a portentous glance with the woman in uniform, he looked
steadfastly into her face and said sombrely: "I hope all's well with
you, sister! I hope all's well with you!"

"Pairfectly," answered Ellen; and after a pause added, shyly: "And I'm
pleased to meet you. I hope anyone that's dear to Richard will be
friends with me."

He flung his head backwards and cried, in that whistling voice: "Yes,
I'll be that! And I'm a friend worth having now I've got Jesus! And He's
given me Poppy too! Aha, old man!" With a little difficulty he put both
his thumbs inside the corked edge of his armholes and began to stride up
and down, taking steps unnaturally long for thin legs. "You aren't the
only man who's thought of getting married! Great minds think alike, they
say!" With a flourish he stretched out his hand, and it was plain that
he thought he would touch the woman in uniform, though he was some feet
away. Richard's and Ellen's eyes met; it was repulsive to see a man
dizzied by so small a draught of excitement. "Richard, Miss Melville,
this is Lieutenant Poppy, who's going to be my wife."

It was difficult to know what to do, for the woman in uniform, although
she made a murmuring noise, preserved that unillumined aspect which
conveyed, more fully than silence could have done, that her soul was
glumly silent. But they went and greeted her, and looked into the matted
darkness of her eyes.

"We're going to be married as soon as I've served my year of probation.
That's a long time ahead, for I've only been at it a fortnight. I expect
you'll be getting married much sooner. Things always went easier with
you than me," he complained. "But it'll be a happy day when it comes,
and I get the two blessings at the same time, becoming a full soldier of
Jesus and marrying Poppy. She's nearly a full soldier already. She
joined the Army seven months ago."

"Do you preach in the streets?" asked Richard.

Roger's eyes filled with water. Ellen reflected that he must be
curiously sensitive for one so dull-witted, for the rage and disgust
behind the question had hardly shown their heads. "Yes, I do!" he said
pettishly. "And if Jesus doesn't object, I don't see why you should."

"I don't object at all," Richard assured him amiably. "I only wondered
what sort of work you did. I suppose you haven't come to work at the
Hallelujah Colony here, have you?"

"That's just what I've done!" answered Roger joyfully. "I joined up at
Margate and I've laboured there for three weeks. I didn't do so bad. Did
I, Poppy? Not for a start? No one could exactly shine at street
preaching at first, you know. They will laugh so. But I didn't do worse
than other people when they begin, did I, Poppy? However, they've
transferred me over here to the Colony, to do clerk work." He added with
a touch of defiance: "And, of course, they'll want me to take services
too, sometimes. In fact I'm going to take a service this evening."

"How long are you to be here?"

"Maybe always. They may feel I do the best work for Jesus here." He drew
a deep, shuddering breath, and took his cap off and threw it on the
table with a convulsive gesture. "If mother doesn't turn me away because
I've given myself to Jesus," he said with that whistling note, "I'll be
able to see her every day."

"She won't turn you away."

There was folly, there was innocence in Roger's failure to notice that
Richard was speaking not in reassurance but in grimness, as one might
speak who sees a doom, fire or flood travelling down on to the place
where he stood. "You ought to know, old chap," he murmured hopefully.
"She's always shown her heart to you, like she never has to me.... I
don't know.... Oh, I've prayed...."

"Well, you'll know for yourself in a minute," said Richard. "I heard the
front door open and close a second ago."

Ellen felt a thrill of pride because he had such keen senses, for the
sound had been so soft that she had not heard it, and yet it had reached
him in the depth of his horrified absorption of his brother's being. She
longed to smile at him and tell him how she loved him for this and all
the other things, but again he wouldn't pay attention to her. Indeed, he
could not, for, as she saw from his white mask, he was wholly given up
to pain and apprehension. Her heart was wrung for him, for she saw the
case against Roger. He was sickening like something that has been fried
in insufficient fat; and that his loathsomeness proceeded from no moral
flaw made it all the more sinister. If there was not vileness in his
will to account for the impression he made, then it must be kneaded
into his general substance, and meanness be the meaning of his pallor,
and treachery the secret of the darkness of his hair. She looked at him
accusingly as he stood beside the buxom, sullen woman, who in a slum
version of the emotion of embarrassment was sucking and gnawing one of
her fingers, and she found shining in his face the light of love; true
love that keeps faith and does service even when it is used
despitefully. Perplexed, she doubted all judgment.

The doorhandle turned, and Richard stepped in front of Roger. But when
Marion slowly came into the room she did not see him or anyone else,
because she was looking down on a piece of broken china which she held
in her hand.

There was stillness till Richard whispered: "Mother."

She lifted her dark eyes and said, with inordinate melancholy, "Oh,
Richard, someone has broken the Lowestoft jug I used for flowers in the
parlour."

He answered softly: "No one broke it. The wind blew it down when I
opened the door to Roger."

Her eyes did not move from his. Her mouth was a round hole. He put out
his hand to take the piece of china from her. They both gazed down on
it, as if it were a symbol, and exchanged a long glance. She gave it to
him and, bracing herself, looked around for Roger. When she found him
she started, and stared at the braid on his coat, the brass buttons, and
the brass studs on his high collar. Then she became aware of the woman,
and, with a faint, mild smile of distracted courtesy, took stock of her
uniform. His cap, lying on the table, caught her eye, and she picked it
up and turned it round and round on her hand, reading the black letters
on the magenta ribbon.

"So you've joined the Hallelujah Army, Roger?" she said, in that
muffled, indifferent tone.

"Yes," he murmured.

"Do you preach in the streets?" Her voice shook.

"Yes," he whispered.

She gave the cap another turn on her hand. "Are you happy?" she asked,
again indifferently.

"Yes," he whispered.

She flung the cap down on the table and stretched out her arms to him.
"Oh, my boy!" she cried. "Oh, my boy, I am so glad you are happy at
last!" Love itself seemed to have spread its strong wings in the room,
and the others gazed astonished until they saw her flinch, as Roger
crumpled up and fell on her breast, and visibly force herself to be all
soft, mothering curves to him.

Ellen cast down her eyes and stared at the floor. Roger's sobbing made a
queer noise. Ahé ... ahé ... ahé.... It had an unmechanical sound, like
the sewing-machine at home before it quite wore out, or Richard's
motor-bicycle when something had gone wrong; and this spectacle of a
mother giving heaven to her son by forgery of an emotion was an
unmechanical situation. It must break down soon. She looked across at
Richard and found him digging his nails into the palms of his hands, but
not so dejected as she might have feared. It struck her that he was
finding an almost gross satisfaction in the very wrongness of the
situation which was making her grieve--which must, she realised with a
stab of pain, make everyone grieve who was not themselves tainted with
that wrongness. He would rather have things as they were, and see his
mother lacerating her soul by feigning an emotion that should have been
natural to her, and his half-brother showing himself a dolt by believing
her, than see them embracing happily as uncursed mothers and their
children do. Uneasily she shifted her eyes from his absorbed face to the
far view of the river and the marshes.

"Oh, mother!" spluttered Roger, coming up to the surface of his emotion.
"I'm a rich man now! I've got Jesus, and you, and Poppy! Mother, this is
Poppy, and I'm going to marry her as soon as I can."

The woman in uniform looked at the window when Marion turned to her, as
if she would have liked to jump through it. One could imagine her
alighting quite softly on the earth as if on pads, changing into some
small animal with a shrew's stringy snout, and running home on short
hindlegs into a drain. She moistened her lips and mumbled roughly and
abjectly: "I didn't want to come."

Marion answered smoothly: "But now that you are here, how glad I am
that you have," and took her two hands and patted them. Looking round
benevolently at Ellen and back at Lieutenant Poppy, she exclaimed: "I'm
a lucky woman to have two daughters given me in one week." She was
behaving like an old mother in an advertisement, like the silver-haired
old lady who leads the home circle in its orgy of eating Mackintosh's
toffee or who reads the _Weekly Telegraph_ in plaques at
railway-stations. The rapidity with which she had changed from the
brooding thing she generally was, with her heavy eyes and her twitching
hands perpetually testifying that the chords of her life had not been
resolved and she was on edge to hear their final music, and the
perfection with which she had assumed this bland and glossy personality
at a moment's notice, struck Ellen with wonder and admiration. She liked
the way this family turned and doubled under the attack of fate. She was
glad that she was going to become one of them, just as a boy might feel
proud on joining a pirate crew. She went over and stood beside Richard
and slipped her arm through his. Uneasily she was aware that now she,
too, was enjoying the situation, and would not have had it other than it
was. She drooped her head against Richard's shoulder, and hoped all
might be well with all of them.

"You see, mother, since I saw you I've had trouble--I've had trouble--"
Roger was stammering.

Marion turned from him to Richard. "Ring for tea," she said, "and turn
on the lights. All the lights. Even the lights we don't generally use."

Roger clung to her. "I don't want to hide anything from you, mother," he
began, but she cut him short. "Oh, what cold hands! Oh, what cold
hands!" she cried playfully, and rubbed them for him. As the lights went
up one by one, behind the cornice, in the candlesticks on the table, in
the alabaster vases on the mantelpiece, they disclosed those hands as
long and yellowish and covered with warts. The parlourmaid came in and,
over her shoulder, Marion said easily: "Tea now, Mabel. There're five of
us. And we'll have it down here at the table."

She waved her visitors towards chairs and herself moved over to an
armchair at the hearth. All her movements were easy and her face wore a
look of blandness as she settled back among the cushions, until it
became evident that she was to be disappointed in her natural hope that
Roger would see the necessity of stopping his babble while the servant
was going in and out of the room. It was true that he did not speak when
she was actually present, but he began again on his whistling intimacies
the minute she closed the door, and when she returned cut himself short
and relapsed into a breathy silence that made it seem as if he had been
talking of something to the discredit of them all. Ellen felt disgust in
watching him, and more of this perverse pleasure in this situation,
which she ought to have whole-heartedly abhorred, when she watched
Marion. She was one of those women who wear distress like a rose in
their hair. Her eyes, which wandered between the two undesired visitors,
were star-bright and aerial-soft; under her golden, age-dusked pallor
her blood rose crimson with surprise; her face was abandoned so amazedly
to her peril that it lost all its burden of reserve, and was upturned
and candid as if she were a girl receiving her first kiss; her body,
taut in case she had to keep up and restrain Roger from some folly of
attitude or blubbering flight, recovered the animation of youth. It was
no wonder that Richard did not look at anybody but his mother.

"You see, mother, it was Poppy who brought me to Jesus," Roger said, a
second before the door closed. "I ... I'd had a bit of trouble. I'd been
very foolish.... I'll tell you about that later. It isn't because I'm
cowardly and unrepentant that I won't tell it now. I've told it once on
the Confession Bench in front of lots of people, so I'm not a coward.
And I don't believe," he declared, casting a look of dislike at Richard
and Ellen, "that the Lord would want me to tell anybody but you about
it." The servant returned, and he fell silent; with such an effect that
she looked contemptuously at her mistress as she might have if bailiffs
had been put into the house. When she had gone he began again: "It was
this way Poppy did it. After my trouble I was walking down Margate
Broadway--"

The woman in uniform made so emphatic a noise of impatience that they
all turned and looked at her. "There isn't a Broadway in Margate!" she
nearly snarled. "It's High Street, you mean. The High Street. Broadways
they call them some places. But not at Margate, not at _Margate_."

"Neither it is," said Roger adoringly. "What a memory you're got,
Poppy!"

Marion rose from the table, laying her hand on the woman's braided
shoulders as she passed. "Let's come to the table and have some tea; and
take your hat off, dear. Yes, take it off. That close bonnet can't be
very comfortable when one's tired."

Ellen stared like a rude child as the woman slowly, with shapeless red
fingers, untied her bonnet-strings and revealed herself as something at
once agelessly primitive and most modernly degenerate. The frizzed
thicket of coarse hair which broke into a line of tiny, quite circular
curls round her low forehead made Ellen remember side-streets round
Gorgie and Dalry, which the midday hooters filled with factory girls
horned under their shawls with Hinde's curlers; yet made her remember
also vases and friezes in museums where crimped, panoplied priestesses
dispensed archaic rites. Her features were so closely moulded to the
bone, her temples so protuberant, and her eyes sunk in such pits of
sockets that one had to think of a skull, a skull found in hot sand
among ruins. The ruins of some lost Nubian city, the mind ran on, for
the fulness of her lips compared with the thinness of her cheeks gave
her a negroid look; yet the smallness and poor design of her bones
marked her as reared in an English slum. But her rich colour declared
that neither that upbringing, nor any of the mean conditions which her
bearing showed had pressed in upon her since her birth, had been able to
destroy her inner resource of vitality. The final meaning of her was,
perhaps, primitive and strong. When she had stood about the room there
had been a kind of hieratic dignity about her; she had that sanctioned
effect upon the eye which is given by someone adequately imitating the
pose of some famous picture or statue. There flashed before Ellen's mind
the tail of some memory of an open place round which women stood looking
just like this; but it was gone immediately.

"Well," said Roger, "I was telling you how I got Jesus. I was going
along Margate High Street, and I saw a crowd, and I heard a band
playing. I didn't take any particular notice of it and I was going to
pass it by--think of it, mother, I was going to pass it by!--when the
band stopped and a most beautiful voice started singing. It was Poppy.
Oh, mother, you must hear Poppy sing some day. She has such a wonderful
voice. It's a very rich contralto. Before she was saved she sang on a
pier. Well, I got into the crowd, and presently I got close and I saw
her." A dreadful coyness came on him, and he turned to Poppy and, it was
plain to all of them, squeezed her hand under the table. She looked
straight in front of her with the dumb malignity of a hobbled mule that
is being teased. "Well, I knew at once. I've often envied you and mother
for going to Spain and South America, and wondered if the ladies were
really like what you see in pictures. All big and dark and handsome, but
when Poppy came along I saw I didn't have to go abroad for that! And you
know, mother, Poppy _is_ Spanish--half. Her name's Poppy Alicante. Her
mother was English, but she married a Spanish gentleman, of very good
family he was. In fact, he was a real don, wasn't he, Poppy? But he died
when she was a baby, and as he'd been tricked out of his inheritance by
a wicked uncle, there wasn't much money about, so Poppy's mother married
again, to a gentleman connected with the Navy, who lives just the other
side of the river from over here. Funny, isn't it? _Dear Sirs_,--In
your issue of the 21st. I note an editorial setting forth how the New
York City Health Department trapped an ingenious builder, who piped his
sewerage into his back-yard, and I, and, I think I can safely say, many
other architects of New York, would ask why you omit, when publishing
such facts, to mention that such work was so put in and is continually
put in, in as bad or in a very unworkmanlike and insanitary manner,
under the supervision of the same department, and thus shows how
the paid officials and inspectors whose business it is to pass upon
and approve the plans and specifications and to give continual
inspection--to see, examine and test every length of pipe and every
joint; who have the might of the law to strike down the offender
who shall make bold to violate their mandates, fail to give protection
to the innocent owners and purchasers of property, or curb the
avaricious hands of unscrupulous builders and careless workmen.

I should like further, to ask you to publish to the New York City
public, the fact that the "Department", the "Health Department",
with its Bureau of Plumbing and Light and Ventilation, and the
Building Bureau of the Fire Department, are unable to protect
property owners and purchasers from errors in sanitation and
construction as they are supposed by too many to do.

Owners frequently think that unless they want "fancy" drawings and
fronts, an architect is superfluous.

The "speculator" finds it no advantage, but rather the opposite, to
have an impartial judge between owner and Contractor, or a close
inspection over his subs; as he gains little by the fact of his having
employed a thorough architect, when he comes to fell, and loses by
the bill for services and the legitimate price he pays for honest
work.

The bulk of speculative work done in New York is after the most trivial
plans made by some mere draughtsman or carpenter, and the
"superintendence" is under the "keen" eye of the builder and
owner--who is usually one and the same individual and who has made
a definite failure at all the branches of the trade and frequently
many others, and now holds position as owner of the property by
virtue of his having paid, entirely in mortgage, for the same.

In the large majority of cases that have been under my observation,
they are entirely incapable of passing an intelligent opinion on any of
the materials and work that make up a building, or at least on very
little, and the gross impositions practiced upon them by their
sub-contractors is startling.
Their work is covered-in and is so left, I doubt not, in the majority
of cases, as the inspection furnished by the "Department" is entirely
inadequate for proper protection. The confidence of the public is
continually bolstered up by such descriptions as the editorial above
mentioned.

A NEW YORK ARCHITECT.

* * * * *

A SEEMING ATTEMPT TO DEFRAUD AN ARCHITECT.

PITTSBURGH, PA., December 30, 1889.

TO THE EDITORS OF THE AMERICAN ARCHITECT:

_Dear Sirs_,--Please answer through the columns of your valuable journal
the following:

I will designate A as the party for whom I drew plans, etc., B as the
owner of property adjoining, and C as the contractor for A.
If he's harsh to
those that work under him it's right he should be. God chasteneth whom
He loveth, and it's the same way with Captain Sampson I expect. It's
really a way of showing that he cares about you and is anxious about
you. And anyway, he did give me Jesus that evening. Oh, mother, it was
so wonderful!" The words rushed out of him. "He made you feel all
tingling like you do when the fire engine goes past. Oh, it's an evening
to remember! And it gave me Jesus! Oh, mother, you don't know what it's
like to find Jesus! To know"--his voice whistled exultantly over the
stricken tea-table--"that there's Somebody who really loves you!"

For one second Marion covered her face with her hands.

Unseeingly he piped on: "I'm happy now. Always happy." He broke into
thin, causeless laughter. "When I wake up in the middle of the night,
instead of feeling miserable like I used to, and remembering things that
happened at Dawlish when I was a kid, and wishing I hadn't ever been
born as I wasn't any good for anything, I just think of Jesus and feel
lovely and warm. And I've got earthly happiness as well. I've got Poppy.
Oh, I'm a lucky man, lucky man! And I've got a lifework instead of being
an odd-come-short. I'll always have something to do now. They've had
experience with all sorts of men for years and years, turning them into
soldiers for Jesus. Surely they'll be able to find some work for me,
even if they don't want me to preach. Look at what I'm going to do now.
Even if I don't do anything but clerk work, it's helping the Labour
Colony along--helping hundreds of poor souls to earn a decent living
under Bible influence when, if they weren't, there they'd be, roaming
about the streets hungry and in sin. I'll be doing my bit, won't I,
mother?"

She smiled beneficently but speechlessly.

Ellen felt contemptuous. She had read about those Hallelujah Army
Colonies for the unemployed, and had heard them denounced at labour
meetings, and they were, she knew, mere palliatives by using which the
pious gave themselves the pleasure of feeling that they were dealing
with the immense problem of poverty when they were merely taking a few
hundred men and setting them to work in uneconomic conditions. The very
consideration of them brought back the happy spasm in the throat, the
flood of fire through the veins, the conviction that amidst the
meadowsweet of some near field there lurked a dragon whose slaughter
(which would not be difficult) would restore the earth its lost
security; and all the hot, hopeful mood which filled her when she heard
talk of revolution. She hated the weak man for aggravating the offence
of his unsightliness by allying himself with the reactionary powers that
made this world as unsightly as himself. And it was like him to talk
about teaching the Bible when everybody knew that there were lots of
things that weren't true. The spectacle of this mean little intelligence
refusing to take cognisance of the truths that men like Darwin and
Huxley had worked all their lives to discover, and faced the common
hatred to proclaim, seemed to her cruel ingratitude to the great and
wanton contemning of the power of thought, which was the only tool man
had been given to help him break this prison of disordered society. She
leaned across the table and demanded in a heckling tone: "But you must
know pairfectly well that these Labour Colonies are only tackling the
fringe of the problem. There's no way of settling the question of
unemployment until the capitalist system's overturned."

He looked at her with wide eyes and assumed an air of being engaged in
desperate conflict. It was evident that his egotism was transforming
this conversation into a monstrous wrestling with Apollyon. "Ah! You're
a Socialist. They only think of giving people money. But it isn't money
people need. Oh, no. 'What shall it profit a man if he gain the whole
world and lose his own soul?' It's Jesus they need. Give them the Bible
and all their wants will be satisfied," he cried in a shrill peewit cry.

"But the Bible isn't final. There's lots of things we know more about
than the people who wrote it. Look at all yon nonsense they put in about
Adam and Eve because they didn't know about evolution. That alone shows
it's absurd to rely solely on the Bible...."

She looked round for signs of the others' approval. She knew that
Richard agreed with her, for among his Christmas presents to her had
been Huxley's Essays, and when he had talked to her of science she had
seen that research after that truth was to him a shining mystic way
which he would have declared led to God had he not been more reverent
than Church men are, and feared to use that name lest it were not sacred
enough for the ultimate sacredness. But to her amazement he kept his
eyes on the crumbs which he was picking up from the tablecloth, and
through his parted lips there sounded the faintest click of
exasperation. She looked in wonder at Marion, and found her eyes also
downcast and her forefinger tapping on her chin as if she were seeking
for some expedient to stop this dangerous chatter. Ellen despised them
both. They had been terribly exercised at the thought that Roger was
going to preach in the streets, but they did not care at all that he was
delivered over to error. She looked at him sympathetically over the
table, feeling that since these horrid people with whom she had got
entangled did not like him, he might be quite nice, and found him
exchanging a long, peculiar glance with Poppy, which was followed on
both sides by a slow, meaning nod.

He looked in front of him again and his round eyes vacillated between
Richard and Ellen, growing rounder at each roll. Presently he swallowed
a lump in his throat and addressed himself to her. "Ah, you're an
unbeliever," he said. "Well, Captain Sampson says there's always a
reason for it if people can't believe." He moistened his lips and panted
the words out at her. "If you've been doing anything that's wrong--"

A sob prevented him. "Oh, I can't go and spoil this lovely tea, even if
I ought to for Jesus' sake!" he cried. "We're all so happy, I can't bear
to break it up by telling you what it's my duty to do! Poppy, doesn't
mother have everything nice? I've often thought of this tea-table when
I've been eating at places where they did things, roughish. Look at the
flowers. Mother always has flowers on the table, even when it's winter.
Jesus wouldn't expect me to break this up." His face became transfused
with light. "I believe Jesus loves everything that's done nicely,
whether it's a good deed or bread-and-butter cut nice and thin. That's
why," he mourned, so wistfully that all of them save the impassive woman
in uniform made a kind, friendly bending towards him, "I mind not to be
able to do anything really well. But Jesus loves me all the same. He
loves me whatever I'm like!" His brow clouded. "But because He loves me
I owe Him a debt. I ought to preach Him wherever I am, in and out of
season. But I can't spoil this. Aren't we all happy, sitting here? I'll
tell you what. They've asked me to take the Saturday evening service
to-night because the Commandant and the two under him are all down with
influenza. If you'll come and hear me I'll tell you what Jesus wants you
to hear. Oh, mother, Richard, do, do come!"

"Yes, Roger dear, we'll come."

"You won't ... make fun of it?"

"Oh no! Oh no!" Her voice was hesitant, intimate, girlishly shy. "We
haven't seen nearly as much of each other as a mother and son ought.
There are lots of things about me you don't know. For all you know, what
you said of Richard a moment ago ... might be true of me...."

"What I said about Richard?..."

"About times when one feels life too difficult and wants Someone to help
one...."

She spoke seductively, mysteriously, as if she were promising him a
pleasure; and he answered in a voluptuous whining: "Oh, mother, if I
could bring you to Jesus! Oh, Jesus! you are giving me everything I
want!" But in the midst of his rapture his face changed and he started
to his feet, so violently that his chair nearly fell backwards. "Yes,"
he cried reproachfully, "Jesus gives me everything, and this is how I
reward Him!"

They all stared at him, except Poppy, who was gloomily reading the
tea-leaves in her cup.

"I told a lie!" he answered their common mute enquiry.

"A silly, vain lie. I told you they'd asked me to take the Saturday
evening service to-night. They didn't. I offered to take it. Nobody ever
asks me to preach. They say I can't. Mind you, I don't think they're
right. I think that if they would let me practise I wouldn't speak so
badly. But that's not the point. I told a lie. I distinctly said they'd
asked me to preach because I wanted to pretend that I was making a
success of things like Richard always does. Oh, what a thing to do to
Jesus!"

"But, dear, that was only because you were speaking in a hurry. It
wasn't a deliberate lie."

"Oh, mother, you don't understand," he fairly squealed. "You haven't
been saved, you see, and you're still lax about these things. It does
matter! It was a lie! I ought to wrestle this thing out on my knees.
Mother, will it put anybody out if I go into the parlour and pray?"

Marion answered tenderly: "My dear, of course you can," but Poppy
clicked down her cup into its saucer and said in a tone of sluggish,
considered exasperation: "You haven't time. We ought to be at the chapel
half an hour before the meeting. It's a quarter to six now."

"Oh dear! oh dear! Is it as late as that? I wanted to write on a piece
of paper what I'm going to say! Now I won't have time! Oh, and I did
want to preach well! Oh, where's my cap?" He began to stumble about the
room.

Presently he caught his foot in one of the electric light cords and set
an alabaster lamp on the mantelpiece rocking on its pedestal. Richard
and Marion watched him and it with that set, horrified stare which the
anticipation of disorder always provoked in them. "Tcha!" exclaimed
Poppy contemptuously. "But it's there! On the armchair!" cried Ellen:
she could not bear the look on Richard's and Marion's faces. "Where?"
asked Poppy. It was the first time she had spoken directly to Ellen.
"There! There! Among the cushions," she answered, and rose and went
round the table to pick it up herself. Richard came and helped her.

Roger seemed a little annoyed when Richard and Ellen found the cap for
him among the cushions. Having to thank them spoiled, it could be seen,
some valedictory effect which he had planned. He stood by while they
shook hands with Poppy, who turned her head away as if to hide some
scar, and when she had gone across to Marion tried to get in his
designed tremendousness. By the working of his face, which made even
his ears move a little, they knew they must endure something very
characteristic of him. But into his weak eyes there bubbled a spring of
joyful tenderness so bright, so clear, so intense that, though it would
have seemed more fitting on the face of a child than of a man, it yet
was dignified.

"You make a handsome couple, you two!" he said.

"Richard, you're a whole lot taller than me. When I'm away from you I
forget what a difference there is between us. And the young lady, she's
fine, too."

"Come on! Come on!" said Poppy from the door.

He drew wistfully away from them. "I do hope you both come to Jesus," he
murmured, and smiled sweetly over his shoulder. "Yes, Poppy, I'm quite
ready. Why, you aren't cross with me over anything, are you, dear? Well,
good-bye, mother."

"Good-bye, Roger. And we'll come to the meeting. I'll let you out
myself, my dears."

Very pleased that she and Richard were at last alone together, Ellen sat
down on one of the armchairs at the hearth and smiled up at him. But he
would not come to her. He smiled back through the closed visor of an
overmastering preoccupation, and moved past her to the fireplace and
stood with his elbow on one end of the mantelpiece, listening to the
sounds that came in from the parlour through the half-open door:
Marion's urbane voice, thin and smooth like a stretched membrane, the
click of the front-door handle, the last mounting squeal from Roger,
which was cut short by a gruff whine from Poppy, and, loudest of all,
the silence that fell after the banging of the door. They heard the turn
of the electric switch. Marion must be standing out there in the dark.
But Ellen doubted that even if he had been with her in soul as in body,
and had spoken to her the words she wished, she could have answered him
as she ought, for a part of her soul too was standing out there in the
dark with Marion. They were both of them tainted with disloyalty to
their own lives.

When Marion came in she halted at the door and turned out all the lamps
save the candlesticks on the table. She passed through the amber,
fire-shot twilight and sat down in the other armchair, and began to
polish her nails on the palm of her hands. They were all of them lapped
in dusk, veiled with it, featureless because of it. Behind them the
candlesticks cast a brilliant light on the disordered table, on the four
chairs where Richard and Marion, Roger and Poppy had sat. Who's there?
Skirina? What! And in such haste?
Whence come you? Whither are you going?

SKIRINA.

Why, For sheer delight because the unknown Prince Had won the game; a
little, too, because I itched to hear how the proud tigress took
it, I ran to see Zelima in the harem.

BARAK.

Incautious woman! What is this you say?
I see. I hear you boasting: "Yes, just fancy, The strange Prince
spoke to us; my husband knows him...." Is it not as I say?

SKIRINA.
Well, if it is, What harm is there?

BARAK.
Confess it! You have told!

SKIRINA.
Well, yes! She asked me straightway for his name, And, to be frank,
I promised her...

BARAK (_angrily_).

Damnation!
The cat's out of the bag. Insensate woman!
Come hence! Away out of the town!Ellen was reminded of the way that
her own mother used to hover above the debris of the little tea-parties
they sometimes gave in Hume Park Square, cheeping: "I think they enjoyed
their teas. Do you not think so, Ellen?" and satisfying an appetite
which she had been too solicitous and interested a hostess to more than
whet in the presence of her friends. That was how a mother ought to be,
little, sweet, and moderate.

Marion brought her an éclair on a plate. She took it and stood up,
asking meekly: "Shall I take it and eat it somewhere else? You and
Richard'll be wanting to talk things over."

"Ah, no!" Marion was startled; and Ellen, to her own distress, found
herself exulting because this mature woman, who had dived so deeply into
the tides of adult experience in which she herself had hardly been
laved, was facing the situation so inadequately. She scorned her for the
stiffness of the conciliatory gesture she attempted, for the queer notes
which her voice made when she tried to alter it from her customary tone
of indifference in saying: "But, Ellen dear, you're one of us now. We've
no affairs that aren't yours too. We only wish they were a little
gayer...." She admired the facility of her own response for not more
than a minute, for, giving her a kind, blindish smile, Marion walked
draggingly across the hearthrug and took up her position at the
disengaged side of the fireplace and rested her elbow on the
mantelpiece, even as Richard was doing at its other end. They stood side
by side, without speaking, their firelit faces glowing darkly like
rubies in shadow, their eyes set on the brilliantly lit tea-table and
its four chairs. They looked beautiful and unconquerable--this tall man
who could assail all things with his outstretched strength, this
broad-bodied woman whom nothing could assail because of her crouching
strength.

Marion stretched out her hand to the fire. Her insanely polished nails
glittered like jewels.

She said in that indifferent tone: "Well, it wasn't so bad."

Some passion shook him. "Mother! Mother! To think of him bringing that
woman into this house--to meet you and Ellen!"

"Hush, oh hush! He does not know."

"But, mother! He ought to! Anyone could see--"

"What she was. Yes, poor woman. But remember I made a bad job of Roger.
I gave him no brains."

"Mother--it mustn't happen again. She can't come here again."

She grew stern. "Richard, you must say nothing to Roger. Nor to her.
She's his love and pride. So far as he's concerned, she's a better woman
than I am. I never put my love and pride in his life. (_Aloud._) But
if perchance You solve the riddles, and then prove to be Of mean
extraction, how shall the edict...

CALAF (_interrupting him quickly_).

Sire, The edict serves not save for sons of Kings.
If I by help of Heaven should solve the riddles, And then were found
to be of base extraction, Let my head pay for it.

My body give To dogs and carrion crows upon the fields.
There is one man in Pekin knows my name, And he will bear me
witness.

(_With an obeisance to the_ EMPEROR.)
Therefore I Entreat you in your mercy once again, Still let my name
be covered up with dark.

ALTOUM.

So be it then! It is your pleasing speech And noble bearing make me grant
the boon.
Oh that you now would grant the Emperor The boon he begs for from
his very throne, Beseeching you: Go back, my son, go back!
Desist from this adventure, and go back!

PANTALONE.
We can't get him any farther, your Majesty.

ALTOUM.
The nations are already nursing wrath Against me for the reckless
oath I swore.
Do not thou also force me to shed tears Over thy corpse. Oh, force
me not to hate This daughter of my loins more than I do Already;
force me not to hate myself Who brought her into the world, more
than I do.
Proud, vain, and pitiless, and cruel, source Is she of torment to
me till I die.

CALAF.
Sire, but I cannot think that you have cause To fill your heart
with torment and unrest.
If in your daughter there is cruelty, It is not from her father
that it came."No doubt you're right," he said, looking into the fire.

"And she hated giving up the child. That's why she snarls at Roger.
Until she gets another she'll be famished. It was taken over, I expect,
by a married sister or brother who've got no children of their own.
She's not allowed to see it now. Not since she left the nice place that
was found for her after she'd got over her trouble. Twenty pounds a
year--because of her lost character; and for the same reason rather more
work than the rest of the servants, who all found out about it. So she
ran away."

He interrupted her: "Supposing all that's true. And I know it is. It's
like you, mother, to read from a patch of brown skin on a woman's face
things that other people would have found out only by searching registry
records and asking the police. It's like the way you always turned your
back on the barometer and read the sky for news of the weather. You're
an old peasant woman under your skin, mother." His voice was hazed with
delight. He had forgotten the moment in the timeless joy of his love for
her. Ellen, in the shadows, stirred and coughed. He broke out again:
"Well, supposing all that's true! Are you going to be honest and be as
clear-sighted about what happened after she ran away? Mother, think of
the things that have been done to her, think of the things she's seen!"

The indifferent tone continued now, although she said: "Think of the
horrible things that have been done to me, think of the horrible things
I've seen! Oh, you're right, of course. Unhappy people are dangerous.
They clutch at the happy people round them and drag them down into the
vortex of their misery. But if you're going to hate anybody for doing
that, hate me. Look how I've dominated you with my misfortunes, look how
I've eaten up your life by making you feel it a duty to compensate me
for what I've endured. Hate me. But don't hate Poppy. Oh, that poor,
simple creature. Even now, after all that's happened, she'd be pleased
like a child if you took her to a fair where there were merry-go-rounds.
Oh, don't hate her. And don't hate Roger." Wildness flashed through her
like lightning through a dense dark cloud. "Don't hate him, Richard!
Take your mind off both of us. We're all right. I can manage everything
quite well. I'm hard. I haven't got all those fine feelings you think I
have. I'm quite hard. I can arrange everything beautifully. Roger's
happy in the Hallelujah Army. He's gone to Jesus for the love I ought to
have given him. I know they're thinking of turning him out. But I'll see
to it that they keep him. I'll pretend to have leanings towards their
religion, and I'll give them money from time to time so that they won't
dare get rid of him. It will be rather amusing squaring them. I shall
enjoy it. We will be all right. Leave us alone. Don't think of us. Think
of Ellen. Think of Ellen. How you hold back from your happiness!" she
cried gibingly. "I tell you, if I had had your chance of happiness when
I was young, neither my mother nor my father would have held me back
from it!"

It was as if her soul had leapt, naked and raging, from out of her mouth
when she said that. Ellen stirred among the cushions, feeling
unformulated shame. She wondered how Richard could endure hearing that
hoarse vehemence from the lips of one whom he must wish to be gentle and
unpassionate. But he was gazing at his mother trancedly and with slight
movements of his hands and feet, as if she were dancing and he desired
to join her in her spinning rhythm; and she, mad, changeable woman,
shivered and pressed her fingers against her mouth to silence herself,
and looked down on her skirt, drawling lazily: "Well, here I am,
standing about in my outdoor clothes. If there's anything I hate, it's
wearing outdoor clothes in the house. However, it'll save me changing,
and I've none too much time if I'm going to be punctual for Roger's
meeting."

She moved towards the door. He followed softly, as her shadow, and held
it open.

When he made to follow her out of the room she turned sharply. "You
needn't come."

"I promised Roger," he said falsely.

"What nonsense!" she blazed. "I'll tell him you had to stay here with
Ellen."

She banged the door on him. He stood staring at its panels, which were
rosy with firelight, and Ellen closed her eyes for weariness. After some
seconds she heard his tread and felt him bend over her. "Ellen," he
mumbled, "I must go with mother. That fool will be too awful on the
platform. I must see her through."

From the dark fey shape he made against the firelight she knew that he
was not thinking of her, that the life she had given him by her love no
longer ran in his veins. She scratched one of her wrists. If she could
have let the life he had given flow out of her veins she would have done
it. "Ay, do," she said. "I like you to be good to your mother. You never
know how long you may have her with you," she added piously and not
without cheerfulness.

He left her with a kiss that was dry and spurious like a paper flower.
She sank back into the chair and closed her eyes again, and listened for
the closing of the front door which would leave her free to weep or rage
or dance or do whatever would relieve the pressure of the moment on her
brain. TURANDOT (_haughtily_).

What man is this again, who fondly hopes To penetrate the
darkness of my riddles In spite of warnings manifold and grim?
What man comes speeding after dead men's heels, And asks to lose
his head?

ALTOUM.

Here stands the man.A desire for unspecified adult things ran through her veins, as
if she had just heard the strong initial blare of a band. Then she
checked all thoughts, for from the hall she heard the sound of argument.

The door was flung open by Marion. She moved towards the hearth with a
burly speed which marked this moment a crisis in the house of languid,
inhibited movements, and cast herself down on a low stool by the fender.
Richard followed and stood over her, the firelight driving over his face
like the glow of excited blood, the shadows lying in his eye-sockets
like blindness. She cried up at him: "No, I will not go if you come too.
How can I go and sit listening to him, with you beside me hating him!"
He swayed slowly, but did not answer. She stripped herself of coat and
furs and thrust them on him. "There. Take them up to my room. I'm not
going. I'll tell some lie. Better than you hating him like this. And
while you're up you'll find some papers on my desk about the mortgage on
Whitewebbs. Attend to these. And don't come back just now. You drive me
mad when you hate Roger so."

When he had softly shut the door she put her hand to her head and said:
"Oh, Ellen, what has happened to me? I have lost all my strength."

But her voice was still level, and she was but a squat, crouching mass
against the firelight. Nino is a poor man, having worked hard in all his
voyagings backwards and forwards across the Atlantic; but he has a
friend with money, one Luis Guerra, who provides him with the funds
necessary for fitting out a small caravel about the size of his old
ship the Nifta.So she did not answer.

"You must go for a long walk with Richard to-morrow," said Marion
presently. "Over to Rochford, perhaps, where Anne Boleyn lived. It's
pretty there."

