We read prayers, and then thought of breakfast. The monkey sucked one of
the goats, as if it had been its mother. My wife milked the cow, and
gave us boiled milk with biscuit for our breakfast; part of which she
put in a flask, for us to take on our expedition. We then prepared our
boat for a voyage to the vessel, to procure planks and timber for our
bridge. I took both Ernest and Fritz, as I foresaw our cargo would be
weighty, and require all our hands to bring it to shore.

We rowed vigorously till we got into the current, which soon carried us
beyond the bay. We had scarcely reached a little isle at the entrance,
when we saw a vast number of gulls and other sea-birds, fluttering with
discordant cries over it. I hoisted the sail, and we approached rapidly;
and, when near enough, we stepped on shore, and saw that the birds were
feasting so eagerly on the remains of a huge fish, that they did not
even notice our approach. We might have killed numbers, even with our
sticks. This fish was the shark which Fritz had so skilfully shot
through the head the night before. He found the marks of his three
balls. Ernest drew his ramrod from his gun, and struck so vigorously
right and left among the birds, that he killed some, and put the rest to
flight. We then hastily cut off some pieces of the skin of the monster,
which I thought might be useful, and placed them in our boat. But this
was not the only advantage we gained by landing. I perceived an immense
quantity of wrecked timber lying on the shore of the island, which
would spare us our voyage to the ship. We selected such planks as were
fit for our purpose; then, by the aid of our _jack-screw_ and some
levers we had brought with us, we extricated the planks from the sand,
and floated them; and, binding the spars and yards together with cords,
with the planks above them, like a raft, we tied them to the stern of
our boat, and hoisted our sail.

Fritz, as we sailed, was drying the shark's skin, which I hoped to
convert into files. And Ernest, in his usual reflective manner, observed
to me, "What a beautiful arrangement of Providence it is, that the mouth
of the shark should be placed in such a position that he is compelled to
turn on his back to seize his prey, thus giving it a chance of escape;
else, with his excessive voracity, he might depopulate the ocean."

At last, we reached our landing-place, and, securing our boat, and
calling out loudly, we soon saw our friends running from the river; each
carried a handkerchief filled with some new acquisition, and Francis had
over his shoulder a small fishing-net. Jack reached us first, and threw
down before us from his handkerchief some fine crawfish. They had each
as many, forming a provision for many days.

Francis claimed the merit of the discovery. Jack related, that Francis
and he took a walk to find a good place for the bridge.

"Thank you, Mr. Architect," said I; "then you must superintend the
workmen. Have you fixed on your place?"

"Yes, yes!" cried he; "only listen. When we got to the river, Francis,
who was looking about, called out, 'Jack! Jack! Fritz's jackal is
covered with crabs! Come!--come!' I ran to tell mamma, who brought a net
that came from the ship, and we caught these in a few minutes, and could
have got many more, if you had not come."

I commanded them to put the smaller ones back into the river, reserving
only as many as we could eat. I was truly thankful to discover another
means of support.

We now landed our timber. I had looked at Jack's site for the bridge,
and thought my little architect very happy in his selection; but it was
at a great distance from the timber. I recollected the simplicity of the
harness the Laplanders used for their reindeer. I tied cords to the
horns of the cow--as the strength of this animal is in the head--and
then fastened the other ends round the piece of timber we wanted moving.
I placed a halter round the neck of the ass, and attached the cords to
this. We were thus enabled, by degrees, to remove all our wood to the
chosen spot, where the sides of the river were steep, and appeared of
equal height.

It was necessary to know the breadth of the river, to select the proper
planks; and Ernest proposed to procure a ball of packthread from his
mother, to tie a stone to one end of the string, and throw it across the
river, and to measure it after drawing it back. This expedient succeeded
admirably. We found the breadth to be eighteen feet; but, as I proposed
to give the bridge strength by having three feet, at least, resting on
each shore, we chose some planks of twenty-four feet in length. How we
were to get these across the river was another question, which we
prepared to discuss during dinner, to which my wife now summoned us.

Our dinner consisted of a dish of crawfish, and some very good
rice-milk. But, before we began, we admired her work. She had made a
pair of bags for the ass, sewed with packthread; but having no large
needles, she had been obliged to pierce holes with a nail, a tedious and
painful process. Well satisfied with her success, we turned to our
repast, talking of our bridge, which the boys, by anticipation, named
the _Nonpareil_. We then went to work.

There happened to be an old trunk of a tree standing on the shore. To
this I tied my main beam by a strong cord, loose enough to turn round
the trunk. Another cord was attached to the opposite end of the beam,
long enough to cross the river twice. I took the end of my rope over the
stream, where we had previously fixed the block, used in our boat, to a
tree, by the hook which usually suspended it. I passed my rope, and
returned with the end to our own side. I then harnessed my cow and ass
to the end of my rope, and drove them forcibly from the shore. The beam
turned slowly round the trunk, then advanced, and was finally lodged
over the river, amidst the shouts of the boys; its own weight keeping it
firm. Fritz and Jack leaped on it immediately to run across, to my
great fear.

We succeeded in placing four strong beams in the same way; and, by the
aid of my sons, I arranged them at a convenient distance from each
other, that we might have a broad and good bridge. We then laid down
planks close together across the beams; but not fixed, as in time of
danger it might be necessary rapidly to remove the bridge. My wife and I
were as much excited as the children, and ran across with delight. Our
bridge was at least ten feet broad.

Thoroughly fatigued with our day of labour, we returned home, supped,
and offered thanks to God, and went to rest.

       *       *       *       *       *


CHAPTER IX.

The next morning, after prayers, I assembled my family. We took a solemn
leave of our first place of refuge. I cautioned my sons to be prudent,
and on their guard; and especially to remain together during our
journey. We then prepared for departure. We assembled the cattle: the
bags were fixed across the backs of the cow and the ass, and loaded with
all our heavy baggage; our cooking utensils; and provisions, consisting
of biscuits, butter, cheese, and portable soup; our hammocks and
blankets; the captain's service of plate, were all carefully packed in
the bags, equally poised on each side the animals.

All was ready, when my wife came in haste with her inexhaustible bag,
requesting a place for it. Neither would she consent to leave the
poultry, as food for the jackals; above all, Francis must have a place;
he could not possibly walk all the way. I was amused with the exactions
of the sex; but consented to all, and made a good place for Francis
between the bags, on the back of the ass.

The elder boys returned in despair,--they could not succeed in catching
the fowls; but the experienced mother laughed at them, and said she
would soon capture them.

"If you do," said my pert little Jack, "I will be contented to be
roasted in the place of the first chicken taken."

"Then, my poor Jack," said his mother, "you will soon be on the spit.
Remember, that intellect has always more power than mere bodily
exertion. Look here!" She scattered a few handfuls of grain before the
tent, calling the fowls; they soon all assembled, including the pigeons;
then throwing more down inside the tent, they followed her. It was now
only necessary to close the entrance; and they were all soon taken, tied
by the wings and feet, and, being placed in baskets covered with nets,
were added to the rest of our luggage on the backs of the animals.

Finally, we conveyed inside the tent all we could not carry away,
closing the entrance, and barricading it with chests and casks, thus
confiding all our possessions to the care of God. We set out on our
pilgrimage, each carrying a game-bag and a gun. My wife and her eldest
son led the way, followed by the heavily-laden cow and ass; the third
division consisted of the goats, driven by Jack, the little monkey
seated on the back of its nurse, and grimacing, to our great amusement;
next came Ernest, with the sheep; and I followed, superintending the
whole. Our gallant dogs acted as _aides-de-camp,_ and were continually
passing from the front to the rear rank.

Our march was slow, but orderly, and quite patriarchal. "We are now
travelling across the deserts, as our first fathers did," said I, "and
as the Arabs, Tartars, and other nomade nations do to this day, followed
by their flocks and herds. But these people generally have strong camels
to bear their burdens, instead of a poor ass and cow. I hope this may be
the last of our pilgrimages." My wife also hoped that, once under the
shade of her marvellous trees, we should have no temptation to
travel further.

We now crossed our new bridge, and here the party was happily augmented
by a new arrival. The sow had proved very mutinous at setting out, and
we had been compelled to leave her; she now voluntarily joined us,
seeing we were actually departing; but continued to grunt loudly her
disapprobation of our proceedings. After we had crossed the river, we
had another embarrassment. The rich grass tempted our animals to stray
off to feed, and, but for our dogs, we should never have been able to
muster them again. But, for fear of further accident, I commanded my
advanced guard to take the road by the coast, which offered no
temptation to our troops.

We had scarcely left the high grass when our dogs rushed back into it,
barking furiously, and howling as if in combat; Fritz immediately
prepared for action, Ernest drew near his mother, Jack rushed forward
with his gun over his shoulder, and I cautiously advanced, commanding
them to be discreet and cool. But Jack, with his usual impetuosity,
leaped among the high grass to the dogs; and immediately returned,
clapping his hands, and crying out, "Be quick, papa! a huge porcupine,
with quills as long as my arm!"

When I got up, I really found a porcupine, whom the dogs were warmly
attacking. It made a frightful noise, erecting its quills so boldly,
that the wounded animals howled with pain after every attempt to seize
it. As we were looking at them Jack drew a pistol from his belt, and
discharged it directly into the head of the porcupine, which fell dead.
Jack was very proud of his feat, and Fritz, not a little jealous,
suggested that such a little boy should not be trusted with pistols, as
he might have shot one of the dogs, or even one of us. I forbade any
envy or jealousy among the brothers, and declared that all did well who
acted for the public good. Mamma was now summoned to see the curious
animal her son's valour had destroyed. Her first thought was to dress
the wounds made by the quills which had stuck in the noses of the dogs
during their attack. In the mean time, I corrected my son's notions on
the power of this animal to lance its darts when in danger. This is a
popular error; nature has given it a sufficient protection in its
defensive and offensive armour.

As Jack earnestly desired to carry his booty with him, I carefully
imbedded the body in soft grass, to preserve the quills; then packed it
in strong cloth, and placed it on the ass behind Francis.

At last, we arrived at the end of our journey,--and, certainly, the size
of the trees surpassed anything I could have imagined. Jack was certain
they were gigantic walnut-trees; for my own part, I believed them to be
a species of fig-tree--probably the Antilles fig. But all thanks were
given to the kind mother who had sought out such a pleasant home for us;
at all events, we could find a convenient shelter among the roots. And,
if we should ever succeed in perching on the branches, I told her we
should be safe from all wild beasts. I would defy even the bears of our
native mountains to climb these immense trunks, totally destitute
of branches.

We released our animals from their loads, tying their fore legs
together, that they might not stray; except the sow, who, as usual, did
her own way. The fowls and pigeons we released, and left to their own
discretion. We then sat down on the grass, to consider where we should
establish ourselves. I wished to mount the tree that very night.
Suddenly we heard, to our no slight alarm, the report of a gun. But the
next moment the voice of Fritz re-assured us. He had stolen out
unnoticed, and shot a beautiful tiger-cat, which he displayed in
great triumph.

"Well done, noble hunter!" said I; "you deserve the thanks of the fowls
and pigeons; they would most probably have all fallen a sacrifice
to-night, if you had not slain their deadly foe. Pray wage war with all
his kind, or we shall not have a chicken left for the pot."

Ernest then examined the animal with his customary attention, and
declared that the proper name was the _margay_, a fact Fritz did not
dispute, only requesting that Jack might not meddle with the skin, as he
wished to preserve it for a belt. I recommended them to skin it
immediately, and give the flesh to the dogs. Jack, at the same time,
determined to skin his porcupine, to make dog-collars. Part of its
flesh went into the soup-kettle, and the rest was salted for the next
day. We then sought for some flat stones in the bed of the charming
little river that ran at a little distance from us, and set about
constructing a cooking-place. Francis collected dry wood for the fire;
and, while my wife was occupied in preparing our supper, I amused myself
by making some packing-needles for her rude work from the quills of the
porcupine. I held a large nail in the fire till it was red-hot, then,
holding the head in wet linen, I pierced the quills, and made several
needles, of various sizes, to the great contentment of our indefatigable
workwoman.

Still occupied with the idea of our castle in the air, I thought of
making a ladder of ropes; but this would be useless, if we did not
succeed in getting a cord over the lower branches, to draw it up.
Neither my sons nor myself could throw a stone, to which I had fastened
a cord, over these branches, which were thirty feet above us. It was
necessary to think of some other expedient. In the mean time, dinner was
ready. The porcupine made excellent soup, and the flesh was well-tasted,
though rather hard. My wife could not make up her mind to taste it, but
contented herself with a slice of ham and some cheese.

       *       *       *       *       *


CHAPTER X.

After dinner, as I found we could not ascend at present, I suspended our
hammocks under the arched roots of our tree, and, covering the whole
with sailcloth, we had a shelter from the dew and the insects.

While my wife was employed making harness for the cow and ass, I went
with my sons to the shore, to look for wood fit for our use next day. We
saw a great quantity of wreck, but none fit for our purpose, till Ernest
met with a heap of bamboo canes, half buried in sand and mud. These were
exactly what I wanted. I drew them out of the sand, stripped them of
their leaves, cut them in pieces of about four or five feet long, and my
sons each made up a bundle to carry home. I then set out to seek some
slender stalks to make arrows, which I should need in my project.

We went towards a thick grove, which appeared likely to contain
something for my purpose. We were very cautious, for fear of reptiles or
other dangerous animals, allowing Flora to precede us. When we got near,
she darted furiously among the bushes, and out flew a troop of beautiful
flamingoes, and soared into the air. Fritz, always ready, fired at them.
Two fell; one quite dead, the other, slightly wounded in the wing, made
use of its long legs so well that it would have escaped, if Flora had
not seized it and held it till I came up to take possession. The joy of
Fritz was extreme, to have this beautiful creature alive. He thought at
once of curing its wound, and domesticating it with our own poultry.

"What splendid plumage!" said Ernest; "and you see he is web-footed,
like the goose, and has long legs like the stork; thus he can run as
fast on land as he can swim in the water,"

"Yes," said I, "and fly as quickly in the air. These birds are
remarkable for the power and strength of their wings. Few birds have so
many advantages."

My boys occupied themselves in binding their captive and dressing his
wound; while I sought some of the canes which had done flowering, to cut
off the hard ends, to point my arrows. These are used by the savages of
the Antilles. I then selected the highest canes I could meet with, to
assist me in measuring, by a geometrical process, the height of the
tree. Ernest took the canes, I had the wounded flamingo, and Fritz
carried his own game. Very loud were the cries of joy and astonishment
at our approach. The boys all hoped the flamingo might be tamed, of
which I felt no doubt; but my wife was uneasy, lest it should require
more food than she could spare. However, I assured her, our new guest
would need no attention, as he would provide for himself at the
river-side, feeding on small fishes, worms, and insects. His wounds I
dressed, and found they would soon be healed; I then tied him to a
stake, near the river, by a cord long enough to allow him to fish at his
pleasure, and, in fact, in a few days, he learned to know us, and was
quite domesticated. Meantime, my boys had been trying to measure the
tree with the long canes I had brought, and came laughing to report to
me, that I ought to have got them ten times as long to reach even the
lowest branches. "There is a simpler mode than that," said I, "which
geometry teaches us, and by which the highest mountains can be
measured."

I then showed the method of measuring heights by triangles and imaginary
lines, using canes of different lengths and cords instead of
mathematical instruments. My result was thirty feet to the lowest
branches. This experiment filled the boys with wonder and desire to
become acquainted with this useful, exact science, which, happily, I was
able to teach them fully.

I now ordered Fritz to measure our strong cord, and the little ones to
collect all the small string, and wind it. I then took a strong bamboo
and made a bow of it, and some arrows of the slender canes, filling them
with wet sand to give them weight, and feathering them from the dead
flamingo. As soon as my work was completed, the boys crowded round me,
all begging to try the bow and arrows. I begged them to be patient, and
asked my wife to supply me with a ball of thick strong thread. The
enchanted bag did not fail us; the very ball I wanted appeared at her
summons. This, my little ones declared, must be magic; but I explained
to them, that prudence, foresight, and presence of mind in danger, such
as their good mother had displayed, produced more miracles than magic.

I then tied the end of the ball of thread to one of my arrows, fixed it
in my bow, and sent it directly over one of the thickest of the lower
branches of the tree, and, falling to the ground, it drew the thread
after it. Charmed with this result, I hastened to complete my ladder.
Fritz had measured our ropes, and found two of forty feet each,--exactly
what I wanted. These I stretched on the ground at about one foot
distance from each other; Fritz cut pieces of cane two feet long, which
Ernest passed to me. I placed these in knots which I had made in the
cords, at about a foot distance from each other, and Jack fastened each
end with a long nail, to prevent it slipping. In a very short time our
ladder was completed; and, tying it to the end of the cord which went
over the branch, we drew it up without difficulty. All the boys were
anxious to ascend; but I chose Jack, as the lightest and most active.
Accordingly, he ascended, while his brothers and myself held the ladder
firm by the end of the cord. Fritz followed him, conveying a bag with
nails and hammer. They were soon perched on the branches, huzzaing to
us. Fritz secured the ladder so firmly to the branch, that I had no
hesitation in ascending myself. I carried with me a large pulley fixed
to the end of a rope, which I attached to a branch above us, to enable
us to raise the planks necessary to form the groundwork of our
habitation. I smoothed the branches a little by aid of my axe, sending
the boys down to be out of my way. After completing my day's work, I
descended by the light of the moon, and was alarmed to find that Fritz
and Jack were not below; and still more so, when I heard their clear,
sweet voices, at the summit of the tree, singing the evening hymn, as if
to sanctify our future abode. They had climbed the tree, instead of
descending, and, filled with wonder and reverence at the sublime view
below them, had burst out into the hymn of thanksgiving to God.

I could not scold my dear boys, when they descended, but directed them
to assemble the animals, and to collect wood, to keep up fires during
the night, in order to drive away any wild beasts that might be near.

My wife then displayed her work,--complete harness for our two beasts
of burden, and, in return, I promised her we would establish ourselves
next day in the tree. Supper was now ready, one piece of the porcupine
was roasted by the fire, smelling deliciously; another piece formed a
rich soup; a cloth was spread on the turf; the ham, cheese, butter, and
biscuits, were placed upon it.

My wife first assembled the fowls, by throwing some grain to them, to
accustom them to the place. We soon saw the pigeons fly to roost on the
higher branches of the trees, while the fowls perched on the ladder; the
beasts we tied to the roots, close to us. Now, that our cares were over,
we sat down to a merry and excellent repast by moonlight. Then, after
the prayers of the evening, I kindled our watch-fires, and we all lay
down to rest in our hammocks. The boys were rather discontented, and
complained of their cramped position, longing for the freedom of their
beds of moss; but I instructed them to lie, as the sailors do,
diagonally, and swinging the hammock, and told them that brave Swiss
boys might sleep as the sailors of all nations were compelled to sleep.
After some stifled sighs and groans, all sank to rest except myself,
kept awake by anxiety for the safety of the rest.

       *       *       *       *       *


CHAPTER XI.

My anxiety kept me awake till near morning, when, after a short sleep, I
rose, and we were soon all at work. My wife, after milking the cow and
goats, harnessed the cow and ass, and set out to search for drift-wood
for our use. In the mean time, I mounted the ladder with Fritz, and we
set to work stoutly, with axe and saw, to rid ourselves of all useless
branches. Some, about six feet above our foundation, I left, to suspend
our hammocks from, and others, a little higher, to support the roof,
which, at present, was to be merely sailcloth. My wife succeeded in
collecting us some boards and planks, which, with her assistance, and
the aid of the pulley, we hoisted up. We then arranged them on the level
branches close to each other, in such a manner as to form a smooth and
solid floor. I made a sort of parapet round, to prevent accidents. By
degrees, our dwelling began to assume a distinct form; the sailcloth was
raised over the high branches, forming a roof; and, being brought down
on each side, was nailed to the parapet. The immense trunk protected the
back of our apartment, and the front was open to admit the breeze from
the sea, which was visible from this elevation. We hoisted our hammocks
and blankets by the pulley, and suspended them; my son and I then
descended, and, as our day was not yet exhausted, we set about
constructing a rude table and some benches, from the remainder of our
wood, which we placed beneath the roots of the tree, henceforward to be
our dining-room. The little boys collected the chips and pieces of wood
for fire-wood; while their mamma prepared supper, which we needed much
after the extraordinary fatigues of this day.

The next day, however, being Sunday, we looked forward to as a day of
rest, of recreation, and thanksgiving to the great God who had
preserved us.

Supper was now ready, my wife took a large earthen pot from the fire,
which contained a good stew, made of the flamingo, which Ernest had told
her was an old bird, and would not be eatable, if dressed any other way.
His brothers laughed heartily, and called him the cook. He was, however,
quite right, the stew, well seasoned, was excellent, and we picked the
very bones. Whilst we were thus occupied, the living flamingo,
accompanying the rest of the fowls, and free from bonds, came in, quite
tame, to claim his share of the repast, evidently quite unsuspicious
that we were devouring his mate; he did not seem at all inclined to quit
us. The little monkey, too, was quite at home with the boys, leaping
from one to another for food, which he took in his forepaws, and ate
with such absurd mimicry of their actions, that he kept us in continual
convulsions of laughter. To augment our satisfaction, our great sow, who
had deserted us for two days, returned of her own accord, grunting her
joy at our re-union. My wife welcomed her with particular distinction,
treating her with all the milk we had to spare; for, as she had no dairy
utensils to make cheese and butter, it was best thus to dispose of our
superfluity. I promised her, on our next voyage to the ship, to procure
all these necessaries. This she could not, however, hear of, without
shuddering.

The boys now lighted the fires for the night. The dogs were tied to the
roots of the tree, as a protection against invaders, and we commenced
our ascent. My three eldest sons soon ran up the ladder, my wife
followed, with more deliberation, but arrived safely; my own journey was
more difficult, as, besides having to carry Francis on my back, I had
detached the lower part of the ladder from the roots, where it was
nailed; in order to be able to draw it up during the night. We were thus
as safe in our castle as the knights of old, when their drawbridge was
raised. We retired to our hammocks free from care, and did not wake till
the sun shone brightly in upon us.

       *       *       *       *       *


CHAPTER XII.

Next morning, all awoke in good spirits; I told them that on this, the
Lord's day, we would do no work. That it was appointed, not only for a
day of rest, but a day when we must, as much as possible, turn our
hearts from the vanities of the world, to God himself; thank him,
worship him, and serve him. Jack thought we could not do this without a
church and a priest; but Ernest believed that God would hear our prayers
under his own sky, and papa could give them a sermon; Francis wished to
know if God would like to hear them sing the beautiful hymns mamma had
taught them, without an organ accompaniment.

"Yes, my dear children," said I, "God is everywhere; and to bless him,
to praise him in all his works, to submit to his holy will, and to obey
him,--is to serve him. But everything in its time. Let us first attend
to the wants of our animals, and breakfast, and we will then begin the
services of the day by a hymn."

We descended, and breakfasted on warm milk, fed our animals, and then,
my children and their mother seated on the turf, I placed myself on a
little eminence before them, and, after the service of the day, which I
knew by heart, and singing some portions of the 119th Psalm, I told them
a little allegory.

"There was once on a time a great king, whose kingdom was called the
Land of _Light_ and _Reality_, because there reigned there constant
light and incessant activity. On the most remote frontier of this
kingdom, towards the north, there was another large kingdom, equally
subject to his rule, and of which none but himself knew the immense
extent. From time immemorial, an exact plan of this kingdom had been
preserved in the archives. It was called the Land of Obscurity, or
_Night_, because everything in it was dark and inactive.

"In the most fertile and agreeable part of the empire of Reality, the
king had a magnificent residence, called _The Heavenly City_, where he
held his brilliant court. Millions of servants executed his
wishes--still more were ready to receive his orders. The first were
clothed in glittering robes, whiter than snow--for white was the colour
of the Great King, as the emblem of purity. Others were clothed in
armour, shining like the colours of the rainbow, and carried flaming
swords in their hands. Each, at his master's nod, flew like lightning to
accomplish his will. All his servants--faithful, vigilant, bold, and
ardent--were united in friendship, and could imagine no happiness
greater than the favour of their master. There were some, less elevated,
who were still good, rich, and happy in the favours of their sovereign,
to whom all his subjects were alike, and were treated by him as
his children.

"Not far from the frontiers, the Great King possessed a desert island,
which he desired to people and cultivate, in order to make it, for a
time, the abode of those of his subjects whom he intended to admit, by
degrees, into his _Heavenly City_--a favour he wished to bestow on the
greatest number possible.

"This island was called _Earthly Abode_; and he who had passed some time
there, worthily, was to be received into all the happiness of the
heavenly city. To attain this, the Great King equipped a fleet to
transport the colonists, whom he chose from the kingdom of _Night_, to
this island, where he gave them light and activity--advantages they had
not known before. Think how joyful their arrival would be! The island
was fertile when cultivated; and all was prepared to make the time pass
agreeably, till they were admitted to their highest honours.

"At the moment of embarkation, the Great King sent his own son, who
spoke thus to them in His name:--

"'My dear children, I have called you from inaction and insensibility to
render you happy by feeling, by action, by life. Never forget I am your
king, and obey my commands, by cultivating the country I confide to you.
Every one will receive his portion of land, and wise and learned men are
appointed to explain my will to you. I wish you all to acquire the
knowledge of my laws, and that every father should keep a copy, to read
daily to his children, that they may never be forgotten. And on the
first day of the week you must all assemble, as brothers, in one place,
to hear these laws read and explained. Thus it will be easy for every
one to learn the best method of improving his land, what to plant, and
how to cleanse it from the tares that might choke the good seed. All may
ask what they desire, and every reasonable demand will be granted, if it
be conformable to the great end.

"'If you feel grateful for these benefits, and testify it by increased
activity, and by occupying yourself on this day in expressing your
gratitude to me, I will take care this day of rest shall be a benefit,
and not a loss. I wish that all your useful animals, and even the wild
beasts of the plains, should on this day repose in peace.

"'He who obeys my commands in _Earthly Abode,_ shall receive a rich
reward in the _Heavenly City;_ but the idle, the negligent, and the
evil-disposed, shall be condemned to perpetual slavery, or to labour in
mines, in the bowels of the earth.

"'From time to time, I shall send ships, to bring away individuals, to
be rewarded or punished, as they have fulfilled my commands. None can
deceive me; a magic mirror will show me the actions and thoughts
of all,'

"The colonists were satisfied, and eager to begin their labour. The
portions of land and instruments of labour were distributed to them,
with seeds, and useful plants, and fruit-trees. They were then left to
turn these good gifts to profit.

"But what followed? Every one did as he wished. Some planted their
ground with groves and gardens, pretty and useless. Others planted wild
fruit, instead of the good fruit the Great King had commanded. A third
had sowed good seed; but, not knowing the tares from the wheat, he had
torn up all before they reached maturity. But the most part left their
land uncultivated; they had lost their seeds, or spoiled their
implements. Many would not understand the orders of the great king; and
others tried, by subtlety, to evade them.

"A few laboured with courage, as they had been taught, rejoicing in the
hope of the promise given them. Their greatest danger was in the
disbelief of their teachers. Though every one had a copy of the law, few
read it; all were ready, by some excuse, to avoid this duty. Some
asserted they knew it, yet never thought on it: some called these the
laws of past times; not of the present. Other said the Great King did
not regard the actions of his subjects, that he had neither mines nor
dungeons, and that all would certainly be taken to the _Heavenly City_.
They began to neglect the duties of the day dedicated to the Great King.
Few assembled; and of these, the most part were inattentive, and did not
profit by the instruction given them.

"But the Great King was faithful to his word. From time to time,
frigates arrived, bearing the name of some disease. These were followed
by a large vessel called _The Grave_, bearing the terrible flag of the
Admiral _Death_; this flag was of two colours, green and black; and
appeared to the colonists, according to their state, the smiling colour
of _Hope_, or the gloomy hue of _Despa'r._

"This fleet always arrived unexpectedly, and was usually unwelcome. The
officers were sent out, by the admiral, to seize those he pointed out:
many who were unwilling were compelled to go; and others whose land was
prepared, and even the harvest ripening, were summoned; but these went
joyfully, sure that they went to happiness. The fleet being ready,
sailed for the _Heavenly City_. Then the Great King, in his justice,
awarded the punishments and recompenses. Excuses were now too late; the
negligent and disobedient were sent to labour in the dark mines; while
the faithful and obedient, arrayed in bright robes, were received into
their glorious abodes of happiness.

"I have finished my parable, my dear children; reflect on it, and profit
by it. Fritz, what do you think of it?"

"I am considering the goodness of the Great King, and the ingratitude of
his people," answered he.

"And how very foolish they were," said Ernest, "with a little prudence,
they might have kept their land in good condition, and secured a
pleasant life afterwards."

"Away with them to the mines!" cried Jack, "they richly deserved such a
doom."

"How much I should like," said Francis, "to see those soldiers in their
shining armour!"

"I hope you will see them some day, my dear boy, if you continue to be
good and obedient." I then explained my parable fully, and applied the
moral to each of my sons directly.

"You, Fritz, should take warning from the people who planted wild fruit,
and wished to make them pass for good fruit. Such are those who are
proud of natural virtues, easy to exercise,--such as bodily strength,
or physical courage; and place these above the qualities which are only
attained by labour and patience.

"You, Ernest, must remember the subjects who laid out their land in
flowery gardens; like those who seek the pleasures of life, rather than
the duties. And you, my thoughtless Jack, and little Francis, think of
the fate of those who left their land untilled, or heedlessly sowed
tares for wheat. These are God's people who neither study nor reflect;
who cast to the winds all instruction, and leave room in their minds for
evil. Then let us all be, like the good labourers of the parable,
constantly cultivating our ground, that, when Death comes for us, we may
willingly follow him to the feet of the Great King, to hear these
blessed words: 'Good and faithful servants! enter into the joy of
your Lord!'"

This made a great impression on my children. We concluded by singing a
hymn. Then my good wife produced from her unfailing bag, a copy of the
Holy Scripture, from which I selected such passages as applied to our
situation; and explained them to my best ability. My boys remained for
some time thoughtful and serious, and though they followed their
innocent recreations during the day, they did not lose sight of the
useful lesson of the morning, but, by a more gentle and amiable manner,
showed that my words had taken effect.

The next morning, Ernest had used my bow, which I had given him, very
skilfully; bringing down some dozens of small birds, a sort of ortolan,
from the branches of our tree, where they assembled to feed on the figs.
This induced them all to wish for such a weapon. I was glad to comply
with their wishes, as I wished them to become skilful in the use of
these arms of our forefathers, which might be of great value to us, when
our ammunition failed. I made two bows; and two quivers, to contain
their arrows, of a flexible piece of bark, and, attaching a strap to
them, I soon armed my little archers.

Fritz was engaged in preparing the skin of the margay, with more care
than Jack had shown with that of the jackal. I showed him how to clean
it, by rubbing it with sand in the river, till no vestige of fat or
flesh was left; and then applying butter, to render it flexible.

These employments filled up the morning till dinner-time came. We had
Ernest's ortolans, and some fried ham and eggs, which made us a
sumptuous repast. I gave my boys leave to kill as many ortolans as they
chose, for I knew that, half-roasted, and put into casks, covered with
butter, they would keep for a length of time, and prove an invaluable
resource in time of need. As I continued my work, making arrows, and a
bow for Francis, I intimated to my wife that the abundant supply of figs
would save our grain, as the poultry and pigeons would feed on them, as
well as the ortolans. This was a great satisfaction to her. And thus
another day passed, and we mounted to our dormitory, to taste the sweet
slumber that follows a day of toil.

       *       *       *       *       *


CHAPTER XIII.

The next morning, all were engaged in archery: I completed the bow for
Francis, and at his particular request made him a quiver too. The
delicate bark of a tree, united by glue, obtained from our portable
soup, formed an admirable quiver; this I suspended by a string round the
neck of my boy, furnished with arrows; then taking his bow in his hand,
he was as proud as a knight armed at all points.

After dinner, I proposed that we should give names to all the parts of
our island known to us, in order that, by a pleasing delusion, we might
fancy ourselves in an inhabited country. My proposal was well received,
and then began the discussion of names. Jack wished for something
high-sounding and difficult, such as _Monomotapa_ or _Zanguebar_; very
difficult words, to puzzle any one that visited our island. But I
objected to this, as _we_ were the most likely to have to use the names
ourselves, and we should suffer from it. I rather suggested that we
should give, in our own language, such simple names as should point out
some circumstance connected with the spot. I proposed we should begin
with the bay where we landed, and called on Fritz for his name.

"_The Bay of Oysters_" said he,--"we found so many there."

"Oh, no!" said Jack, "let it be _Lobster Bay_; for there I was caught by
the leg."

[Illustration: MAP OF THE HAPPY ISLAND.

A. Tent House.
B. First Grotto.
C. Second Grotto.
D. Falcon's Nest.
E. Farm.
F. Family Bridge.
G. Bears.
H. Cascades.
I. Shark's Island.
J. Cabbage Palms.
K. Rice Marsh.
L. Arcadia.
M. Marsh.
N. Bamboos.
O. Sugar Canes.
P. Gourd Wood.
Q. Acorn Wood.
R. Monkey Wood.
S. Sand Hills.
T. Coral Reefs.
U. Cotton Wood.
V. Flamingo Marsh.
W. Palm Cocoa Wood.
X. Potatoe Plantation.]

"Then we ought to call it the _Bay of Tears_," said Ernest, "to
commemorate those you shed on the occasion."

"My advice," said my wife, "is, that in gratitude to God we should name
it _Safety Bay_."

We were all pleased with this name, and proceeded to give the name of
_Tent House_ to our first abode; _Shark Island_, to the little island in
the bay, where we had found that animal; and, at Jack's desire, the
marshy spot where we had cut our arrows was named _Flamingo Marsh_.
There the height from which we had vainly sought traces of our
shipmates, received the name of _Cape Disappointment_. The river was to
be _Jackal River_, and the bridge, _Family Bridge_. The most difficult
point was, to name our present abode. At last we agreed on the name of
_Falcon's Nest_ (in German _Falken-hoist)_. This was received with
acclamations, and I poured out for my young nestlings each a glass of
sweet wine, to drink Prosperity to _Falcon's Nest_. We thus laid the
foundation of the geography of our new country, promising to forward it
to Europe by the first post.

After dinner, my sons returned to their occupation as tanners, Fritz to
complete his belt, and Jack to make a sort of cuirass, of the formidable
skin of the porcupine, to protect the dogs. He finished by making a sort
of helmet from the head of the animal, as strange as the cuirasses.

The heat of the day being over, we prepared to set out to walk to Tent
House, to renew our stock of provisions, and endeavour to bring the
geese and ducks to our new residence; but, instead of going by the
coast, we proposed to go up the river till we reached the chain of
rocks, and continue under their shade till we got to the cascade, where
we could cross, and return by Family Bridge.

This was approved, and we set out. Fritz, decorated with his beautiful
belt of skin, Jack in his porcupine helmet. Each had a gun and game-bag;
except Francis, who, with his pretty fair face, his golden hair, and his
bow and quiver, was a perfect Cupid. My wife was loaded with a large
butter-pot for a fresh supply. Turk walked before us with his coat of
mail, and Flora followed, peeping at a respectful distance from him, for
fear of the darts. _Knips_, as my boys called the monkey, finding this
new saddle very inconvenient, jumped off, with many contortions, but
soon fixed on Flora, who, not being able to shake him off, was compelled
to become his palfrey.

The road by the river was smooth and pleasant. When we reached the end
of the wood, the country seemed more open; and now the boys, who had
been rambling about, came running up, out of breath; Ernest was holding
a plant with leaves and flowers, and green apples hanging on it.

"Potatoes!" said he; "I am certain they are potatoes!"

"God be praised," said I; "this precious plant will secure provision for
our colony."

"Well," said Jack, "if his superior knowledge discovered them, I will be
the first to dig them up;" and he set to work so ardently, that we had
soon a bag of fine ripe potatoes, which we carried on to Tent House.

       *       *       *       *       *


CHAPTER XIV.

We had been much delighted with the new and lovely scenery of our road:
the prickly cactus, and aloe, with its white flowers; the Indian fig;
the white and yellow jasmine; the fragrant vanilla, throwing round its
graceful festoons. Above all, the regal pineapple grew in profusion,
and we feasted on it, for the first time, with avidity.

Among the prickly stalks of the cactus and aloes, I perceived a plant
with large pointed leaves, which I knew to be the _karata_. I pointed
out to the boys its beautiful red flowers; the leaves are an excellent
application to wounds, and thread is made from the filaments, and the
pith of the stem is used by the savage tribes for tinder.

When I showed the boys, by experiment, the use of the pith, they thought
the _tinder-tree_ would be almost as useful as the potatoes.

"At all events," I said, "it will be more useful than the pine-apples;
your mother will be thankful for thread, when her enchanted bag is
exhausted."

"How happy it is for us," said she, "that you have devoted yourself to
reading and study. In our ignorance we might have passed this treasure,
without suspecting its value."

Fritz inquired of what use in the world all the rest of these prickly
plants could be, which wounded every one that came near.

"All these have their use, Fritz," said I; "some contain juices and
gums, which are daily made use of in medicine; others are useful in the
arts, or in manufactures. The Indian fig, for instance, is a most
interesting tree. It grows in the most arid soil. The fruit is said to
be sweet and wholesome."

In a moment, my little active Jack was climbing the rocks to gather some
of these figs; but he had not remarked that they were covered with
thousands of slender thorns, finer than the finest needles, which
terribly wounded his fingers. He returned, weeping bitterly and dancing
with pain. Having rallied him a little for his greediness, I extracted
the thorns, and then showed him how to open the fruit, by first cutting
off the pointed end, as it lay on the ground; into this I fixed a piece
of stick, and then pared it with my knife. The novelty of the expedient
recommended it, and they were soon all engaged eating the fruit, which
they declared was very good.

In the mean time, I saw Ernest examining one of the figs very
attentively. "Oh! papa!" said he, "what a singular sight; the fig is
covered with a small red insect. I cannot shake them off. Can they be
the _Cochineal_?" I recognized at once the precious insect, of which I
explained to my sons the nature and use. "It is with this insect," said
I, "that the beautiful and rich scarlet dye is made. It is found in
America, and the Europeans give its weight in gold for it."

Thus discoursing on the wonders of nature, and the necessity of
increasing our knowledge by observation and study, we arrived at Tent
House, and found it in the same state as we left it.

We all began to collect necessaries. Fritz loaded himself with powder
and shot, I opened the butter-cask, and my wife and little Francis
filled the pot. Ernest and Jack went to try and secure the geese and
ducks; but they had become so wild that it would have been impossible,
if Ernest had not thought of an expedient. He tied pieces of cheese, for
bait, to threads, which he floated on the water. The voracious creatures
immediately swallowed the cheese and were drawn out by the thread. They
were then securely tied, and fastened to the game-bags, to be carried
home on our backs. As the bait could not be recovered, the boys
contented themselves with cutting off the string close to the beak,
leaving them to digest the rest.

Our bags were already loaded with potatoes, but we filled up the spaces
between them with salt; and, having relieved Turk of his armour, we
placed the heaviest on his back. I took the butter-pot; and, after
replacing everything, and closing our tent, we resumed our march, with
our ludicrous incumbrances. The geese and ducks were very noisy in their
adieu to their old marsh; the dogs barked; and we all laughed so
excessively, that we forgot our burdens till we sat down again under our
tree. My wife soon had her pot of potatoes on the fire. She then milked
the cow and goat, while I set the fowls at liberty on the banks of the
river. We then sat down to a smoking dish of potatoes, a jug of milk,
and butter and cheese. After supper we had prayers, thanking God
especially for his new benefits; and we then sought our repose among
the leaves.

       *       *       *       *       *


CHAPTER XV.

I had observed on the shore, the preceding day, a quantity of wood,
which I thought would suit to make a sledge, to convey our casks and
heavy stores from Tent House to Falcon's Nest. At dawn of day I woke
Ernest, whose inclination to indolence I wished to overcome, and leaving
the rest asleep, we descended, and harnessing the ass to a strong branch
of a tree that was lying near, we proceeded to the shore. I had no
difficulty in selecting proper pieces of wood; we sawed them the right
length, tied them together, and laid them across the bough, which the
patient animal drew very contentedly. We added to the load a small chest
we discovered half buried in the sand, and we returned homewards, Ernest
leading the ass, and I assisted by raising the load with a lever when we
met with any obstruction. My wife had been rather alarmed; but seeing
the result of our expedition, and hearing of the prospect of a sledge,
she was satisfied. I opened the chest, which contained only some
sailors' dresses and some linen, both wetted with sea-water; but likely
to be very useful as our own clothes decayed. I found Fritz and Jack had
been shooting ortolans; they had killed about fifty, but had consumed so
much powder and shot, that I checked a prodigality so imprudent in our
situation. I taught them to make snares for the birds of the threads we
drew from the karata leaves we had brought home. My wife and her two
younger sons busied themselves with these, while I, with my two elder
boys, began to construct the sledge. As we were working, we heard a
great noise among the fowls, and Ernest, looking about, discovered the
monkey seizing and hiding the eggs from the nests; he had collected a
good store in a hole among the roots, which Ernest carried to his
mother; and Knips was punished by being tied up, every morning, till the
eggs were collected.

Our work was interrupted by dinner, composed of ortolans, milk, and
cheese. After dinner, Jack had climbed to the higher branches of the
trees to place his snares, and found the pigeons were making nests. I
then told him to look often to the snares, for fear our own poor birds
should be taken; and, above all, never in future to fire into the tree.

"Papa," said little Francis, "can we not sow some gunpowder, and then we
shall have plenty?" This proposal was received with shouts of laughter,
which greatly discomposed the little innocent fellow. Professor Ernest
immediately seized the opportunity to give a lecture on the composition
of gunpowder.

At the end of the day my sledge was finished. Two long curved planks of
wood, crossed by three pieces, at a distance from each other, formed the
simple conveyance. The fore and hind parts were in the form of horns, to
keep the load from falling off. Two ropes were fastened to the front,
and my sledge was complete. My wife was delighted with it, and hoped I
would now set out immediately to Tent House for the butter-cask. I made
no objection to this; and Ernest and I prepared to go, and leave Fritz
in charge of the family.

       *       *       *       *       *


CHAPTER XVI.

When we were ready to set out, Fritz presented each of us with a little
case he had made from the skin of the margay. They were ingeniously
contrived to contain knife, fork, and spoon, and a small hatchet. We
then harnessed the ass and the cow to the sledge, took a flexible bamboo
cane for a whip, and, followed by Flora, we departed, leaving Turk to
guard the tree.

We went by the shore, as the better road for the sledge, and crossing
Family Bridge, were soon at Tent House. After unharnessing the animals,
we began to load. We took the cask of butter, the cheese, and the
biscuit; all the rest of our utensils, powder, shot, and Turk's armour,
which we had left there. These labours had so occupied us, that we had
not observed that our animals, attracted by the pasturage, had crossed
the bridge, and wandered out of sight. I sent Ernest to seek them, and
in the mean time went to the bay, where I discovered some convenient
little hollows in the rock, that seemed cut out for baths. I called
Ernest to come, and till he arrived, employed myself in cutting some
rushes, which I thought might be useful. When my son came, I found he
had ingeniously removed the first planks from the bridge, to prevent the
animals straying over again. We then had a very pleasant bath, and
Ernest being out first, I sent him to the rock, where the salt was
accumulated, to fill a small bag, to be transferred to the large bags on
the ass. He had not been absent long, when I heard him cry out, "Papa!
papa! a huge fish! I cannot hold it; it will break my line." I ran to
his assistance, and found him lying on the ground on his face, tugging
at his line, to which an enormous salmon was attached, that had nearly
pulled him into the water. I let it have a little more line, then drew
it gently into a shallow, and secured it. It appeared about fifteen
pounds weight; and we pleased ourselves with the idea of presenting this
to our good cook. Ernest said, he remembered having remarked how this
place swarmed with fish, and he took care to bring his rod with him; he
had taken about a dozen small fishes, which he had in his handkerchief,
before he was overpowered by the salmon. I cut the fishes open, and
rubbed the inside with salt, to preserve them; then placing them in a
small box on the sledge, and adding our bags of salt, we harnessed our
animals, and set off homewards.

When we were about half-way, Flora left us, and, by her barking, raised
a singular animal, which seemed to leap instead of ran. The irregular
bounds of the animal disconcerted my aim, and, though very near, I
missed it. Ernest was more fortunate; he fired at it, and killed it. It
was an animal about the size of a sheep, with the tail of a tiger; its
head and skin were like those of a mouse, ears longer than the hare;
there was a curious pouch on the belly; the fore legs were short, as if
imperfectly developed, and armed with strong claws, the hind legs long,
like a pair of stilts. After Ernest's pride of victory was a little
subdued, he fell back on his science, and began to examine his spoil.

"By its teeth," said he, "it should belong to the family of _rodentes_,
or gnawers; by its legs, to the _jumpers_; and by its pouch, to the
opossum tribe."

This gave me the right clue. "Then," said I, "this must be the animal
Cook first discovered in New Holland, and it is called the _kangaroo_."

We now tied the legs of the animal together, and, putting a stick
through, carried it to the sledge very carefully, for Ernest was anxious
to preserve the beautiful skin. Our animals were heavily laden; but,
giving them a little rest and some fresh grass, we once more started,
and in a short time reached Falcon's Nest.

My wife had been employed during our absence in washing the clothes of
the three boys, clothing them in the mean time from the sailor's chest
we had found a few days before. Their appearance was excessively
ridiculous, as the garments neither suited their age nor size, and
caused great mirth to us all; but my wife had preferred this disguise to
the alternative of their going naked.

We now began to display our riches, and relate our adventures. The
butter and the rest of the provisions were very welcome, the salmon
still more so, but the sight of the kangaroo produced screams of
admiration. Fritz displayed a little jealousy, but soon surmounted it by
an exertion of his nobler feelings; and only the keen eye of a father
could have discovered it. He congratulated Ernest warmly, but could not
help begging to accompany me next time.

"I promise you that," said I, "as a reward for the conquest you have
achieved over your jealousy of your brother. But, remember, I could not
have given you a greater proof of my confidence, than in leaving you to
protect your mother and brothers. A noble mind finds its purest joy in
the accomplishment of its duty, and to that willingly sacrifices its
inclination. But," I added, in a low tone, lest I should distress my
wife, "I propose another expedition to the vessel, and you must
accompany me."

We then fed our tired animals, giving them some salt with their grass, a
great treat to them. Some salmon was prepared for dinner, and the rest
salted. After dinner, I hung up the kangaroo till next day, when we
intended to salt and smoke the flesh. Evening arrived, and an excellent
supper of fish, ortolans, and potatoes refreshed us; and, after thanks
to God, we retired to rest.

       *       *       *       *       *


CHAPTER XVII.

I rose early, and descended the ladder, a little uneasy about my
kangaroo, and found I was but just in time to save it, for my dogs had
so enjoyed their repast on the entrails, which I had given them the
night before, that they wished to appropriate the rest. They had
succeeded in tearing off the head, which was in their reach, and were
devouring it in a sort of growling partnership. As we had no store-room
for our provision, I decided to administer a little correction, as a
warning to these gluttons. I gave them some smart strokes with a cane,
and they fled howling to the stable under the roots. Their cries roused
my wife, who came down; and, though she could not but allow the
chastisement to be just and prudent, she was so moved by compassion,
that she consoled the poor sufferers with some remains of last
night's supper.

I now carefully stripped the kangaroo of his elegant skin, and washing
myself, and changing my dress after this unpleasant operation, I joined
my family at breakfast. I then announced my plan of visiting the vessel,
and ordered Fritz to make preparations. My wife resigned herself
mournfully to the necessity. When we were ready to depart, Ernest and
Jack were not to be found; their mother suspected they had gone to get
potatoes. This calmed my apprehension; but I charged her to reprimand
them for going without leave. We set out towards Tent House, leaving
Flora to protect the household, and taking our guns as usual.

We had scarcely left the wood, and were approaching Jackal River, when
we heard piercing cries, and suddenly Ernest and Jack leaped from a
thicket, delighted, as Jack said, in having succeeded in their plan of
accompanying us, and, moreover, in making us believe we were beset with
savages. They were, however, disappointed. I gave them a severe reproof
for their disobedience, and sent them home with a message to their
mother that I thought we might be detained all night, and begged she
would not be uneasy.

They listened to me in great confusion, and were much mortified at
their dismissal; but I begged Fritz to give Ernest his silver watch,
that they might know how the time passed; and I knew that I could
replace it, as there was a case of watches in the ship. This reconciled
them a little to their lot, and they left us. We went forward to our
boat, embarked, and, aided by the current, soon reached the vessel.

My first care was to construct some more convenient transport-vessel
than our boat. Fritz proposed a raft, similar to those used by savage
nations, supported on skins filled with air. These we had not; but we
found a number of water-hogsheads, which we emptied, and closed again,
and threw a dozen of them into the sea, between the ship and our boat.
Some long planks were laid on these, and secured with ropes. We added a
raised edge of planks to secure our cargo, and thus had a solid raft,
capable of conveying any burden. This work occupied us the whole day,
scarcely interrupted by eating a little cold meat from our game-bags.
Exhausted by fatigue, we were glad to take a good night's rest in the
captain's cabin on an elastic mattress, of which our hammocks had made
us forget the comfort. Early next morning we began to load our raft.

We began by entirely stripping our own cabin and that of the captain. We
carried away even the doors and windows. The chests of the carpenter and
the gunner followed. There were cases of rich jewellery, and caskets of
money, which at first tempted us, but were speedily relinquished for
objects of real utility. I preferred a case of young plants of European
fruits, carefully packed in moss for transportation. I saw, with
delight, among these precious plants, apple, pear, plum, orange,
apricot, peach, almond, and chesnut trees, and some young shoots of
vines. How I longed to plant these familiar trees of home in a foreign
soil. We secured some bars of iron and pigs of lead, grindstones,
cart-wheels ready for mounting, tongs, shovels, plough-shares, packets
of copper and iron wire, sacks of maize, peas, oats, and vetches; and
even a small hand-mill. The vessel had been, in fact, laden with
everything likely to be useful in a new colony. We found a saw-mill in
pieces, but marked, so that it could be easily put together. It was
difficult to select, but we took as much as was safe on the raft, adding
a large fishing-net and the ship's compass. Fritz begged to take the
harpoons, which he hung by the ropes over the bow of our boat; and I
indulged his fancy. We were now loaded as far as prudence would allow
us; so, attaching our raft firmly to the boat, we hoisted our sail, and
made slowly to the shore.

       *       *       *       *       *


CHAPTER XVIII.

The wind was favourable, but we advanced slowly, the floating mass that
we had to tug retarding us. Fritz had been some time regarding a large
object in the water; he called me to steer a little towards it, that he
might see what it was. I went to the rudder, and made the movement;
immediately I heard the whistling of the cord, and felt a shock; then a
second, which was followed by a rapid motion of the boat.

"We are going to founder!" cried I. "What is the matter?"

"I have caught it," shouted Fritz; "I have harpooned it in the neck. It
is a turtle."

I saw the harpoon shining at a distance, and the turtle was rapidly
drawing us along by the line. I lowered the sail, and rushed forward to
cut the line; but Fritz besought me not to do it. He assured me there
was no danger, and that he himself would release us if necessary. I
reluctantly consented, and saw our whole convoy drawn by an animal whose
agony increased its strength. As we drew near the shore, I endeavoured
to steer so that we might not strike and be capsized. I saw after a few
minutes that our conductor again wanted to make out to sea; I therefore
hoisted the sail, and the wind being in our favour, he found resistance
vain, and, tugging as before, followed up the current, only taking more
to the left, towards Falcon's Nest, and landing us in a shallow, rested
on the shore. I leaped out of the boat, and with a hatchet soon put our
powerful conductor out of his misery.

Fritz uttered a shout of joy, and fired off his gun, as a signal of our
arrival. All came running to greet us, and great was their surprise, not
only at the value of our cargo, but at the strange mode by which it had
been brought into harbour. My first care was to send them for the
sledge, to remove some of our load without delay, and as the ebbing tide
was leaving our vessels almost dry on the sand, I profited by the
opportunity to secure them. By the aid of the jack-screw and levers, we
raised and brought to the shore two large pieces of lead from the raft.
These served for anchors and, connected to the boat and raft by strong
cables, fixed them safely.

As soon as the sledge arrived, we placed the turtle with some difficulty
on it, as it weighed at least three hundredweight. We added some lighter
articles, the mattresses, some small chests, &c., and proceeded with our
first load to Falcon's Nest in great spirits. As we walked on, Fritz
told them of the wondrous cases of jewellery we had abandoned for things
of use; Jack wished Fritz had brought him a gold snuff-box, to hold
curious seeds; and Francis wished for some of the money to buy
gingerbread at the fair! Everybody laughed at the little simpleton, who
could not help laughing himself, when he remembered his distance from
fairs. Arrived at home, our first care was to turn the turtle on his
back, to get the excellent meat out of the shell. With my hatchet I
separated the cartilages that unite the shells: the upper shell is
convex, the lower one nearly flat.

We had some of the turtle prepared for dinner, though my wife felt great
repugnance in touching the green fat, notwithstanding my assurance of
its being the chief delicacy to an epicure.

We salted the remainder of the flesh, and gave the offal to the dogs.
The boys were all clamorous to possess the shell; but I said it belonged
to Fritz, by right of conquest, and he must dispose of it as he
thought best.

"Then," said he, "I will make a basin of it, and place it near the
river, that my mother may always keep it full of fresh water."

"Very good," said I, "and we will fill our basin, as soon as we find
some clay to make a solid foundation."

"I found some this morning," said Jack,--"a whole bed of clay, and I
brought these balls home to show you."

"And I have made a discovery too," said Ernest. "Look at these roots,
like radishes; I have not eaten any, but the sow enjoys them very much."

"A most valuable discovery, indeed," said I; "if I am not mistaken, this
is the root of the _manioc_, which with the potatoes will insure us from
famine. Of this root they make in the West Indies a sort of bread,
called cassava bread. In its natural state it contains a violent poison,
but by a process of heating it becomes wholesome. The nutritious tapioca
is a preparation from this root."

By this time we had unloaded, and proceeded to the shore to bring a
second load before night came on. We brought up two chests of our own
clothes and property, some chests of tools, the cart-wheels, and the
hand-mill, likely now to be of use for the cassava. After unloading, we
sat down to an excellent supper of turtle, with potatoes, instead of
bread. After supper, my wife said, smiling, "After such a hard day, I
think I can give you something to restore you." She then brought a
bottle and glasses, and filled us each a glass of clear, amber-coloured
wine. I found it excellent Malaga. She had been down to the shore the
previous day, and there found a small cask thrown up by the waves. This,
with the assistance of her sons, she had rolled up to the foot of our
tree, and there covered it with leaves to keep it cool till our arrival.

We were so invigorated by this cordial, that we set briskly to work to
hoist up our mattresses to our dormitory, which we accomplished by the
aid of ropes and pulleys. My wife received and arranged them, and after
our usual evening devotions, we gladly lay down on them, to enjoy a
night of sweet repose.

       *       *       *       *       *


CHAPTER XIX.

I rose before daylight, and, leaving my family sleeping, descended, to
go to the shore to look after my vessels. I found all the animals
moving. The dogs leaped about me; the cocks were crowing; the goats
browsing on the dewy grass. The ass alone was sleeping; and, as he was
the assistant I wanted, I was compelled to rouse him, a preference which
did not appear to flatter him. Nevertheless, I harnessed him to the
sledge, and, followed by the dogs, went forward to the coast, where I
found my boat and raft safe at anchor. I took up a moderate load and
came home to breakfast; but found all still as I left them. I called my
family, and they sprung up ashamed of their sloth; my wife declared it
must have been the good mattress that had charmed her.

I gave my boys a short admonition for their sloth. We then came down to
a hasty breakfast, and returned to the coast to finish the unloading the
boats, that I might, at high water, take them round to moor at the usual
place in the Bay of Safety. I sent my wife up with the last load, while
Fritz and I embarked, and, seeing Jack watching us, I consented that he
should form one of the crew, for I had determined to make another visit
to the wreck before I moored my craft. When we reached the vessel, the
day was so far advanced that we had only time to collect hastily
anything easy to embark. My sons ran over the ship. Jack came trundling
a wheelbarrow, which he said would be excellent for fetching the
potatoes in.

But Fritz brought me good news: he had found, between decks, a beautiful
pinnace (a small vessel, of which the prow is square), taken to pieces,
with all its fittings, and even two small guns. I saw that all the
pieces were numbered, and placed in order; nothing was wanting. I felt
the importance of this acquisition; but it would take days of labour to
put it together; and then how could we launch it? At present, I felt I
must renounce the undertaking. I returned to my loading. It consisted of
all sorts of utensils: a copper boiler, some plates of iron,
tobacco-graters, two grindstones, a barrel of powder, and one of flints.
Jack did not forget his wheelbarrow; and we found two more, which we
added to our cargo, and then sailed off speedily, to avoid the
land-wind, which rises in the evening.

As we drew near, we were astonished to see a row of little creatures
standing on the shore, apparently regarding us with much curiosity. They
were dressed in black, with white waistcoats, and thick cravats; their
arms hung down carelessly; but from time to time they raised them as if
they wished to bestow on us a fraternal embrace.

"I believe," said I, laughing, "this must be the country of pigmies,
and they are coming to welcome us."

"They are the Lilliputians, father," said Jack; "I have read of them;
but I thought they had been less."

"As if Gulliver's Travels was true!" said Fritz, in a tone of derision.

"Then are there no pigmies?" asked he.

"No, my dear boy," said I; "all these stories are either the invention
or the mistakes of ancient navigators, who have taken troops of monkeys
for men, or who have wished to repeat something marvellous. But the
romance of Gulliver is an allegory, intended to convey great truths."

"And now," said Fritz, "I begin to see our pigmies have beaks and
wings."

"You are right," said I; "they are penguins, as Ernest explained to us
some time since. They are good swimmers; but, unable to fly, are very
helpless on land."

I steered gently to the shore, that I might not disturb them; but Jack
leaped into the water up to his knees, and, dashing among the penguins,
with a stick struck right and left, knocking down half a dozen of the
poor stupid birds before they were aware. Some of these we brought away
alive. The rest, not liking such a reception, took to the water, and
were soon out of sight. I scolded Jack for his useless rashness, for the
flesh of the penguin is by no means a delicacy.

We now filled our three wheelbarrows with such things as we could
carry, not forgetting the sheets of iron and the graters, and trudged
home. Our dogs announced our approach, and all rushed out to meet us. A
curious and merry examination commenced. They laughed at my graters; but
I let them laugh, for I had a project in my head. The penguins I
intended for our poultry-yard; and, for the present, I ordered the boys
to tie each of them by a leg to one of our geese or ducks, who opposed
the bondage very clamorously; but necessity made them submissive.

My wife showed me a large store of potatoes and manioc roots, which she
and her children had dug up the evening before. We then went to supper,
and talked of all we had seen in the vessel, especially of the pinnace,
which we had been obliged to leave. My wife did not feel much regret on
this account, as she dreaded maritime expeditions, though she agreed she
might have felt less uneasiness if we had had a vessel of this
description. I gave my sons a charge to rise early next morning, as we
had an important business on hand; and curiosity roused them all in very
good time. After our usual preparations for the day, I addressed them
thus: "Gentlemen, I am going to teach you all a new business,--that of a
baker. Give me the plates of iron and the graters we brought yesterday."
My wife was astonished; but I requested her to wait patiently and she
should have bread, not perhaps light buns, but eatable flat cakes. But
first she was to make me two small bags of sailcloth. She obeyed me;
but, at the same time, I observed she put the potatoes on the fire, a
proof she had not much faith in my bread-making. I then spread a cloth
over the ground, and, giving each of the boys a grater, we began to
grate the carefully-washed manioc roots, resting the end on the cloth.
In a short time we had a heap of what appeared to be moist white
sawdust; certainly not tempting to the appetite; but the little workmen
were amused with their labour, and jested no little about the cakes made
of scraped radishes.

"Laugh now, boys," said I; "we shall see, after a while. But you,
Ernest, ought to know that the manioc is one of the most precious of
alimentary roots, forming the principal sustenance of many nations of
America, and often preferred by Europeans, who inhabit those countries,
to wheaten bread."

When all the roots were grated, I filled the two bags closely with the
pollard, and my wife sewed the ends up firmly. It was now necessary to
apply strong pressure to extract the juice from the root, as this juice
is a deadly poison. I selected an oak beam, one end of which we fixed
between the roots of our tree; beneath this I placed our bags on a row
of little blocks of wood; I then took a large bough, which I had cut
from a tree, and prepared for the purpose, and laid it across them. We
all united then in drawing down the opposite end of the plank over the
bough, till we got it to a certain point, when we suspended to it the
heaviest substances we possessed; hammers, bars of iron, and masses of
lead. This acting upon the manioc, the sap burst through the cloth, and
flowed on the ground copiously. When I thought the pressure was
complete, we relieved the bags from the lever, and opening one, drew out
a handful of the pollard, still rather moist, resembling coarse
maize-flour.

"It only wants a little heat to complete our success," said I, in great
delight. I ordered a fire to be lighted, and fixing one of our iron
plates, which was round in form, and rather concave, on two stones
placed on each side of the fire, I covered it with the flour which we
took from the bag with a small wooden shovel. It soon formed a solid
cake, which we turned, that it might be equally baked.

It smelled so good, that they all wished to commence eating immediately;
and I had some difficulty in convincing them that this was only a trial,
and that our baking was still imperfect. Besides, as I told them there
were three kinds of manioc, of which one contained more poison than the
rest, I thought it prudent to try whether we had perfectly extracted it,
by giving a small quantity to our fowls. As soon, therefore, as the cake
was cold, I gave some to two chickens, which I kept apart; and also some
to Master Knips, the monkey, that he might, for the first time, do us a
little service. He ate it with so much relish, and such grimaces of
enjoyment, that my young party were quite anxious to share his feast;
but I ordered them to wait till we could judge of the effect, and,
leaving our employment, we went to our dinner of potatoes, to which my
wife had added one of the penguins, which was truly rather tough and
fishy; but as Jack would not allow this, and declared it was a dish fit
for a king, we allowed him to regale on it as much as he liked. During
dinner, I talked to them of the various preparations made from the
manioc; I told my wife we could obtain an excellent starch from the
expressed juice; but this did not interest her much, as at present she
usually wore the dress of a sailor, for convenience, and had neither
caps nor collars to starch.

The cake made from the root is called by the natives of the Antilles
_cassava_, and in no savage nation do we find any word signifying
_bread_; an article of food unknown to them.

We spoke of poisons; and I explained to my sons the different nature and
effects of them. Especially I warned them against the _manchineel_,
which ought to grow in this part of the world. I described the fruit to
them, as resembling a tempting yellow apple, with red spots, which is
one of the most deadly poisons: it is said that even to sleep under the
tree is dangerous. I forbade them to taste any unknown fruit, and they
promised to obey me.

On leaving the table, we went to visit the victims of our experiment.
Jack whistled for Knips, who came in three bounds from the summit of a
high tree, where he had doubtless been plundering some nest; and his
vivacity, and the peaceful cackling of the fowls, assured us our
preparation was harmless.

"Now, gentlemen," said I, laughing, "to the bakehouse, and let us see
what we can do." I wished them each to try to make the cakes. They
immediately kindled the fire and heated the iron plate. In the mean
time, I broke up the grated cassava, and mixed it with a little milk;
and giving each of them a cocoa-nut basin filled with the paste, I
showed them how to pour it with a spoon upon the plate, and spread it
about; when the paste began to puff up, I judged it was baked on one
side, and turned it, like a pancake, with a fork; and after a little
time, we had a quantity of nice yellow biscuits, which, with a jug of
milk, made us a delicious collation; and determined us, without delay,
to set about cultivating the manioc.

The rest of the day was employed in bringing up the remainder of our
cargo, by means of the sledge and the useful wheelbarrows.

       *       *       *       *       *


CHAPTER XX.

The next morning I decided on returning to the wreck. The idea of the
pinnace continually haunted my mind, and left me no repose. But it was
necessary to take all the hands I could raise, and with difficulty I got
my wife's consent to take my three elder sons, on promising her we would
return in the evening. We set out, taking provision for the day, and
soon arrived at the vessel, when my boys began to load the raft with all
manner of portable things. But the great matter was the pinnace. It was
contained in the after-hold of the vessel, immediately below the
officers' berths. My sons, with all the ardour of their age, begged to
begin by clearing a space in the vessel to put the pinnace together, and
we might afterwards think how we should launch it. Under any other
circumstances I should have shown them the folly of such an undertaking;
but in truth, I had myself a vague hope of success, that encouraged me,
and I cried out, "To work! to work!" The hold was lighted by some chinks
in the ship's side. We set diligently to work, hacking, cutting, and
sawing away all obstacles, and before evening we had a clear space round
us. But now it was necessary to return, and we put to sea with our
cargo, purposing to continue our work daily. On reaching the Bay of
Safety, we had the pleasure of finding my wife and Francis, who had
established themselves at Tent House, intending to continue there till
our visits to the vessel were concluded; that they might always keep us
in sight, and spare us the unnecessary labour of a walk after our
day's work.

I thanked my wife tenderly for this kind sacrifice, for I knew how much
she enjoyed the cool shade of Falcon's Nest; and in return I showed her
the treasures we had brought her from the vessel, consisting of two
barrels of salt butter, three hogsheads of flour, several bags of
millet, rice, and other grains, and a variety of useful household
articles, which she conveyed with great delight to our storehouse in
the rocks.

For a week we spent every day in the vessel, returning in the evening to
enjoy a good supper, and talk of our progress; and my wife, happily
engrossed with her poultry and other household cares, got accustomed to
our absence. With much hard labour, the pinnace was at last put
together. Its construction was light and elegant, it looked as if it
would sail well; at the head was a short half-deck; the masts and sails
were like those of a brigantine. We carefully caulked all the seams with
tow dipped in melted tar; and we even indulged ourselves by placing the
two small guns in it, fastened by chains.

And there stood the beautiful little bark, immovable on the stocks. We
admired it incessantly; but what could we do to get it afloat? The
difficulty of forcing a way through the mighty timbers lined with
copper, that formed the side of the ship, was insurmountable.

Suddenly, suggested by the excess of my despair, a bold but dangerous
idea presented itself to me, in which all might be lost, as well as all
gained. I said nothing about this to my children, to avoid the vexation
of a possible disappointment, but began to execute my plan.

I found a cast-iron mortar, exactly fitted for my purpose, which I
filled with gunpowder. I then took a strong oak plank to cover it, to
which I fixed iron hooks, so that they could reach the handles of the
mortar. I cut a groove in the side of the plank, that I might introduce
a long match, which should burn at least two hours before it reached the
powder. I placed the plank then over the mortar, fastened the hooks
through the handles, surrounded it with pitch, and then bound some
strong chains round the whole, to give it greater solidity. I proceeded
to suspend this infernal machine against the side of the ship near our
work, taking care to place it where the recoil from the explosion should
not injure the pinnace. When all was ready, I gave the signal of
departure, my sons having been employed in the boat, and not observing
my preparations. I remained a moment to fire the match, and then hastily
joined them with a beating heart, and proceeded to the shore.

As soon as we reached our harbour, I detached the raft, that I might
return in the boat as soon as I heard the explosion. We began actively
to unload the boat, and while thus employed, a report like thunder was
heard. All trembled, and threw down their load in terror.

"What can it be?" cried they. "Perhaps a signal from some vessel in
distress. Let us go to their assistance."

"It came from the vessel," said my wife. "It must have blown up. You
have not been careful of fire; and have left some near a barrel of
gunpowder."

"At all events," said I, "we will go and ascertain the cause. Who'll go
with me?"

By way of reply, my three sons leaped into the boat, and consoling the
anxious mother by a promise to return immediately, away we rowed. We
never made the voyage so quickly. Curiosity quickened the movements of
my sons, and I was all impatience to see the result of my project. As we
approached, I was glad to see no appearance of flames, or even smoke.
The position of the vessel did not seem altered. Instead of entering the
vessel as usual, we rounded the prow, and came opposite the other side.
The greater part of the side of the ship was gone. The sea was covered
with the remains of it. In its place stood our beautiful pinnace, quite
uninjured, only leaning a little over the stocks. At the sight I cried
out, in a transport that amazed my sons, "Victory! victory! the charming
vessel is our own; it will be easy now to launch her."

"Ah! I comprehend now," said Fritz. "Papa has blown up the ship; but how
could you manage to do it so exactly?"

I explained all to him, as we entered through the broken side of the
devoted vessel. I soon ascertained that no fire remained; and that the
pinnace had escaped any injury. We set to work to clear away all the
broken timbers in our way, and, by the aid of the jack-screw and
levers, we moved the pinnace, which we had taken care to build on
rollers, to the opening; then attaching a strong cable to her head, and
fixing the other end to the most solid part of the ship, we easily
launched her. It was too late to do any more now, except carefully
securing our prize. And we returned to the good mother, to whom, wishing
to give her an agreeable surprise, we merely said, that the side of the
vessel was blown out with powder; but we were still able to obtain more
from it; at which she sighed, and, in her heart, I have no doubt, wished
the vessel, and all it contained, at the bottom of the sea.

We had two days of incessant labour in fitting and loading the pinnace;
finally, after putting up our masts, ropes, and sails, we selected a
cargo of things our boats could not bring. When all was ready, my boys
obtained permission, as a reward for their industry, to salute their
mamma, as we entered the bay, by firing our two guns. Fritz was captain,
and Ernest and Jack, at his command, put their matches to the guns, and
fired. My wife and little boy rushed out in alarm; but our joyful shouts
soon re-assured them; and they were ready to welcome us with
astonishment and delight. Fritz placed a plank from the pinnace to the
shore, and, assisting his mother, she came on board. They gave her a new
salute, and christened the vessel _The Elizabeth,_ after her.

My wife praised our skill and perseverance, but begged we would not
suppose that Francis and she had been idle during our long absence. We
moored the little fleet safely to the shore, and followed her up the
river to the cascade, where we saw a neat garden laid out in beds
and walks.

"This is our work," said she; "the soil here, being chiefly composed of
decayed leaves, is light and easy to dig. There I have my potatoes;
there manioc roots: these are sown with peas, beans and lentils; in this
row of beds are sown lettuces, radishes, cabbages, and other European
vegetables. I have reserved one part for sugar-canes; on the high ground
I have transplanted pine-apples, and sown melons. Finally, round every
bed, I have sown a border of maize, that the high, bushy stems may
protect the young plants from the sun."

I was delighted with the result of the labour and industry of a delicate
female and a child, and could scarcely believe it was accomplished in so
short a time.

"I must confess I had no great hope of success at first," said my wife,
"and this made me averse to speaking of it. Afterwards, when I suspected
you had a secret, I determined to have one, too, and give you a
surprise."

After again applauding these useful labours, we returned to discharge
our cargo; and as we went, my good Elizabeth, still full of
horticultural plans, reminded me of the young fruit-trees we had brought
from the vessel. I promised to look after them next day, and to
establish my orchard near her kitchen-garden.

We unloaded our vessels; placed on the sledge all that might be useful
at Falcon's Nest; and, arranging the rest under the tent, fixed our
pinnace to the shore, by means of the anchor and a cord fastened to a
heavy stone; and at length set out to Falcon's Nest, where we arrived
soon, to the great comfort of my wife, who dreaded the burning plain at
Tent House.

       *       *       *       *       *


CHAPTER XXI.

After our return to Falcon's Nest, I requested my sons to continue their
exercises in gymnastics. I wished to develope all the vigour and energy
that nature had given them; and which, in our situation, were especially
necessary. I added to archery, racing, leaping, wrestling, and climbing
trees, either by the trunks, or by a rope suspended from the branches,
as sailors climb. I next taught them to use the _lasso_, a powerful
weapon, by aid of which the people of South America capture savage
animals. I fixed two balls of lead to the ends of a cord about a fathom
in length. The Patagonians, I told them, used this weapon with wonderful
dexterity. Having no leaden balls, they attach a heavy stone to each end
of a cord about thirty yards long. If they wish to capture an animal,
they hurl one of the stones at it with singular address. By the peculiar
art with which the ball is thrown, the rope makes a turn or two round
the neck of the animal, which remains entangled, without the power of
escaping. In order to show the power of this weapon, I took aim at the
trunk of a tree which they pointed out. My throw was quite successful.
The end of the rope passed two or three times round the trunk of the
tree, and remained firmly fixed to it. If the tree had been the neck of
a tiger, I should have been absolute master of it. This experiment
decided them all to learn the use of the lasso. Fritz was soon skilful
in throwing it, and I encouraged the rest to persevere in acquiring the
same facility, as the weapon might be invaluable to us when our
ammunition failed.

The next morning I saw, on looking out, that the sea was too much
agitated for any expedition in the boats; I therefore turned to some
home employments. We looked over our stores for winter provision. My
wife showed me a cask of ortolans she had preserved in butter, and a
quantity of loaves of cassava bread, carefully prepared. She pointed
out, that the pigeons had built in the tree, and were sitting on their
eggs. We then looked over the young fruit-trees brought from Europe, and
my sons and I immediately laid out a piece of ground, and planted them.

The day passed in these employments; and as we had lived only on
potatoes, cassava bread, and milk for this day, we determined to go off
next morning in pursuit of game to recruit our larder. At dawn of day we
all started, including little Francis and his mother, who wished to take
this opportunity of seeing a little more of the country. My sons and I
took our arms, I harnessed the ass to the sledge which contained our
provision for the day, and was destined to bring back the products of
the chase. Turk, accoutred in his coat of mail, formed the advanced
guard; my sons followed with their guns; then came my wife with Francis
leading the ass; and at a little distance I closed the procession, with
Master Knips mounted on the patient Flora.

We crossed Flamingo Marsh, and there my wife was charmed with the
richness of the vegetation and the lofty trees. Fritz left us, thinking
this a favourable spot for game. We soon heard the report of his gun,
and an enormous bird fell a few paces from us. I ran to assist him, as
he had much difficulty in securing his prize, which was only wounded in
the wing, and was defending itself vigorously with its beak and claws. I
threw a handkerchief over its head, and, confused by the darkness, I had
no difficulty in binding it, and conveying it in triumph to the sledge.
We were all in raptures at the sight of this beautiful creature, which
Ernest pronounced to be a female of the bustard tribe. My wife hoped
that the bird might be domesticated among her poultry, and, attracting
some more of its species, might enlarge our stock of useful fowls. We
soon arrived at the Wood of Monkeys, as we called it, where we had
obtained our cocoa-nuts; and Fritz related the laughable scene of the
stratagem to his mother and brothers. Ernest looked up wistfully at the
nuts, but there were no monkeys to throw them down.

"Do they never fall from the trees?" and hardly had he spoken, when a
large cocoa-nut fell at his feet, succeeded by a second, to my great
astonishment, for I saw no animal in the tree, and I was convinced the
nuts in the half-ripe state, as these were, could not fall of
themselves.

"It is exactly like a fairy tale," said Ernest; "I had only to speak,
and my wish was accomplished."

"And here comes the magician," said I, as, after a shower of nuts, I saw
a huge land-crab descending the tree quietly, and quite regardless of
our presence. Jack boldly struck a blow at him, but missed, and the
animal, opening its enormous claws, made up to its opponent, who fled in
terror. But the laughter of his brothers made him ashamed, and recalling
his courage, he pulled off his coat, and threw it over the back of the
crab; this checked its movements, and going to his assistance, I killed
it with a blow of my hatchet.

They all crowded round the frightful animal, anxious to know what it
was. I told them it was a land-crab--which we might call the _cocoa-nut
crab,_ as we owed such a store to it. Being unable to break the shell of
the nut, of which they are very fond, they climb the tree, and break
them off, in the unripe state. They then descend to enjoy their feast,
which they obtain by inserting their claw through the small holes in the
end, and abstracting the contents. They sometimes find them broken by
the fall, when they can eat them at pleasure.

The hideousness of the animal, and the mingled terror and bravery of
Jack, gave us subject of conversation for some time. We placed our booty
on the sledge, and continued to go on through the wood. Our path became
every instant more intricate, from the amazing quantity of creeping
plants which choked the way, and obliged us to use the axe continually.
The heat was excessive, and we got on slowly, when Ernest, always
observing, and who was a little behind us, cried out, "Halt! a new and
important discovery!" We returned, and he showed us, that from the stalk
of one of the creepers we had cut with our axe, there was issuing clear,
pure water. It was the _liane rouge_, which, in America, furnishes
the hunter such a precious resource against thirst. Ernest was much
pleased; he filled a cocoa-nut cup with the water, which flowed from the
cut stalks like a fountain, and carried it to his mother, assuring her
she might drink fearlessly; and we all had the comfort of allaying our
thirst, and blessing the Gracious Hand who has placed this refreshing
plant in the midst of the dry wilderness for the benefit of man.

[Illustration: "Suddenly we saw Ernest running to us, in great terror,
crying, 'A wild boar, papa! a great wild boar!'"]

We now marched on with more vigour, and soon arrived at the Gourd Wood,
where my wife and younger sons beheld with wonder the growth of this
remarkable fruit. Fritz repeated all the history of our former attempts,
and cut some gourds to make his mother some egg-baskets, and a large
spoon to cream the milk. But we first sat down under the shade, and took
some refreshment; and afterwards, while we all worked at making baskets,
bowls, and flasks, Ernest, who had no taste for such labour, explored
the wood. Suddenly we saw him running to us, in great terror, crying, "A
wild boar! Papa; a great wild boar!" Fritz and I seized our guns, and
ran to the spot he pointed out, the dogs preceding us. We soon heard
barking and loud grunting, which proved the combat had begun, and,
hoping for a good prize, we hastened forward; when, what was our
vexation, when we found the dogs holding by the ears, not a wild boar,
but our own great sow, whose wild and intractable disposition had
induced her to leave us, and live in the woods! We could not but laugh
at our disappointment, after a while, and I made the dogs release the
poor sow, who immediately resumed her feast on a small fruit, which had
fallen from the trees, and, scattered on the ground, had evidently
tempted the voracious beast to this part. I took up one of these apples,
which somewhat resembled a medlar, and opening it, found the contents of
a rich and juicy nature, but did not venture to taste it till we had put
it to the usual test. We collected a quantity--I even broke a loaded
branch from the tree, and we returned to our party. Master Knips no
sooner saw them than he seized on some, and crunched them up with great
enjoyment. This satisfied me that the fruit was wholesome, and we
regaled ourselves with some. My wife was especially delighted when I
told her this must be the guava, from which the delicious jelly is
obtained, so much prized in America.

"But, with all this," said Fritz, "we have a poor show of game. Do let
us leave mamma with the young ones, and set off, to see what we can
meet with."

I consented, and we left Ernest with his mother and Francis, Jack
wishing to accompany us. We made towards the rocks at the right hand,
and Jack preceded us a little, when he startled us by crying out, "A
crocodile, papa!--a crocodile!"

"You simpleton!" said I, "a crocodile in a place where there is not a
drop of water!"

"Papa!--I see it!" said the poor child, his eyes fixed on one spot; "it
is there, on this rock, sleeping. I am sure it is a crocodile!"

As soon as I was near enough to distinguish it, I assured him his
crocodile was a very harmless lizard, called the _iguana_, whose eggs
and flesh were excellent food. Fritz would immediately have shot at this
frightful creature, which was about five feet in length. I showed him
that his scaly coat rendered such an attempt useless. I then cut a
strong stick and a light wand. To the end of the former I attached a
cord with a noose; this I held in my right hand, keeping the wand in my
left. I approached softly, whistling. The animal awoke, apparently
listening with pleasure. I drew nearer, tickling him gently with the
wand. He lifted up his head, and opened his formidable jaws. I then
dexterously threw the noose round his neck, drew it, and, jumping on his
back, by the aid of my sons, held him down, though he succeeded in
giving Jack a desperate blow with his tail. Then, plunging my wand up
his nostrils, a few drops of blood came, and he died apparently
without pain.

We now carried off our game. I took him on my back, holding him by the
fore-claws, while my boys carried the tail behind me; and, with shouts
of laughter, the procession returned to the sledge.

Poor little Francis was in great dismay when he saw the terrible monster
we brought, and began to cry; but we rallied him out of his cowardice,
and his mother, satisfied with our exploits, begged to return home. As
the sledge was heavily laden, we decided to leave it till the next day,
placing on the ass, the iguana, the crab, our gourd vessels, and a bag
of the guavas, little Francis being also mounted. The bustard we loosed,
and, securing it by a string tied to one of its legs, led it with us.

We arrived at home in good time. My wife prepared part of the iguana for
supper, which was pronounced excellent. The crab was rejected as tough
and tasteless. Our new utensils were then tried, the egg-baskets and the
milk-bowls, and Fritz was charged to dig a hole in the earth, to be
covered with boards, and serve as a dairy, till something better was
thought of. Finally, we ascended our leafy abode, and slept in peace.

       *       *       *       *       *


CHAPTER XXII.

I projected an excursion with my eldest son, to explore the limits of
our country, and satisfy ourselves that it was an island, and not a part
of the continent. We set out, ostensibly, to bring the sledge we had
left the previous evening. I took Turk and the ass with us, and left
Flora with my wife and children, and, with a bag of provisions, we left
Falcon's Nest as soon as breakfast was over.

In crossing a wood of oaks, covered with the sweet, eatable acorn, we
again met with the sow; our service to her in the evening did not seem
to be forgotten, for she appeared tamer, and did not run from us. A
little farther on, we saw some beautiful birds. Fritz shot some, among
which I recognized the large blue Virginian jay, and some different
kinds of parrots. As he was reloading his gun, we heard at a distance a
singular noise, like a muffled drum, mingled with the sound made in
sharpening a saw. It might be savages; and we plunged into a thicket,
and there discovered the cause of the noise in a brilliant green bird,
seated on the withered trunk of a tree. It spread its wings and tail,
and strutted about with strange contortions, to the great delight of its
mates, who seemed lost in admiration of him. At the same time, he made
the sharp cry we heard, and, striking his wing against the tree,
produced the drum-like sound. I knew this to be the _ruffed grouse_, one
of the greatest ornaments of the forests of America. My insatiable
hunter soon put an end to the scene; he fired at the bird, who fell
dead, and his crowd of admirers, with piercing cries, took to flight.

I reprimanded my son for so rashly killing everything we met with
without consideration, and for the mere love of destruction. He seemed
sensible of his error, and, as the thing was done, I thought it as well
to make the best of it, and sent him to pick up his game.

"What a creature!" said he, as he brought it; "how it would have figured
in our poultry-yard, if I had not been in such a hurry."

We went on to our sledge in the Gourd Wood, and, as the morning was not
far advanced, we determined to leave all here, and proceed in our
projected excursion beyond the chain of rocks. But we took the ass with
us to carry our provisions, and any game or other object we should meet
with in the new country we hoped to penetrate. Amongst gigantic trees,
and through grass of a prodigious height, we travelled with some labour,
looking right and left to avoid danger, or to make discoveries. Turk
walked the first, smelling the air; then came the donkey, with his grave
and careless step; and we followed, with our guns in readiness. We met
with plains of potatoes and of manioc, amongst the stalks of which were
sporting tribes of agoutis; but we were not tempted by such game.

We now met with a new kind of bush covered with small white berries
about the size of a pea. On pressing these berries, which adhered to my
fingers, I discovered that this plant was the _Myrica cerifera,_ or
candle-berry myrtle, from which a wax is obtained that may be made into
candles. With great pleasure I gathered a bag of these berries, knowing
how my wife would appreciate this acquisition; for she often lamented
that we were compelled to go to bed with the birds, as soon as the
sun set.

We forgot our fatigue, as we proceeded, in contemplation of the wonders
of nature, flowers of marvellous beauty, butterflies of more dazzling
colours than the flowers, and birds graceful in form, and brilliant in
plumage. Fritz climbed a tree, and succeeded in securing a young green
parrot, which he enveloped in his handkerchief, with the intention of
bringing it up, and teaching it to speak. And now we met with another
wonder: a number of birds who lived in a community, in nests, sheltered
by a common roof, in the formation of which they had probably laboured
jointly. This roof was composed of straw and dry sticks, plastered with
clay, which rendered it equally impenetrable to sun or rain. Pressed as
we were for time, I could not help stopping to admire this feathered
colony. This leading us to speak of natural history, as it relates to
animals who live in societies, we recalled in succession the ingenious
labours of the beavers and the marmots; the not less marvellous
constructions of the bees, the wasps, and the ants; and I mentioned
particularly those immense ant-hills of America, of which the masonry is
finished with such skill and solidity that they are sometimes used for
ovens, to which they bear a resemblance.

We had now reached some trees quite unknown to us. They were from forty
to sixty feet in height, and from the bark, which was cracked in many
places, issued small balls of a thick gum. Fritz got one off with
difficulty, it was so hardened by the sun. He wished to soften it with
his hands, but found that heat only gave it the power of extension, and
that by pulling the two extremities, and then releasing them, it
immediately resumed its first form.

Fritz ran to me, crying out, "I have found some India-rubber!"

"If that be true," said I, "you have made a most valuable discovery."

He thought I was laughing at him, for we had no drawing to rub out here.

I told him this gum might be turned to many useful purposes; among the
rest we might make excellent shoes of it. This interested him. How could
we accomplish this?

"The caoutchouc," said I, "is the milky sap which is obtained from
certain trees of the _Euphorbium_ kind, by incisions made in the bark.
It is collected in vessels, care being taken to agitate them, that the
liquid may not coagulate. In this state they cover little clay bottles
with successive layers of it, till it attains the required thickness. It
is then dried in smoke, which gives it the dark brown colour. Before it
is quite dry, it is ornamented by lines and flowers drawn with the
knife. Finally, they break the clay form, and extract it from the mouth;
and there remains the India-rubber bottle of commerce, soft and
flexible. Now, this is my plan for shoemaking; we will fill a stocking
with sand, cover it with repeated layers of the gum till it is of the
proper thickness; then empty out the sand, and, if I do not deceive
myself, we shall have perfect boots or shoes."

Comfortable in the hope of new boots, we advanced through an
interminable forest of various trees. The monkeys on the cocoa-nut trees
furnished us with pleasant refreshment, and a small store of nuts
besides. Among these trees I saw some lower bushes, whose leaves were
covered with a white dust. I opened the trunk of one of these, which had
been torn up by the wind, and found in the interior a white farinaceous
substance, which, on tasting, I knew to be the sago imported into
Europe. This, as connected with our subsistence, was a most important
affair, and my son and I, with our hatchets, laid open the tree, and
obtained from it twenty-five pounds of the valuable sago.

This occupied us an hour; and, weary and hungry, I thought it prudent
not to push our discoveries farther this day. We therefore returned to
the Gourd Wood, placed all our treasures on the sledge, and took our way
home. We arrived without more adventures, and were warmly greeted, and
our various offerings gratefully welcomed, especially the green parrot.
We talked of the caoutchouc, and new boots, with great delight during
supper; and, afterwards, my wife looked with exceeding content at her
bag of candle-berries, anticipating the time when we should not have to
go to bed, as we did now, as soon as the sun set.

       *       *       *       *       *


CHAPTER XXIII.

The next morning my wife and children besought me to begin my
manufacture of candles. I remembered having seen the chandler at work,
and I tried to recall all my remembrances of the process. I put into a
boiler as many berries as it would hold, and placed it over a moderate
fire: the wax melted from the berries, and rose to the surface, and this
I carefully skimmed with a large flat spoon and put in a separate vessel
placed near the fire; when this was done, my wife supplied me with some
wicks she had made from the threads of sailcloth; these wicks were
attached, four at a time, to a small stick; I dipped them into the wax,
and placed them on two branches of a tree to dry; I repeated this
operation as often as necessary to make them the proper thickness, and
then placed them in a cool spot to harden. But we could not forbear
trying them that very night; and, thought somewhat rude in form, it was
sufficient that they reminded us of our European home, and prolonged our
days by many useful hours we had lost before.

This encouraged me to attempt another enterprise. My wife had long
regretted that she had not been able to make butter. She had attempted
to beat her cream in a vessel, but either the heat of the climate, or
her want of patience, rendered her trials unsuccessful. I felt that I
had not skill enough to make a churn; but I fancied that by some simple
method, like that used by the Hottentots, who put their cream in a skin
and shake it till they produce butter, we might obtain the same result.
I cut a large gourd in two, filled it with three quarts of cream, then
united the parts, and secured them closely. I fastened a stick to each
corner of a square piece of sailcloth, placed the gourd in the middle,
and, giving a corner to each of my sons, directed them to rock the cloth
with a slow, regular motion, as you would a child's cradle. This was
quite an amusement for them; and at the end of an hour, my wife had the
pleasure of placing before us some excellent butter. I then tried to
make a cart, our sledge being unfitted for some roads; the wheels I had
brought from the wreck rendered this less difficult; and I completed a
very rude vehicle, which was, nevertheless, very useful to us.

While I was thus usefully employed, my wife and children were not idle.
They had transplanted the European trees, and thoughtfully placed each
in the situation best suited to it. I assisted with my hands and
counsels. The vines we planted round the roots of our trees, and hoped
in time to form a trellis-work. Of the chesnut, walnut, and
cherry-trees, we formed an avenue from Falcon's Nest to Family Bridge,
which, we hoped, would ultimately be a shady road between our two
mansions. We made a solid road between the two rows of trees, raised in
the middle and covered with sand, which we brought from the shore in our
wheelbarrows. I also made a sort of tumbril, to which we harnessed the
ass, to lighten this difficult labour.

We then turned our thoughts to Tent House, our first abode, and which
still might form our refuge in case of danger. Nature had not favoured
it; but our labour soon supplied all deficiencies. We planted round it
every tree that requires ardent heat; the citron, pistachio, the almond,
the mulberry, the Siamese orange, of which the fruit is as large as the
head of a child, and the Indian fig, with its long prickly leaves, all
had a place here. These plantations succeeding admirably, we had, after
some time, the pleasure of seeing the dry and sandy desert converted
into a shady grove, rich in flowers and fruit. As this place was the
magazine for our arms, ammunition, and provisions of all sorts; we made
a sort of fortress of it, surrounding it with a high hedge of strong,
thorny trees; so that not only to wild beasts, but even to human
enemies, it was inaccessible. Our bridge was the only point of approach,
and we always carefully removed the first planks after crossing it. We
also placed our two cannon on a little elevation within the enclosure;
and, finally, we planted some cedars, near our usual landing-place, to
which we might, at a future time, fasten our vessels. These labours
occupied us three months, only interrupted by a strict attention to the
devotions and duties of the Sunday. I was most especially grateful to
God for the robust health we all enjoyed, in the midst of our
employments. All went on well in our little colony. We had an abundant
and certain supply of provisions; but our wardrobe, notwithstanding the
continual repairing my wife bestowed on it, was in a most wretched
state, and we had no means of renewing it, except by again visiting the
wreck, which I knew still contained some chests of clothes, and bales
of cloth. This decided me to make another voyage; besides I was rather
anxious to see the state of the vessel.

We found it much in the same condition we had left it, except being much
more shattered by the winds and waves.

We selected many useful things for our cargo; the bales of linen and
woollen cloth were not forgotten; some barrels of tar; and everything
portable that we could remove; doors, windows, tables, benches, locks
and bolts, all the ammunition, and even such of the guns as we could
move. In fact we completely sacked the vessel; carrying off, after
several days' labour, all our booty, with the exception of some weighty
articles, amongst which were three or four immense boilers, intended for
a sugar-manufactory. These we tied to some large empty casks, which we
pitched completely over, and hoped they would be able to float in
the water.

When we had completed our arrangements, I resolved to blow up the ship.
We placed a large barrel of gunpowder in the hold, and arranging a long
match from it, which would burn some hours, we lighted it, and proceeded
without delay to Safety Bay to watch the event. I proposed to my wife to
sup on a point of land where we could distinctly see the vessel. Just as
the sun was going down, a majestic rolling, like thunder, succeeded by a
column of fire, announced the destruction of the vessel, which had
brought us from Europe, and bestowed its great riches on us. We could
not help shedding tears, as we heard the last mournful cry of this sole
remaining bond that connected us with home. We returned sorrowfully to
Tent House, and felt as if we had lost an old friend.

We rose early next morning, and hastened to the shore, which we found
covered with the wreck, which, with a little exertion, we found it easy
to collect. Amongst the rest, were the large boilers. We afterwards used
these to cover our barrels of gunpowder, which we placed in a part of
the rock, where, even if an explosion took place, no damage could ensue.

My wife, in assisting us with the wreck, made the agreeable discovery,
that two of our ducks, and one goose, had hatched each a brood, and were
leading their noisy young families to the water. This reminded us of all
our poultry and domestic comfort, at Falcon's Nest, and we determined to
defer, for some time, the rest of our work at Tent House, and to return
the next day to our shady summer home.

       *       *       *       *       *


CHAPTER XXIV.

As we went along the avenue of fruit-trees, I was concerned to see my
young plants beginning to droop, and I immediately resolved to proceed
to Cape Disappointment the next morning, to cut bamboos to make props
for them. It was determined we should all go, as, on our arrival at
Falcon's Nest, we discovered many other supplies wanting. The candles
were failing: we must have more berries, for now my wife sewed by
candlelight, while I wrote my journal. She wanted, also, some
wild-fowls' eggs to set under her hens. Jack wanted some guavas, and
Francis wished for some sugar-canes. So we made a family tour of it,
taking the cart, with the cow and ass, to contain our provision, and a
large sailcloth, to make a tent. The weather was delightful, and we set
out singing, in great spirits.

We crossed the potato and manioc plantations, and the wood of guavas, on
which my boys feasted to their great satisfaction. The road was rugged,
but we assisted to move the cart, and rested frequently. We stopped to
see the bird colony, which greatly delighted them all, and Ernest
declared they belonged to the species of _Loxia gregaria_, the sociable
grosbeak. He pointed out to us their wonderful instinct in forming their
colony in the midst of the candle-berry bushes, on which they feed. We
filled two bags with these berries, and another with guavas, my wife
proposing to make jelly from them.

We then proceeded to the caoutchouc-tree, and here I determined to rest
awhile, to collect some of the valuable gum. I had brought some large
gourd-shells with me for the purpose. I made incisions in the trees, and
placed these bowls to receive the gum, which soon began to run out in a
milky stream, and we hoped to find them filled on our return. We turned
a little to the left, and entered a beautiful and fertile plain, bounded
on one side by the sugar-canes, behind which rose a wood of palms, on
the other by the bamboos; and before us was Cape Disappointment, backed
by the ocean--a magnificent picture.

We at once decided to make this our resting-place; we even thought of
transferring our residence from Falcon's Nest to this spot; but we
dismissed the thought, when we reflected on the perfect security of our
dear castle in the air. We contented ourselves with arranging to make
this always our station for refreshment in our excursions. We loosed our
animals, and allowed them to graze on the rich grass around us. We
arranged to spend the night here, and, taking a light repast, we
separated on our several employments--some to cut sugar-canes, others
bamboos, and, after stripping them, to make them into bundles, and place
them in the cart. This hard work made the boys hungry; they refreshed
themselves with sugar-canes, but had a great desire to have some
cocoa-nuts. Unfortunately, there were neither monkeys nor crabs to
bestow them, and the many attempts they made to climb the lofty, bare
trunk of the palm ended only in disappointment and confusion. I went to
their assistance. I gave them pieces of the rough skin of the shark,
which I had brought for the purpose, to brace on their legs, and showing
them how to climb, by the aid of a cord fastened round the tree with a
running noose, a method practised with success by the savages, my little
climbers soon reached the summit of the trees; they then used their
hatchets, which they had carried up in their girdles, and a shower of
cocoa-nuts fell down. These furnished a pleasant dessert, enlivened by
the jests of Fritz and Jack, who, being the climbers, did not spare
Doctor Ernest, who had contented himself with looking up at them; and
even now, regardless of their banter, he was lost in some new idea.
Rising suddenly, and looking at the palms, he took a cocoa-nut cup, and
a tin flask with a handle, and gravely addressed us thus:--

"Gentlemen and lady! this exercise of climbing is really very
disagreeable and difficult; but since it confers so much honour on the
undertakers, I should like also to attempt an adventure, hoping to do
something at once glorious and agreeable to the company."

He then bound his legs with the pieces of shark's skin, and with
singular vigour and agility sprung up a palm which he had long been
attentively examining. His brothers laughed loudly at his taking the
trouble to ascend a tree that had not a single nut on it. Ernest took no
notice of their ridicule, but, as soon as he reached the top, struck
with his hatchet, and a tuft of tender yellow leaves fell at our feet,
which I recognized as the product of the cabbage-palm, a delicate food,
highly valued in America. His mother thought it a mischievous act, to
destroy the tree thus; but he assured her his prize was worth many
cocoa-nuts. But our hero did not descend; and I asked him if he wanted
to replace the cabbage he had cut off?

"Wait a little," said he; "I am bringing you some wine to drink my
health; but it comes slower than I could wish."

He now descended, holding his cocoa-cup, into which he poured from the
flask a clear rose-coloured liquor, and, presenting it to me, begged me
to drink. It was, indeed, the true palm-wine, which is as pleasant as
champaign, and, taken moderately, a great restorative.

We all drank; and Ernest was praised and thanked by all, till he forgot
all the scoffs he had received.

As it was getting late, we set about putting up our tent for the night,
when suddenly our ass, who had been quietly grazing near us, began to
bray furiously, erected his ears, kicking right and left, and, plunging
into the bamboos, disappeared. This made us very uneasy. I could not
submit to lose the useful animal; and, moreover, I was afraid his
agitation announced the approach of some wild beast. The dogs and I
sought for any trace of it in vain; I therefore, to guard against any
danger, made a large fire before our tent, which I continued to watch
till midnight, when, all being still, I crept into the tent, to my bed
of moss, and slept undisturbed till morning.

In the morning we thanked God for our health and safety, and then began
to lament our poor donkey, which, I hoped, might have been attracted by
the light of our fire, and have returned; but we saw nothing of him, and
we decided that his services were so indispensable, that I should go,
with one of my sons, and the two dogs, in search of him, and cross the
thickets of bamboo. I chose to take Jack with me, to his great
satisfaction, for Fritz and Ernest formed a better guard for their
mother in a strange place. We set out, well armed, with bags of
provisions on our back, and after an hour's fruitless search among the
canes, We emerged beyond them, in an extensive plain on the borders of
the great bay. We saw that the ridge of rocks still extended on the
right till it nearly reached the shore, when it abruptly terminated in a
perpendicular precipice. A considerable river flowed into the bay here,
and between the river and the rock was a narrow passage, which at high
water would be overflowed. We thought it most likely that our ass had
passed by this defile; and I wished to see whether these rocks merely
bordered or divided the island; we therefore went forward till we met
with a stream, which fell in a cascade from a mass of rocks into the
river. We ascended the stream till we found a place shallow enough to
cross. Here we saw the shoemarks of our ass, mingled with the footsteps
of other animals, and at a distance we saw a herd of animals, but could
not distinguish what they were. We ascended a little hill, and, through
our telescope, saw a most beautiful and fertile country, breathing peace
and repose. To our right rose the majestic chain of rocks that divided
the island. On our left a succession of beautiful green hills spread to
the horizon. Woods of palms and various unknown trees were scattered
over the scene. The beautiful stream meandered across the valley like a
silver ribbon, bordered by rushes and other aquatic plants. There was no
trace of the footstep of man. The country had all the purity of its
first creation; no living creatures but some beautiful birds and
brilliant butterflies appeared.

But, at a distance, we saw some specks, which I concluded were the
animals we had first seen, and I resolved to go nearer, in hopes our ass
might have joined them. We made towards the spot, and, to shorten the
road, crossed a little wood of bamboos, the stalks of which, as thick as
a man's thigh, rose to the height of thirty feet. I suspected this to be
the giant reed of America, so useful for the masts of boats and canoes.
I promised Jack to allow him to cut some on our return; but at present
the ass was my sole care. When we had crossed the wood, we suddenly came
face to face on a herd of buffaloes, not numerous certainly, but
formidable in appearance. At the sight, I was absolutely petrified, and
my gun useless. Fortunately the dogs were in the rear, and the animals,
lifting their heads, and fixing their large eyes on us, seemed more
astonished than angry--we were the first men probably they had
ever seen.

We drew back a little, prepared our arms, and endeavoured to retreat,
when the dogs arrived, and, notwithstanding our efforts to restrain
them, flew at the buffaloes. It was no time now to retreat; the combat
was begun. The whole troop uttered the most frightful roars, beat the
ground with their feet, and butted with their horns. Our brave dogs were
not intimidated, but marched straight upon the enemy, and, falling on a
young buffalo that had strayed before the rest, seized it by the ears.
The creature began to bellow, and struggle to escape; its mother ran to
its assistance, and, with her, the whole herd. At that moment,--I
tremble as I write it, I gave the signal to my brave Jack, who behaved
with admirable coolness, and at the same moment we fired on the herd.
The effect was wonderful: they paused a moment, and then, even before
the smoke was dissipated, took to flight with incredible rapidity,
forded the river, and were soon out of sight. My dogs still held their
prize, and the mother, though wounded by our shot, tore up the ground in
her fury, and was advancing on the dogs to destroy them; but I stepped
forward, and discharging a pistol between the horns, put an end to
her life.

We began to breathe. We had looked death in the face,--a most horrible
death; and thanked God for our preservation. I praised Jack for his
courage and presence of mind; any fear or agitation on his part would
have unnerved me, and rendered our fate certain. The dogs still held the
young calf by the ears, it bellowed incessantly, and I feared they would
either be injured or lose their prize. I went up to their assistance. I
hardly knew how to act. I could easily have killed it; but I had a great
desire to carry it off alive, and try to tame it, to replace our ass,
whom I did not intend to follow farther. A happy idea struck Jack: he
always carried his lasso in his pocket; he drew it out, retired a
little, and flung it so dexterously that he completely wound it round
the hind legs of the calf, and threw it down. I now approached; I
replaced the lasso by a stronger cord, and used another to bind his fore
legs loosely. Jack cried victory, and already thought how his mother and
brothers would be delighted, when we presented it; but that was no easy
matter. At last I thought of the method used in Italy to tame the wild
bulls, and I resolved to try it, though it was a little cruel.

I began by tying to the foot of a tree the cords that held the legs;
then making the dogs seize him again by the ears, I caught hold of his
mouth, and with a sharp knife perforated the nostril, and quickly passed
a cord through the opening. This cord was to serve as my rein, to guide
the animal. The operation was successful; and, as soon as the blood
ceased to flow, I took the cord, uniting the two ends, and the poor
suffering creature, completely subdued, followed me without resistance.

I was unwilling to abandon the whole of the buffalo I had killed, as it
is excellent meat; I therefore cut out the tongue, and some of the best
parts from the loin, and covered them well with salt, of which we had
taken a provision with us. I then carefully skinned the four legs,
remembering that the American hunters use these skins for boots, being
remarkably soft and flexible. We permitted the dogs to feast on the
remainder; and while they were enjoying themselves, we washed ourselves,
and sat down under a tree to rest and refresh ourselves. But the poor
beasts had soon many guests at their banquet. Clouds of birds of prey
came from every part; an incessant combat was kept up; no sooner was one
troop of brigands satisfied, than another succeeded; and soon all that
remained of the poor buffalo was the bones. I noticed amongst these
ravenous birds the royal vulture, an elegant bird, remarkable for a
brilliant collar of down. We could easily have killed some of these
robbers, but I thought it useless to destroy for mere curiosity, and I
preferred employing our time in cutting, with a small saw we had
brought, some of the gigantic reeds that grew round us. We cut several
of the very thick ones, which make excellent vessels when separated at
the joints; but I perceived that Jack was cutting some of small
dimensions, and I inquired if he was going to make a Pandean pipe, to
celebrate his triumphal return with the buffalo.

"No," said he; "I don't recollect that Robinson Crusoe amused himself
with music in his island; but I have thought of something that will be
useful to mamma. I am cutting these reeds to make moulds for
our candles."

"An excellent thought, my dear boy!" said I; "and if even we break our
moulds in getting out the candles, which I suspect we may, we know where
they grow, and can come for more."

We collected all our reeds in bundles, and then set out. The calf,
intimidated by the dogs, and galled by the rein, went on tolerably well.
We crossed the narrow pass in the rocks, and here our dogs killed a
large jackal which was coming from her den in the rock. The furious
animals then entered the den, followed by Jack, who saved, with
difficulty, one of the young cubs, the others being immediately worried.
It was a pretty little gold-coloured creature, about the size of a cat.
Jack petitioned earnestly to have it to bring up; and I made him happy
by granting his request.

In the mean time I had tied the calf to a low tree, which I discovered
was the thorny dwarf palm, which grows quickly, and is extremely useful
for fences. It bears an oblong fruit, about the size of a pigeon's egg,
from which is extracted an oil which is an excellent substitute for
butter. I determined to return for some young plants of this palm to
plant at Tent House.

It was almost night when we joined our family; and endless were the
questions the sight of the buffalo produced, and great was the boasting
of Jack the dauntless. I was compelled to lower his pride a little by an
unvarnished statement, though I gave him much credit for his coolness
and resolution; and, supper-time arriving, my wife had time to tell me
what had passed while we had been on our expedition.

       *       *       *       *       *


CHAPTER XXV.

My wife began by saying they had not been idle in my absence. They had
collected wood, and made torches for the night. Fritz and Ernest had
even cut down an immense sago-palm, seventy feet high, intending to
extract its precious pith; but this they had been unable to accomplish
alone, and waited for my assistance. But while they were engaged in this
employment, a troop of monkeys had broken into the tent and pillaged and
destroyed everything; they had drunk or overturned the milk, and carried
off or spoiled all our provisions; and even so much injured the palisade
I had erected round the tent, that it took them an hour, after they
returned, to repair the damage. Fritz had made also a beautiful capture,
in a nest he had discovered in the rocks at Cape Disappointment. It was
a superb bird, and, though very young, quite feathered. Ernest had
pronounced it to be the eagle of Malabar, and I confirmed his assertion;
and as this species of eagle is not large, and does not require much
food, I advised him to train it as a falcon, to chase other birds. I
took this opportunity to announce that henceforward every one must
attend to his own live stock, or they should be set at liberty, mamma
having sufficient to manage in her own charge.

We then made a fire of green wood, in the smoke of which we placed the
buffalo-meat we had brought home, leaving it during the night, that it
might be perfectly cured. We had had some for supper, and thought it
excellent. The young buffalo was beginning to graze, and we gave him a
little milk to-night, as well as to the jackal. Fritz had taken the
precaution to cover the eyes of his eagle, and tying it fast by the leg
to a branch, it rested very tranquilly. We then retired to our mossy
beds, to recruit our strength for the labours of another day.

At break of day we rose, made a light breakfast, and I was about to give
the signal of departure, when my wife communicated to me the difficulty
they had had in cutting down the palm-tree, and the valuable provision
that might be obtained from it with a little trouble. I thought she was
right, and decided to remain here another day; for it was no trifling
undertaking to split up a tree seventy feet long. I consented the more
readily, as I thought I might, after removing the useful pith from the
trunk, obtain two large spouts or channels to conduct the water from
Jackal River to the kitchen garden.

Such tools as we had we carried to the place where the tree lay. We
first sawed off the head; then, with the hatchet making an opening at
each end, we took wedges and mallets, and the wood being tolerably soft,
after four hours' labour, we succeeded in splitting it completely. When
parted, we pressed the pith with our hands, to get the whole into one
division of the trunk, and began to make our paste. At one end of the
spout we nailed one of the graters, through which we intended to force
the paste, to form the round seeds. My little bakers set vigorously to
work, some pouring water on the pith, while the rest mixed it into
paste. When sufficiently worked, I pressed it strongly with my hand
against the grater; the farinaceous parts passed easily through the
holes, while the _ligneous_ part, consisting of splinters of wood, &c,
was left behind. This we threw into a heap, hoping mushrooms might
spring from it. My wife now carefully spread the grains on sailcloth, in
the sun, to dry them. I also formed some vermicelli, by giving more
consistence to the paste, and forcing it through the holes in little
pipes. My wife promised with this, and the Dutch cheese, to make us a
dish equal to Naples maccaroni. We were now contented; we could at any
time obtain more sago by cutting down a tree, and we were anxious to get
home to try our water-pipes. We spent the rest of the day in loading the
cart with our utensils and the halves of the tree. We retired to our hut
at sunset, and slept in peace.

The next morning the whole caravan began to move at an early hour. The
buffalo, harnessed to the cart, by the side of his nurse, the cow, took
the place of our lost ass, and began his apprenticeship as a beast of
draught. We took the same road on our return, that we might carry away
the candle-berries and the vessels of India-rubber. The vanguard was
composed of Fritz and Jack, who pioneered our way, by cutting down the
underwood to make a road for the cart. Our water-pipes, being very long,
somewhat impeded our progress; but we happily reached the candle-berry
trees without accident, and placed our sacks on the cart. We did not
find more than a quart of the caoutchouc gum; but it would be
sufficient for our first experiment, and I carried it off.

In crossing the little wood of guavas, we suddenly heard our dogs, who
were before us with Fritz and Jack, uttering the most frightful
howlings. I was struck with terror lest they should have encountered a
tiger, and rushed forward ready to fire. The dogs were endeavouring to
enter a thicket, in the midst of which Fritz declared he had caught a
glimpse of an animal larger than the buffalo, with a black, bristly
skin. I was just about to discharge my gun into the thicket, when Jack,
who had lain down on the ground, to look under the bushes, burst into a
loud laugh. "It is another trick of that vexatious animal, our old sow!
she is always making fools of us," cried he. Half merry and half angry,
we made an opening into the thicket, and there discovered the lady
lying, surrounded by seven little pigs, only a few days old. We were
very glad to see our old friend so attended, and stroked her. She seemed
to recognize us, and grunted amicably. We supplied her with some
potatoes, sweet acorns, and cassava bread; intending, in return, to eat
her young ones, when they were ready for the spit, though my dear wife
cried out against the cruelty of the idea. At present we left them with
her, but proposed afterwards to take away two, to be brought up at home,
and leave the rest to support themselves on acorns in the woods, where
they would become game for us. At length we arrived at Falcon's Nest,
which we regarded with all the attachment of home. Our domestic animals
crowded round us, and noisily welcomed us. We tied up the buffalo and
jackal, as they were not yet domesticated. Fritz fastened his eagle to
a branch by a chain long enough to allow it to move freely, and then
imprudently uncovered its eyes; it immediately raised its head, erected
its feathers, and struck on all sides with its beak and claws; our fowls
took to flight, but the poor parrot fell in his way, and was torn to
pieces before we could assist it. Fritz was very angry, and would have
executed the murderer; but Ernest begged he would not be so rash, as
parrots were more plentiful than eagles, and it was his own fault for
uncovering his eyes; the falconers always keeping their young birds
hooded six weeks, till they are quite tamed. He offered to train it, if
Fritz would part with it; but this Fritz indignantly refused. I told
them the fable of the dog in the manger, which abashed Fritz; and he
then besought his brother to teach him the means of training this noble
bird, and promised to present him with his monkey.

Ernest then told him that the Caribs subdue the largest birds by making
them inhale tobacco smoke. Fritz laughed at this; but Ernest brought a
pipe and some tobacco he had found in the ship, and began to smoke
gravely under the branch where the bird was perched. It was soon calm,
and on his continuing to smoke it became quite motionless. Fritz then
easily replaced the bandage, and thanked his brother for his
good service.

The next morning we set out early to our young plantation of
fruit-trees, to fix props to support the weaker plants. We loaded the
cart with the thick bamboo canes and our tools, and harnessed the cow to
it, leaving the buffalo in the stable, as I wished the wound in his
nostrils to be perfectly healed before I put him to any hard work. I
left Francis with his mother, to prepare our dinner, begging them not to
forget the maccaroni.

We began at the entrance of the avenue to Falcon's Nest, where all the
trees were much bent by the wind. We raised them gently by a crowbar; I
made a hole in the earth, in which one of my sons placed the bamboo
props, driving them firmly down with a mallet, and we proceeded to
another, while Ernest and Jack tied the trees to them with a long,
tough, pliant plant, which I suspected was a species of _llana_. As we
were working, Fritz inquired if these fruit-trees were wild.

"A pretty question!" cried Jack. "Do you think that trees are tamed like
eagles or buffaloes? You perhaps could teach them to bow politely, so
that we might gather the fruit!"

"You fancy you are a wit," said I, "but you speak like a dunce. We
cannot make trees bow at our pleasure; but we can make a tree, which by
nature bears sour and uneatable fruit, produce what is sweet and
wholesome. This is effected by grafting into a wild tree a small branch,
or even a bud, of the sort you wish. I will show you this method
practically at some future time, for by these means we can procure all
sorts of fruit; only we must remember, that we can only graft a tree
with one of the same natural family; thus, we could not graft an apple
on a cherry-tree, for one belongs to the apple tribe, and the other to
the plum tribe."

"Do we know the origin of all these European fruits?" asked the
inquiring Ernest.

"All our shell fruits," answered I, "such as the nut, the almond, and
the chesnut, are natives of the East; the peach, of Persia; the orange
and apricot, of Armenia; the cherry, which was unknown in Europe sixty
years before Christ, was brought by the proconsul Lucullus from the
southern shores of the Euxine; the olives come from Palestine. The first
olive-trees were planted on Mount Olympus, and from thence were spread
through the rest of Europe; the fig is from Lydia; the plums, your
favourite fruit, with the exception of some natural sorts that are
natives of our forests, are from Syria, and the town of Damascus has
given its name to one sort, the _Damascene_, or Damson. The pear is a
fruit of Greece; the ancients called it the fruit of Peloponnesus; the
mulberry is from Asia; and the quince from the island of Crete."

Our work progressed as we talked thus, and we had soon propped all our
valuable plants. It was now noon, and we returned to Falcon's Nest very
hungry, and found an excellent dinner prepared, of smoked beef, and the
tender bud of the cabbage-palm, the most delicious of vegetables.

After dinner, we began to discuss a plan I had long had in my head; but
the execution of it presented many difficulties. It was, to substitute a
firm and solid staircase for the ladder of ropes, which was a source of
continual fear to my wife. It is true, that we only had to ascend it to
go to bed; but bad weather might compel us to remain in our apartment;
we should then have frequently to ascend and descend, and the ladder was
very unsafe. But the immense height of the tree, and the impossibility
of procuring beams to sustain a staircase round it, threw me into
despair. However, looking at the monstrous trunk of the tree, I
thought, if we cannot succeed outside, could we not contrive to mount
within?

"Have you not said there was a swarm of bees in the trunk of the tree?"
I inquired of my wife. "Yes," said little Francis, "they stung my face
dreadfully the other day, when I was on the ladder. I was pushing a
stick into the hole they came out of, to try how deep it was."

"Now, then," cried I, "I see through my difficulties. Let us find out
how far the tree is hollow; we can increase the size of the tunnel, and
I have already planned the sort of staircase I can construct." I had
hardly spoken, when the boys leaped like squirrels, some upon the arched
roots, some on the steps of the ladder, and began to strike with sticks
and mallets to sound the tree. This rash proceeding had nearly been
fatal to Jack, who, having placed himself just before the opening, and
striking violently, the whole swarm, alarmed at an attack, which
probably shook their palace of wax, issued forth, and revenged
themselves amply on all the assailants. Nothing was heard but cries and
stamping of feet. My wife hastened to cover the stings with moist earth,
which rather relieved them; but it was some hours before they could open
their eyes. They begged me to get them the honey from their foes, and I
prepared a hive, which I had long thought of--a large gourd, which I
placed on a board nailed upon a branch of our tree, and covered with
straw to shelter it from the sun and wind. But it was now bedtime, and
we deferred our attack on the fortress till next day.

       *       *       *       *       *


CHAPTER XXVI.

An hour before day, I waked my sons to assist me in removing the bees to
the new abode I had prepared for them. I commenced by plastering up the
entrance to their present dwelling with clay, leaving only room to admit
the bowl of my pipe. This was necessary, because I had neither masks nor
gloves, as the regular bee-takers have. I then began to smoke briskly,
to stupify the bees. At first we heard a great buzzing in the hollow,
like the sound of a distant storm: the murmur ceased by degrees, and a
profound stillness succeeded, and I withdrew my pipe without a single
bee appearing. Fritz and I then, with a chisel and small axe, made an
opening about three feet square, below the bees' entrance. Before we
detached this, I repeated the fumigation, lest the noise and the fresh
air should awake the bees; but there was no fear of such a thing,--they
were quite stupified. We removed the wood, and through this opening
beheld, with wonder and admiration, the work of this insect nation.
There was such a store of wax and honey, that we feared we should not
have vessels to contain it. The interior of the tree was filled with the
honeycombs; I cut them carefully, and placed them in the gourds the boys
brought me. As soon as I had made a little space, I placed the upper
comb, on which the bees were hanging in clusters, in the new hive, and
put it on the plank prepared for it; I then descended with the rest of
the honeycomb, and filled a cask with it, which I had previously washed
in the stream; this we covered with sailcloth and planks, lest the
bees, attracted by the smell, should come to claim their own. We left
out some comb for a treat at dinner, and my wife carefully put by
the rest.

To prevent the bees returning to their old abode, we placed some burning
tobacco in the hollow, the smell and fumes of which drove them from the
tree, when they wished to enter; and, finally, they settled in the new
hive, where the queen bee, doubtless, had fixed herself.

We now began our work; we emptied the cask of honey into a large boiler,
except a little reserved for daily use; we added a little water, placed
the boiler on a slow fire, and reduced it to a liquid mass; this was
strained through a bag into the cask, and left standing all night to
cool. The next morning the wax had risen to the top, and formed a hard
and solid cake, which we easily removed; and beneath was the most pure
and delicious honey. The barrel was then carefully closed, and placed in
a cool place. We now proceeded to examine the interior of the tree. I
took a long pole, and tried the height from the window I had made; and
tied a stone to a string to sound the depth. To my surprise, the pole
penetrated without resistance to the very branches where our dwelling
was, and the stone went to the roots. It was entirely hollow, and I
thought I could easily fix a winding staircase in this wide tunnel. It
would seem, that this huge tree, like the willow of our country, is
nourished through the bark, for it was flourishing in luxuriant beauty.

We began by cutting a doorway, on the side facing the sea, of the size
of the door we had brought from the captain's cabin, with its
framework, thus securing ourselves from invasion on that side. We then
cleansed, and perfectly smoothed the cavity, fixing in the middle the
trunk of a tree about ten feet high, to serve for the axis of the
staircase. We had prepared, the evening before, a number of boards from
the staves of a large barrel, to form our steps. By the aid of the
chisel and mallet, we made deep notches in the inner part of our tree,
and corresponding notches in the central pillar; I placed my steps in
these notches, riveting them with large nails; I raised myself in this
manner step after step, but always turning round the pillar, till we got
to the top. We then fixed on the central pillar another trunk of the
same height, prepared beforehand, and continued our winding steps. Four
times we had to repeat this operation, and, finally, we reached our
branches, and terminated the staircase on the level of the floor of our
apartment. I cleared the entrance by some strokes of my axe. To render
it more solid, I filled up the spaces between the steps with planks, and
fastened two strong cords from above, to each side of the staircase, to
hold by. Towards different points, I made openings; in which were placed
the windows taken from the cabin, which gave light to the interior, and
favoured our observations outside.

The construction of this solid and convenient staircase occupied us
during a month of patient industry; not that we laboured like slaves,
for we had no one to constrain us; we had in this time completed several
works of less importance; and many events had amused us amidst our toil.

A few days after we commenced, Flora produced six puppies; but the
number being too large for our means of support, I commanded that only a
male and female should be preserved, that the breed might be
perpetuated; this was done, and the little jackal being placed with the
remainder, Flora gave it the same privileges as her own offspring. Our
goats also, about this time, gave us two kids; and our sheep some lambs.
We saw this increase of our flock with great satisfaction; and for fear
these useful animals should take it into their heads to stray from us,
as our ass had done, we tied round their necks some small bells we had
found on the wreck, intended to propitiate the savages, and which would
always put us on the track of the fugitives.

The education of the young buffalo was one of the employments that
varied our labour as carpenters. Through the incision in his nostrils, I
had passed a small stick, to the ends of which I attached a strap. This
formed a kind of bit, after the fashion of those of the Hottentots; and
by this I guided him as I chose; though not without much rebellion on
his part. It was only after Fritz had broken it in for mounting, that we
began to make it carry. It was certainly a remarkable instance of
patience and perseverance surmounting difficulties, that we not only
made it bear the wallets we usually placed on the ass, but Ernest, Jack,
and even little Francis, took lessons in _horsemanship_, by riding him,
and, henceforward, would have been able to ride the most spirited horse
without fear; for it could not be worse than the buffalo they had
assisted to subdue.

In the midst of this, Fritz did not neglect the training of his young
eagle. The royal bird began already to pounce very cleverly on the dead
game his master brought, and placed before him; sometimes between the
horns of the buffalo, sometimes on the back of the great bustard, or the
flamingo; sometimes he put it on a board, or on the end of a pole, to
accustom it to pounce, like the falcon, on other birds. He taught it to
settle on his wrist at a call, or a whistle; but it was some time before
he could trust it to fly, without a long string attached to its leg, for
fear its wild nature should carry it from us for ever. Even the indolent
Ernest was seized with the mania of instructing animals. He undertook
the education of his little monkey, who gave him sufficient employment.
It was amusing to see the quiet, slow, studious Ernest obliged to make
leaps and gambols with his pupil to accomplish his instruction. He
wished to accustom Master Knips to carry a pannier, and to climb the
cocoa-nut trees with it on his back; Jack and he wove a small light
pannier of rushes, and fixed it firmly on his back with three straps.
This was intolerable to him at first; he ground his teeth, rolled on the
ground, and leaped about in a frantic manner, trying in vain to release
himself. They left the pannier on his back night and day, and only
allowed him to eat what he had previously put into it. After a little
time, he became so accustomed to it, that he rebelled if they wished to
remove it, and threw into it everything they gave him to hold. He was
very useful to us, but he obeyed only Ernest, who had very properly
taught him equally to love and fear him.

Jack was not so successful with his jackal; for, though he gave him the
name of _"The Hunter,"_ yet, for the first six months, the carnivorous
animal chased only for himself, and, if he brought anything to his
master, it was only the skin of the animal he had just devoured; but I
charged him not to despair, and he continued zealously his instructions.

During this time I had perfected my candle manufacture; by means of
mixing the bees' wax with that obtained from the candle-berry, and by
using cane moulds, which Jack first suggested to me, I succeeded in
giving my candles the roundness and polish of those of Europe. The wicks
were for some time an obstacle. I did not wish to use the small quantity
of calico we had left, but my wife happily proposed to me to substitute
the pith of a species of elder, which answered my purpose completely.

I now turned myself to the preparation of the caoutchouc, of which we
had found several trees. I encouraged the boys to try their ingenuity in
making flasks and cups, by covering moulds of clay with the gum, as I
had explained to them. For my part, I took a pair of old stockings, and
filled them with sand for my mould, which I covered with a coating of
mud, and left to dry in the sun. I cut out a pair of soles of buffalo
leather, which I first hammered well, and then fastened with small tacks
to the sole of the stocking, filling up the spaces left with the gum, so
as to fix it completely. Then, with a brush of goats hair, I covered it
with layer upon layer of the elastic gum, till I thought it sufficiently
thick. It was easy after this to remove the sand, the stocking, and the
hardened mud, to shake out the dust, and I had a pair of waterproof
boots, without seam, and fitting as well as if I had employed an English
shoemaker. My boys were wild with joy, and all begged for a pair; but I
wished first to try their durability, compared with those of buffalo
leather. I began to make a pair of boots for Fritz, using the skin drawn
from the legs of the buffalo we had killed; but I had much more
difficulty than with the caoutchouc. I used the gum to cover the seams,
so that the water might not penetrate. They were certainly not elegant
as a work of art, and the boys laughed at their brother's awkward
movements in them; but their own productions, though useful vessels,
were not models of perfection.

We then worked at our fountain, a great source of pleasure to my wife
and to all of us. We raised, in the upper part of the river, a sort of
dam, made with stakes and stones, from whence the water flowed into our
channels of the sago-palm, laid down a gentle declivity nearly to our
tent, and there it was received into the shell of the turtle, which we
had raised on some stones of a convenient height, the hole which the
harpoon had made serving to carry off the waste water through a cane
that was fitted to it. On two crossed sticks were placed the gourds that
served us for pails, and thus we had always the murmuring of the water
near us, and a plentiful supply of it, always pure and clean, which the
river, troubled by our water-fowl and the refuse of decayed leaves,
could not always give us. The only inconvenience of these open channels
was, that the water reached us warm and unrefreshing; but this I hoped
to remedy in time, by using bamboo pipes buried in the earth. In the
mean time, we were grateful for this new acquisition, and gave credit to
Fritz, who had suggested the idea.

       *       *       *       *       *


CHAPTER XXVII.

One morning, as we were engaged in giving the last finish to our
staircase, we were alarmed at hearing at a distance strange, sharp,
prolonged sounds, like the roars of a wild beast, but mingled with an
unaccountable hissing. Our dogs erected their ears, and prepared for
deadly combat. I assembled my family; we then ascended our tree, closing
the lower door, loaded our guns, and looked anxiously round, but nothing
appeared. I armed my dogs with their porcupine coats of mail and
collars, and left them below to take care of our animals.

The horrible howlings seemed to approach nearer to us; at length, Fritz,
who was leaning forward to listen as attentively as he could, threw down
his gun, and bursting into a loud laugh, cried out, "It is our fugitive,
the ass, come back to us, and singing his song of joy on his return!" We
listened, and were sure he was right, and could not but feel a little
vexation at being put into such a fright by a donkey. Soon after, we had
the pleasure of seeing him appear among the trees; and, what was still
better, he was accompanied by another animal of his own species, but
infinitely more beautiful. I knew it at once to be the onagra, or wild
ass, a most important capture, if we could make it; though all
naturalists have declared it impossible to tame this elegant creature,
yet I determined to make the attempt.

I went down with Fritz, exhorting his brothers to remain quiet, and I
consulted with my privy counsellor on the means of taking our prize. I
also prepared, as quickly as possible, a long cord with a noose, kept
open by a slight stick, which would fall out as soon as the animal's
head entered, while any attempt to escape would only draw the noose
closer; the end of this cord was tied to the root of a tree. I took then
a piece of bamboo, about two feet long, and splitting it up, tied it
firmly at one end, to form a pair of pincers for the nose of the animal.
In the mean time, the two animals had approached nearer, our old Grizzle
apparently doing the honours to his visitor, and both grazing very
comfortably.

By degrees we advanced softly to them, concealed by the trees; Fritz
carrying the lasso, and I the pincers. The onagra, as soon as he got
sight of Fritz, who was before me, raised his head, and started back,
evidently only in surprise, as it was probably the first man the
creature had seen. Fritz remained still, and the animal resumed his
browsing. Fritz went up to our old servant, and offered him a handful of
oats mixed with salt; the ass came directly to eat its favourite treat;
its companion followed, raised its head, snuffed the air, and came so
near, that Fritz adroitly threw the noose over its head. The terrified
animal attempted to fly, but that drew the cord so tight as almost to
stop his respiration, and he lay down, his tongue hanging out. I
hastened up and relaxed the cord, lest he should be strangled. I threw
the halter of the ass round his neck, and placed the split cane over
his nose, tying it firmly below with a string. I subdued this wild
animal by the means that blacksmiths use the first time they shoe a
horse. I then took off the noose, and tied the halter by two long cords
to the roots of two separate trees, and left him to recover himself.

In the mean time, the rest of the family had collected to admire this
noble animal, whose graceful and elegant form, so superior to that of
the ass, raises it almost to the dignity of a horse. After a while it
rose, and stamped furiously with its feet, trying to release itself; but
the pain in its nose obliged it to lie down again. Then my eldest son
and I, approaching gently, took the two cords, and led or dragged it
between two roots very near to each other, to which we tied the cords so
short, that it had little power to move, and could not escape. We took
care our own donkey should not stray again, by tying his fore-feet
loosely, and putting on him a new halter, and left him near the onagra.

I continued, with a patience I had never had in Europe, to use every
means I could think of with our new guest, and at the end of a month he
was so far subdued, that I ventured to begin his education. This was a
long and difficult task. We placed some burdens on his back; but the
obedience necessary before we could mount him, it seemed impossible to
instil into him. At last, I recollected the method they use in America
to tame the wild horses, and I resolved to try it. In spite of the
bounds and kicks of the furious animal, I leaped on his back, and
seizing one of his long ears between my teeth, I bit it till the blood
came. In a moment he reared himself almost erect on his hind-feet,
remained for a while stiff and motionless, then came down on his
fore-feet slowly, I still holding on his ear. At last I ventured to
release him; he made some leaps, but soon subsided into a sort of trot,
I having previously placed loose cords on his fore-legs. From that time
we were his masters; my sons mounted him one after another; they gave
him the name of Lightfoot, and never animal deserved his name better. As
a precaution, we kept the cords on his legs for some time; and as he
never would submit to the bit, we used a snaffle, by which we obtained
power over his head, guiding him by a stick, with which we struck the
right or left ear, as we wished him to go.

During this time, our poultry-yard was increased by three broods of
chickens. We had at least forty of these little creatures chirping and
pecking about, the pride of their good mistress's heart. Part of these
were kept at home, to supply the table, and part she allowed to colonize
in the woods, where we could find them when we wanted them. "These," she
said, "are of more use than your monkeys, jackals, and eagles, who do
nothing but eat, and would not be worth eating themselves, if we were in
need." However, she allowed there was some use in the buffalo, who
carried burdens, and Lightfoot, who carried her sons so well. The fowls,
which cost us little for food, would be always ready, she said, either
to supply us with eggs or chickens, when the rainy season came on--the
winter of this climate.

This reminded me that the approach of that dreary season permitted me no
longer to defer a very necessary work for the protection of our
animals. This was to construct, under the roots of the trees, covered
houses for them. We began by making a kind of roof above the vaulted
roots of our tree. We used bamboo canes for this purpose; the longer and
stouter were used for the supports, like columns, the slighter ones
bound together closely formed the roof. The intervals we filled up with
moss and clay, and spread over the whole a coating of tar. The roof was
so firm, that it formed a platform, which we surrounded with a railing;
and thus we had a balcony, and a pleasant promenade. By the aid of some
boards nailed to the roots, we made several divisions in the interior,
each little enclosure being appropriated to some useful purpose; and
thus, stables, poultry-houses, dairy, larder, hay-house, store-room,
&c., besides our dining-room, were all united under one roof. This
occupied us some time, as it was necessary to fill our store-room before
the bad weather came; and our cart was constantly employed in bringing
useful stores.

One evening, as we were bringing home a load of potatoes on our cart,
drawn by the ass, the cow, and the buffalo, I saw the cart was not yet
full; I therefore sent home the two younger boys with their mother, and
went on with Fritz and Ernest to the oak wood, to collect a sack of
sweet acorns--Fritz mounted on his onagra, Ernest followed by his
monkey, and I carrying the bag. On arriving at the wood, we tied
Lightfoot to a tree, and all three began to gather the dropped acorns,
when we were startled by the cries of birds, and a loud flapping of
wings, and we concluded that a brisk combat was going on between Master
Knips and the tenants of the thickets, from whence the noise came.
Ernest went softly to see what was the matter, and we soon heard him
calling out, "Be quick! a fine heath-fowl's nest, full of eggs! Knips
wants to suck them, and the mother is beating him."

Fritz ran up, and secured the two beautiful birds, who fluttered, and
cried out furiously, and returned, followed by Ernest, carrying a large
nest filled with eggs. The monkey had served us well on this occasion;
for the nest was so hidden by a bush with long leaves, of which Ernest
held his hand full, that, but for the instinct of the animal, we could
never have discovered it. Ernest was overjoyed to carry the nest and
eggs for his dear mamma, and the long, pointed leaves he intended for
Francis, to serve as little toy-swords.

We set out on our return, placing the sack of acorns behind Fritz on
Lightfoot; Ernest carried the two fowls, and I charged myself with the
care of the eggs, which I covered up, as I found they were warm, and I
hoped to get the mother to resume her brooding when we got to Falcon's
Nest. We were all delighted with the good news we should have to carry
home, and Fritz, anxious to be first, struck his charger with a bunch of
the pointed leaves he had taken from Ernest: this terrified the animal
so much, that he took the bit in his teeth, and flew out of sight like
an arrow. We followed, in some uneasiness, but found him safe. Master
Lightfoot had stopped of himself when he reached his stable. My wife
placed the valuable eggs under a sitting hen, the true mother refusing
to fulfil her office. She was then put into the cage of the poor
parrot, and hung in our dining-room, to accustom her to society. In a
few days the eggs were hatched, and the poultry-yard had an increase of
fifteen little strangers, who fed greedily on bruised acorns, and soon
became as tame as any of our fowls, though I plucked the large feathers
out of their wings when they were full-grown, lest their wild nature
should tempt them to quit us.

       *       *       *       *       *


CHAPTER XXVIII.

Francis had soon become tired of playing with the long leaves his
brother had brought him, and they were thrown aside. Fritz happened to
take some of the withered leaves up, which were soft and flexible as a
ribbon, and he advised Francis to make whiplashes of them, to drive the
goats and sheep with, for the little fellow was the shepherd. He was
pleased with the idea, and began to split the leaves into strips, which
Fritz platted together into very good whiplashes. I remarked, as they
were working, how strong and pliant these strips seemed, and, examining
them closely, I found they were composed of long fibres, or filaments,
which made me suspect it to be _Phormium tenax,_ or New Zealand flax, a
most important discovery to us, and which, when I communicated it to my
wife, almost overwhelmed her with joy. "Bring me all the leaves you can
without delay," cried she, "and I will make you stockings, shirts,
coats, sewing-thread, cords--in fact, give me but flax and work-tools,
and I can manage all." I could not help smiling at the vivacity of her
imagination, roused at the very name of flax; but there was still great
space between the leaves lying before us and the linen she was already
sewing in idea. But my boys, always ready to second the wishes of their
beloved mother, soon mounted their coursers, Fritz on Lightfoot, and
Jack on the great buffalo, to procure supplies.

Whilst we waited for these, my wife, all life and animation, explained
to me all the machines I must make, to enable her to spin and weave, and
make linen to clothe us from head to foot; her eyes sparkled with
delight as she spoke, and I promised her all she asked.

In a short time, our young cavaliers returned from their foraging
expedition, conveying on their steeds huge bundles of the precious
plant, which they laid at the feet of their mother. She gave up
everything to begin her preparation. The first operation necessary was
to steep the flax, which is usually done by exposing it in the open air
in the rain, the wind, and the dew, so as, in a certain degree, to
dissolve the plant, rendering the separation of the fibrous and ligneous
parts more easy. It can then be cleaned and picked for spinning. But, as
the vegetable glue that connects the two parts is very tenacious, and
resists for a long time the action of moisture, it is often advisable to
steep it in water, and this, in our dry climate, I considered most
expedient.

My wife agreed to this, and proposed that we should convey it to
Flamingo Marsh; and we spent the rest of the day in tying up the leaves
in bundles. Next morning, we loaded our cart, and proceeded to the
marsh: we there untied our bundles, and spread them in the water,
pressing them down with stones, and leaving them till it was time to
take them out to dry. We could not but admire here the ingenious nests
of the flamingo; they are of a conical form, raised above the level of
the marsh, having a recess above, in which the eggs are deposited, out
of the reach of danger, and the female can sit on them with her legs in
the water. These nests are of clay, and so solid, that they resist the
water till the young are able to swim.

In a fortnight the flax was ready to be taken out of the water; we
spread it in the sun, which dried it so effectually, that we brought it
to Falcon's Nest the same evening, where it was stored till we were
ready for further operations. At present we laboured to lay up provision
for the rainy season, leaving all sedentary occupations to amuse us in
our confinement. We brought in continually loads of sweet acorns,
manioc, potatoes, wood, fodder for the cattle, sugar-canes, fruit,
indeed everything that might be useful during the uncertain period of
the rainy season. We profited by the last few days to sow the wheat and
other remaining European grains, that the rain might germinate them. We
had already had some showers; the temperature was variable, the sky
became cloudy, and the wind rose. The season changed sooner than we
expected; the winds raged through the woods, the sea roared, mountains
of clouds were piled in the heavens. They soon burst over our heads, and
torrents of rain fell night and day, without intermission; the rivers
swelled till their waters met, and turned the whole country around us
into an immense lake. Happily we had formed our little establishment on
a spot rather elevated above the rest of the valley; the waters did not
quite reach our tree, but surrounded us about two hundred yards off,
leaving us on a sort of island in the midst of the general inundation.
We were reluctantly obliged to descend from our aërial abode; the rain
entered it on all sides, and the hurricane threatened every moment to
carry away the apartment, and all that were in it. We set about our
removal, bringing down our hammocks and bedding to the sheltered space
under the roots of the trees that we had roofed for the animals. We were
painfully crowded in the small space; the stores of provisions, the
cooking-utensils, and especially the neighbourhood of the animals, and
the various offensive smells, made our retreat almost insupportable. We
were choked with smoke if we lighted a fire, and inundated with rain if
we opened a door. For the first time since our misfortune, we sighed for
the comforts of our native home; but action was necessary, and we set
about endeavouring to amend our condition.

The winding staircase was very useful to us; the upper part was crowded
with things we did not want, and my wife frequently worked in the lower
part, at one of the windows. We crowded our beasts a little more, and
gave a current of air to the places they had left. I placed outside the
enclosure the animals of the country, which could bear the inclemency of
the season; thus I gave a half-liberty to the buffalo and the onagra,
tying their legs loosely, to prevent them straying, the boughs of the
tree affording them a shelter. We made as few fires as possible, as,
fortunately it was never cold, and we had no provisions that required a
long process of cookery. We had milk in abundance, smoked meat, and
fish, the preserved ortolans, and cassava cakes. As we sent out some of
our animals in the morning, with bells round their necks, Fritz and I
had to seek them and bring them in every evening, when we were
invariably wet through. This induced my ingenious Elizabeth to make us a
sort of blouse and hood out of old garments of the sailors, which we
covered with coatings of the caoutchouc, and thus obtained two capital
waterproof dresses; all that the exhausted state of our gum permitted
us to make.

The care of our animals occupied us a great part of the morning, then we
prepared our cassava, and baked our cakes on iron plates. Though we had
a glazed door to our hut, the gloominess of the weather, and the
obscurity caused by the vast boughs of the tree, made night come on
early. We then lighted a candle, fixed in a gourd on the table, round
which we were all assembled. The good mother laboured with her needle,
mending the clothes; I wrote my journal, which Ernest copied, as he
wrote a beautiful hand; while Fritz and Jack taught their young brother
to read and write, or amused themselves with drawing the animals or
plants they had been struck with. We read the lessons from the Bible in
turns, and concluded the evening with devotion. We then retired to rest,
content with ourselves and with our innocent and peaceful life. Our kind
housekeeper often made us a little feast of a roast chicken, a pigeon,
or a duck, and once in four or five days we had fresh butter made in the
gourd churn; and the delicious honey which we ate to our cassava bread
might have been a treat to European epicures.

The remains of our repast was always divided among our domestic animals.
We had four dogs, the jackal, the eagle, and the monkey, who relied on
their masters, and were never neglected. But if the buffalo, the onagra,
and the sow had not been able to provide for themselves, we must have
killed them, for we had no food for them.

We now decided that we would not expose ourselves to another rainy
season in such an unsuitable habitation; even my gentle Elizabeth got
out of temper with the inconveniences, and begged we would build a
better winter house; stipulating, however, that we should return to our
tree in summer. We consulted a great deal on this matter; Fritz quoted
Robinson Crusoe, who had cut a dwelling out of the rock, which sheltered
him in the inclement season; and the idea of making our home at Tent
House naturally came into my mind. It would probably be a long and
difficult undertaking, but with time, patience, and perseverance, we
might work wonders. We resolved, as soon as the weather would allow us,
to go and examine the rocks at Tent House.

The last work of the winter was, at my wife's incessant request, a
beetle for her flax, and some carding-combs. The beetle was easily made,
but the combs cost much trouble. I filed large nails till they were
round and pointed, I fixed them, slightly inclined, at equal distances,
in a sheet of tin, and raised the edge like a box; I then poured melted
lead between the nails and the edge, to fix them more firmly. I nailed
this on a board, and the machine was fit for use, and my wife was all
anxiety to begin her manufacture.

       *       *       *       *       *


CHAPTER XXIX.

I cannot describe our delight when, after long and gloomy weeks, we saw
at length the sky clear, and the sun, dispersing the dark clouds of
winter, spread its vivifying rays over all nature; the winds were
lulled, the waters subsided, and the air became mild and serene. We went
out, with shouts of joy, to breathe the balmy air, and gratified our
eyes with the sight of the fresh verdure already springing up around us.
Nature seemed in her youth again, and amidst the charms that breathed on
every side, we forgot our sufferings, and, like the children of Noah
coming forth from the ark, we raised a hymn of thanksgiving to the Giver
of all good.

All our plantations and seeds had prospered. The corn was springing, and
the trees were covered with leaves and blossoms. The air was perfumed
with the odour of countless beautiful flowers; and lively with the songs
and cries of hundreds of brilliant birds, all busy building their nests.
This was really spring in all its glory.

We began our summer occupation by cleaning and putting in order our
dormitory in the tree, which the rain and the scattered leaves had
greatly deranged; and in a few days we were able to inhabit it again. My
wife immediately began with her flax; while my sons were leading the
cattle to the pasture, I took the bundles of flax into the open air,
where I constructed a sort of oven of stone, which dried it completely.
We began that very evening to strip, beat, and comb it; and I drew out
such handfuls of soft, fine flax, ready for spinning, that my wife was
overjoyed, and begged me to make her a wheel, that she might commence.

I had formerly had a little taste for turning, and though I had now
neither lathe nor any other of the tools, yet I knew how a
spinning-wheel and reel should be made, and, by dint of application, I
succeeded in completing these two machines to her satisfaction. She
began to spin with so much earnestness, that she would hardly take a
walk, and reluctantly left her wheel to make dinner ready. She employed
Francis to reel off the thread as she spun it, and would willingly have
had the elder boys to take her place when she was called off; but they
rebelled at the effeminate work, except Ernest, whose indolent habits
made him prefer it to more laborious occupation.

In the mean time we walked over to Tent House to see the state of
things, and found that winter had done more damage there than at
Falcon's Nest. The storm had overthrown the tent, carried away some of
the sailcloth, and injured our provisions so much, that great part was
good for nothing, and the rest required to be immediately dried.
Fortunately our beautiful pinnace had not suffered much,--it was still
safe at anchor, and fit for use; but our tub boat was entirely
destroyed.

Our most important loss was two barrels of gunpowder, which had been
left in the tent, instead of under the shelter of the rock, and which
the rain had rendered wholly useless. This made us feel still more
strongly the necessity of securing for the future a more suitable
shelter than a canvas tent, or a roof of foliage. Still I had small hope
from the gigantic plan of Fritz or the boldness of Jack. I could not be
blind to the difficulties of the undertaking. The rocks which surrounded
Tent House presented an unbroken surface, like a wall without any
crevice, and, to all appearance, of so hard a nature as to leave little
hopes of success. However, it was necessary to try to contrive some sort
of cave, if only for our gunpowder. I made up my mind, and selected the
most perpendicular face of the rock as the place to begin our work. It
was a much pleasanter situation than our tent, commanding a view of the
whole bay, and the two banks of Jackal River, with its picturesque
bridge. I marked out with chalk the dimension of the entrance I wished
to give to the cave; then my sons and I took our chisels, pickaxes, and
heavy miner's hammers, and began boldly to hew the stone.

Our first blows produced very little effect; the rock seemed
impenetrable, the sun had so hardened the surface; and the sweat poured
off our brows with the hard labour. Nevertheless, the efforts of my
young workmen did not relax. Every evening we left our work advanced,
perhaps, a few inches; and every morning returned to the task with
renewed ardour. At the end of five or six days, when the surface of the
rock was removed, we found the stone become easier to work; it then
seemed calcarious, and, finally, only a sort of hardened clay, which we
could remove with spades; and we began to hope. After a few days' more
labour, we found we had advanced about seven feet. Fritz wheeled out the
rubbish, and formed a sort of terrace with it before the opening; while
I was working at the higher part, Jack, as the least, worked below. One
morning he was hammering an iron bar, which he had pointed at the end,
into the rock, to loosen the earth, when he suddenly cried out--

"Papa! papa! I have pierced through!"

"Not through your hand, child?" asked I.

"No, papa!" cried he; "I have pierced through the mountain! Huzza!"

Fritz ran in at the shout, and told him he had better have said at once
that he had pierced through the earth! But Jack persisted that, however
his brother might laugh, he was quite sure he had felt his iron bar
enter an empty space behind. I now came down from my ladder, and, moving
the bar, I felt there was really a hollow into which the rubbish fell,
but apparently very little below the level we were working on. I took a
long pole and probed the cavity, and found that it must be of
considerable size. My boys wished to have the opening enlarged and to
enter immediately, but this I strictly forbade; for, as I leaned forward
to examine it through the opening, a rush of mephitic air gave me a sort
of vertigo. "Come away, children," cried I, in terror; "the air you
would breathe there is certain death." I explained to them that, under
certain circumstances, carbonic acid gas was frequently accumulated in
caves or grottoes, rendering the air unfit for respiration; producing
giddiness of the head, fainting, and eventually death. I sent them to
collect some hay, which I lighted and threw into the cave; this was
immediately extinguished; we repeated the experiment several times with
the same result. I now saw that more active means must be resorted to.

We had brought from the vessel a box of fireworks, intended for signals;
I threw into the cave, by a cord, a quantity of rockets, grenades, &c.,
and scattered a train of gunpowder from them; to this I applied a long
match, and we retired to a little distance. This succeeded well; a great
explosion agitated the air, a torrent of the carbonic acid gas rushed
through the opening, and was replaced by the pure air; we sent in a few
more rockets, which flew round like fiery dragons, disclosing to us the
vast extent of the cave. A shower of stars, which concluded our
experiment, made us wish the duration had been longer. It seemed as if a
crowd of winged genii, carrying each a lamp, were floating about in that
enchanted cavern. When they vanished, I threw in some more lighted hay,
which blazed in such a lively manner, that I knew all danger was over
from the gas; but, for fear of deep pits, or pools of water, I would not
venture in without lights. I therefore despatched Jack, on his buffalo,
to report this discovery to his mother, and bring all the candles she
had made. I purposely sent Jack on the errand, for his lively and poetic
turn of mind would, I hoped, invest the grotto with such charms, that
his mother would even abandon her wheel to come and see it.

[Illustration: "This succeeded well; a great explosion agitated the
air--a torrent of the carbonic acid gas rushed through the opening."]

Delighted with his commission, Jack leaped upon his buffalo, and, waving
his whip, galloped off with an intrepidity that made my hair stand on
end. During his absence, Fritz and I enlarged the opening, to make it
easy of access, removed all the rubbish, and swept a road for mamma. We
had just finished, when we heard the sound of wheels crossing the
bridge, and the cart appeared, drawn by the cow and ass, led by Ernest.
Jack rode before on his buffalo, blowing through his hand to imitate a
horn, and whipping the lazy cow and ass. He rode up first, and alighted
from his huge courser, to help his mother out.

I then lighted our candles, giving one to each, with a spare candle and
flint and steel in our pockets. We took our arms, and proceeded in a
solemn manner into the rock. I walked first, my sons followed, and their
mother came last, with Francis. We had not gone on above a few steps,
when we stopped, struck with wonder and admiration; all was glittering
around us; we were in a grotto of diamonds! From the height of the lofty
vaulted roof hung innumerable crystals, which, uniting with those on the
walls, formed colonnades, altars, and every sort of gothic ornament of
dazzling lustre, creating a fairy palace, or an illuminated temple.

When we were a little recovered from our first astonishment, we advanced
with more confidence. The grotto was spacious, the floor smooth, and
covered with a fine dry sand. From the appearance of these crystals, I
suspected their nature, and, on breaking off a piece and tasting it, I
found, to my great joy, that we were in a grotto of rock salt, which is
found in large masses in the earth, usually above a bed of gypsum, and
surrounded by fossils. We were charmed with this discovery, of which we
could no longer have a doubt. What an advantage this was to our cattle,
and to ourselves! We could now procure this precious commodity without
care or labour. The acquisition was almost as valuable as this brilliant
retreat was in itself, of which we were never tired of admiring the
beauty. My wife was struck with our good fortune in opening the rock
precisely at the right spot; but I was of opinion, that this mine was of
great extent, and that we could not well have missed it. Some blocks of
salt were scattered on the ground, which had apparently fallen from the
vaulted roof. I was alarmed; for such an accident might destroy one of
my children; but, on examination, I found the mass above too solid to be
detached spontaneously, and I concluded that the explosion of the
fireworks had given this shock to the subterranean palace, which had not
been entered since the creation of the world. I feared there might yet
be some pieces loosened; I therefore sent out my wife and younger sons.
Fritz and I remained, and, after carefully examining the suspected
parts, we fired our guns, and watched the effect; one or two pieces
fell, but the rest remained firm, though we struck with long poles as
high as we could reach. We were now satisfied of the security of our
magnificent abode, and began to plan our arrangements for converting it
into a convenient and pleasant habitation. The majority were for coming
here immediately, but the wiser heads determined that, for this year,
Falcon's Nest was to continue our home. There we went every night, and
spent the day at Tent House, contriving and arranging our future
winter dwelling.

       *       *       *       *       *


CHAPTER XXX.

The last bed of rock, before we reached the cave which Jack had pierced,
was so soft, and easy to work, that we had little difficulty in
proportioning and opening the place for our door; I hoped that, being
now exposed to the heat of the sun, it would soon become as hard as the
original surface. The door was that we had used for the staircase at
Falcon's Nest; for as we only intended to make a temporary residence of
our old tree, there was no necessity for solid fittings; and, besides, I
intended to close the entrance of the tree by a door of bark, more
effectually to conceal it, in case savages should visit us. I then laid
out the extent of the grotto at pleasure, for we had ample space. We
began by dividing it into two parts; that on the right of the entrance
was to be our dwelling; on the left were, first, our kitchen, then the
workshop and the stables; behind these were the store-rooms and the
cellar. In order to give light and air to our apartments, it was
necessary to insert in the rock the windows we had brought from the
ship; and this cost us many days of labour. The right-hand portion was
subdivided into three rooms: the first our own bedroom; the middle, the
common sitting-room, and beyond the boys' room. As we had only three
windows, we appropriated one to each bedroom, and the third to the
kitchen, contenting ourselves, at present, with a grating in the
dining-room. I constructed a sort of chimney in the kitchen, formed of
four boards, and conducted the smoke thus, through a hole made in the
face of the rock. We made bur work-room spacious enough for us to carry
on all our manufactures, and it served also for our cart-house. Finally,
all the partition-walls were put up, communicating by doors, and
completing our commodious habitation. These various labours, the removal
of our effects, and arranging them again, all the confusion of a change
when it was necessary to be at once workmen and directors, took us a
great part of summer; but the recollection of the vexations we should
escape in the rainy season gave us energy.

We passed nearly all our time at Tent House, the centre of our
operations; and, besides the gardens and plantations which surrounded
it, we found many advantages which we profited by. Large turtles often
came to deposit their eggs in the sand, a pleasant treat for us; but we
raised our desires to the possession of the turtles themselves, living,
to eat when we chose. As soon as we saw one on the shore, one of my sons
ran to cut off its retreat. We then hastened to assist, turned the
creature on its back, passed a long cord through its shell, and tied it
firmly to a post close to the water. We then placed it on its legs, when
of course it made for the water, but could only ramble the length of its
cord; it seemed, however, very content, and we had it in readiness when
we wanted it. The lobsters, crabs, muscles, and every sort of fish which
abounded on the coast, plentifully supplied our table. One morning, we
were struck with an extraordinary spectacle: a large portion of the sea
appeared in a state of ebullition, and immense flocks of marine birds
were hovering over it, uttering piercing cries, and plunging into the
waves. From time to time the surface, on which the rising sun now shone,
seemed covered with little flames, which rapidly appeared and vanished.
Suddenly, this extraordinary mass advanced to the bay; and we ran down,
fall of curiosity. We found, on our arrival, that this strange
phenomenon was caused by a shoal of herrings. These shoals are so dense,
that they are often taken for sand-banks, are many leagues in extent,
and several feet in depth: they spread themselves over the seas,
carrying to barren shores the resources that nature has denied them.

These brilliant, scaly creatures had now entered the bay, and my wife
and children were lost in admiration of the wonderful sight; but I
reminded them, that when Providence sends plenty, we ought to put forth
our hands to take it. I sent immediately for the necessary utensils, and
organized my fishery. Fritz and Jack stood in the water, and such was
the thickness of the shoal, that they filled baskets, taking them up as
you would water in a pail; they threw them on the sand; my wife and
Ernest cut them open, cleaned them, and rubbed them with salt; I
arranged them in small barrels, a layer of herrings and a layer of salt;
and when the barrel was full, the ass, led by Francis, took them up to
the storehouse. This labour occupied us several days, and at the end of
that time we had a dozen barrels of excellent salt provision against the
winter season.

The refuse of this fishery, which we threw into the sea, attracted a
number of sea-dogs; we killed several for the sake of the skin and the
oil, which would be useful to burn in lamps, or even as an ingredient
in soap, which I hoped to make at some future time.

At this time I greatly improved my sledge, by placing it on two small
wheels belonging to the guns of the ship, making it a light and
commodious carriage, and so low, that we could easily place heavy
weights on it. Satisfied with our labours, we returned very happy to
Falcon's Nest, to spend our Sunday, and to thank God heartily for all
the blessings he had given us.

       *       *       *       *       *


CHAPTER XXXI.

We went on with our labours but slowly, as many employments diverted us
from the great work. I had discovered that the crystals of salt in our
grotto had a bed of gypsum for their base, from which I hoped to obtain
a great advantage. I was fortunate enough to discover, behind a
projecting rock, a natural passage leading to our store-room, strewed
with fragments of gypsum. I took some of it to the kitchen, and by
repeated burnings calcined it, and reduced it to a fine white powder,
which I put into casks, and carefully preserved for use. My intention
was, to form our partition-walls of square stones, cemented with the
gypsum. I employed my sons daily to collect this, till we had amassed a
large quantity; using some, in the first place, effectually to cover our
herring-barrels. Four barrels were salted and covered in this way; the
rest my wife smoked in a little hut of reeds and branches, in the midst
of which the herrings were laid on sticks, and exposed to the smoke of
a fire of green moss kindled below. This dried them, and gave them the
peculiar flavour so agreeable to many.

We were visited by another shoal of fish a month after that of the
herrings. Jack first discovered them at the mouth of Jackal River, where
they had apparently come to deposit their eggs among the scattered
stones. They were so large, that he was sure they must be whales. I
found them to be pretty large sturgeons, besides salmon, large trout,
and many other fishes. Jack immediately ran for his bow and arrows, and
told me he would kill them all. He fastened the end of a ball of string
to an arrow, with a hook at the end of it; he tied the bladders of the
dog-fish at certain distances to the string; he then placed the ball
safe on the shore, took his bow, fixed the arrow in it, and aiming at
the largest salmon, shot it in the side; the fish tried to escape; I
assisted him to draw the cord; it was no easy task, for he struggled
tremendously; but at length, weakened by loss of blood, we drew him to
land, and despatched him.

The other boys came running up to congratulate the young fisherman on
his invention, and as it was to be feared that the rest, alarmed by this
attack, might take their departure, we determined to abandon everything
for the fishery. Fritz threw his harpoon, and landed, by means of the
reel, some large salmon; Ernest took his rod, and caught trout; and I,
armed like Neptune with an iron trident, succeeded in striking, amongst
the stones, some enormous fish. The greatest difficulty was to land our
booty; Fritz had struck a sturgeon at least eight feet long, which
resisted our united efforts, till my wife brought the buffalo, which we
harnessed to the line, and made ourselves masters of this immense prize.

We had a great deal of labour in opening and cleaning all our fish: some
we dried and salted; some my wife boiled in oil, as they preserve the
tunny. The spawn of the sturgeon, a huge mass, weighing not less than
thirty pounds, I laid aside to prepare as _caviare_, a favourite dish in
Holland and Russia. I carefully cleansed the eggs from the skin and
fibres that were mixed with them, washed them thoroughly in sea-water,
slightly sprinkled them with salt, then put them in a gourd pierced with
small holes to let the water escape, and placed weights on them to press
them completely for twenty-four hours. We then removed the caviare in
solid masses, like cheeses, took it to the smoking-hut to dry, and in a
few days had this large addition to our winter provision.

My next employment was the preparation of the valuable isinglass. I took
the air-bladder and sounds of the fish, cut them in strips, twisted them
in rolls, and dried them in the sun. This is all that is necessary to
prepare this excellent glue. It becomes very hard, and, when wanted for
use, is cut up in small pieces, and dissolved over a slow fire. The glue
was so white and transparent, that I hoped to make window-panes from it
instead of glass.

After this work was finished, we began to plan a boat to replace our tub
raft. I wished to try to make one of bark, as the savage nations do, and
I proposed to make an expedition in search of a tree for our purpose.
All those in our own neighbourhood were too precious to destroy; some
for their fruits, others for their shade. We resolved to search at a
distance for trees fit for our purpose, taking in our road a survey of
our plantations and fields. Our garden at Tent House produced abundantly
continual successions of vegetables in that virgin soil, and in a
climate which recognized no change of season. The peas, beans, lentils,
and lettuces were flourishing, and only required water, and our channels
from the river brought this plentifully to us. We had delicious
cucumbers and melons; the maize was already a foot high, the sugar-canes
were prospering, and the pine-apples on the high ground promised us a
rich treat.

We hoped our distant plantations were going on as well, and all set out
one fine morning to Falcon's Nest, to examine the state of things there.
We found my wife's corn-fields were luxuriant in appearance, and for the
most part ready for cutting. There were barley, wheat, oats, beans,
millet, and lentils. We cut such of these as were ready, sufficient to
give us seeds for another year. The richest crop was the maize, which
suited the soil. But there were a quantity of gatherers more eager to
taste these new productions than we were; these were birds of every
kind, from the bustard to the quail, and from the various establishments
they had formed round, it might be presumed they would not leave
much for us.

After our first shock at the sight of these robbers, we used some
measures to lessen the number of them. Fritz unhooded his eagle, and
pointed out the dispersing bustards. The well-trained bird immediately
soared, and pounced on a superb bustard, and laid it at the feet of its
master. The jackal, too, who was a capital pointer, brought to his
master about a dozen little fat quails, which furnished us with an
excellent repast; to which my wife added a liquor of her own invention,
made of the green maize crushed in water, and mingled with the juice of
the sugar-cane; a most agreeable beverage, white as milk, sweet and
refreshing.

We found the bustard, which the eagle had struck down, but slightly
wounded; we washed his hurts with a balsam made of wine, butter, and
water, and tied him by the leg in the poultry-yard, as a companion to
our tame bustard.

We passed the remainder of the day at Falcon's Nest, putting our summer
abode into order, and thrashing out our grain, to save the precious seed
for another year. The Turkey wheat was laid by in sheaves, till we
should have time to thrash and winnow it; and then I told Fritz that it
would be necessary to put the hand-mill in order, that we had brought
from the wreck. Fritz thought we could build a mill ourselves on the
river; but this bold scheme was, at present, impracticable.

The next day we set out on an excursion in the neighbourhood. My wife
wished to establish colonies of our animals at some distance from
Falcon's Nest, at a convenient spot, where they would be secure, and
might find subsistence. She selected from her poultry-yard twelve young
fowls; I took four young pigs, two couple of sheep, and two goats. These
animals were placed in the cart, in which we had previously placed our
provisions of every kind, and the tools and utensils we might need, not
forgetting the rope ladder and the portable tent; we then harnessed the
buffalo, the cow, and the ass, and departed on our tour.

Fritz rode before on Lightfoot, to reconnoitre the ground, that we
might not plunge into any difficulties; as, this time, we went in a new
direction, exactly in the midst between the rocks and the shore, that we
might get acquainted with the whole of the country that stretched to
Cape Disappointment. We had the usual difficulty, at first, in getting
through the high grass, and the underwood embarrassed our road, till we
were compelled to use the axe frequently. I made some trifling
discoveries that were useful, while engaged in this labour; amongst
others, some roots of trees curved like saddles, and yokes for beasts of
draught. I cut away several of these, and placed them on the cart. When
we had nearly passed the wood, we were struck with the singular
appearance of a little thicket of low bushes, apparently covered with
snow. Francis clapped his hands with joy, and begged to get out of the
cart that he might make some snowballs. Fritz galloped forward, and
returned, bringing me a branch loaded with this beautiful white down,
which, to my great joy, I recognized to be cotton. It was a discovery of
inestimable value to us, and my wife began immediately to enumerate all
the advantages we should derive from it, when I should have constructed
for her the machines for spinning and weaving the cotton. We soon
gathered as much as filled three bags, intending afterwards to collect
the seeds of this marvellous plant, to sow in the neighbourhood of
Tent House.

After crossing the plain of the cotton-trees, we reached the summit of a
hill, from which the eye rested on a terrestrial paradise. Trees of
every sort covered the sides of the hill, and a murmuring stream
crossed the plain, adding to its beauty and fertility. The wood we had
just crossed formed a shelter against the north winds, and the rich
pasture offered food for our cattle. We decided at once that this should
be the site of our farm.

We erected our tent, made a fireplace, and set about cooking our dinner.
While this was going on, Fritz and I sought a convenient spot for our
structure; and we met with a group of beautiful trees, at such a
distance one from another, as to form natural pillars for our dwelling;
we carried all our tools here; but as the day was far advanced, we
delayed commencing our work till next day. We returned to the tent, and
found my wife and her boys picking cotton, with which they made some
very comfortable beds, and we slept peacefully under our canvass roof.

       *       *       *       *       *


CHAPTER XXXII.

The trees which I had chosen for my farmhouse were about a foot in
diameter in the trunk. They formed a long square; the long side facing
the sea. The dimensions of the whole were about twenty-four feet by
sixteen. I cut deep mortices in the trees, about ten feet distant from
the ground, and again ten feet higher, to form a second story; I then
placed in them strong poles: this was the skeleton of my house--solid,
if not elegant; I placed over this a rude roof of bark, cut in squares,
and placed sloping, that the rain might run off. We fastened these with
the thorn of the acacia, as our nails were too precious to be lavished.
While procuring the bark, we made many discoveries. The first was that
of two remarkable trees,--the _Pistacia terebinthus_ and the _Pistacia
atlantica;_ the next, the thorny acacia, from which we got the
substitute for nails.

The instinct of my goats led us also to find out, among the pieces of
bark, that of the cinnamon, not perhaps equal to that of Ceylon, but
very fragrant and agreeable. But this was of little value, compared to
the turpentine and mastic I hoped to procure from the pistachios, to
compose a sort of pitch to complete our intended boat.

We continued our work at the house, which occupied us several days. We
formed the walls of thin laths interwoven with long pliant reeds for
about six feet from the ground; the rest was merely a sort of light
trellis-work, to admit light and air. The door opened on the front to
the sea. The interior consisted simply of a series of compartments,
proportioned to the guests they were to contain. One small apartment was
for ourselves, when we chose to visit our colony. On the upper story was
a sort of hayloft for the fodder. We projected plastering the walls with
clay; but these finishing touches we deferred to a future time,
contented that we had provided a shelter for our cattle and fowls. To
accustom them to come to this shelter of themselves, we took care to
fill their racks with the food they liked best, mingled with salt; and
this we proposed to renew at intervals, till the habit of coming to
their houses was fixed. We all laboured ardently, but the work proceeded
slowly, from our inexperience; and the provisions we had brought were
nearly exhausted. I did not wish to return to Falcon's Nest till I had
completed my new establishment, and therefore determined to send Fritz
and Jack to look after the animals at home, and bring back a fresh stock
of provisions. Our two young couriers set out, each on his favourite
steed, Fritz leading the ass to bring back the load, and Jack urging the
indolent animal forward with his whip.

During their absence, Ernest and I made a little excursion, to add to
our provision--if we could meet with them, some potatoes and cocoa-nuts.
We ascended the stream for some time, which led us to a large marsh,
beyond which we discovered a lake abounding with water-fowl. This lake
was surrounded by tall, thick grass, with ears of a grain, which I found
to be a very good, though small, sort of rice. As to the lake itself, it
is only a Swiss, accustomed from his infancy to look on such smooth,
tranquil waters, that can comprehend the happiness we felt on looking
upon this. We fancied we were once more in Switzerland, our own dear
land; but the majestic trees and luxuriant vegetation soon reminded us
we were no longer in Europe, and that the ocean separated us from our
native home.

In the mean time, Ernest had brought down several birds, with a skill
and success that surprised me. A little after, we saw Knips leap off the
back of his usual palfrey, Flora, and, making his way through the rich
grass, collect and carry rapidly to his mouth something that seemed
particularly to please his palate. We followed him, and, to our great
comfort, were able to refresh ourselves with that delicious strawberry
called in Europe the Chili or pineapple strawberry. We ate plentifully
of this fruit, which was of enormous size; Ernest especially enjoyed
them, but did not forget the absent; he filled Knips's little pannier
with them, and I covered them with large leaves, which I fastened down
with reeds, lest he should take a fancy to help himself as we went home.
I took, also, a specimen of rice, for the inspection of our good
housekeeper, who would, I knew, rejoice in such an acquisition.

We proceeded round the lake, which presented a different scene on every
side. This was one of the most lovely and fertile parts we had yet seen
of this country. Birds of all kinds abounded; but we were particularly
struck with a pair of black swans, sailing majestically on the water.
Their plumage was perfectly black and glossy, except the extremity of
the wings, which was white. Ernest would have tried his skill again, but
I forbade him to disturb the profound tranquillity of this
charming region.

But Flora, who probably had not the same taste for the beauties of
nature that I had, suddenly darted forward like an arrow, pounced upon a
creature that was swimming quietly at the edge of the water, and brought
it to us. It was a most curious animal. It resembled an otter in form,
but was web-footed, had an erect bushy tail like the squirrel, small
head, eyes and ears almost invisible. A long, flat bill, like that of a
duck, completed its strange appearance. We were completely puzzled--even
Ernest, the naturalist, could not give its name. I boldly gave it the
name of the beast with a bill. I told Ernest to take it, as I wished to
stuff and preserve it.

"It will be," said the little philosopher, "the first natural object for
our museum."

"Exactly," replied I; "and, when the establishment is fully arranged,
we will appoint you curator."

But, thinking my wife would grow uneasy at our protracted absence, we
returned by a direct road to the tent. Our two messengers arrived about
the same time, and we all sat down together to a cheerful repast. Every
one related his feats. Ernest dwelt on his discoveries, and was very
pompous in his descriptions, and I was obliged to promise to take Fritz
another time. I learnt, with pleasure, that all was going on well at
Falcon's Nest, and that the boys had had the forethought to leave the
animals with provisions for ten days. This enabled me to complete my
farmhouse. We remained four days longer, in which time I finished the
interior, and my wife arranged in our own apartment the cotton
mattresses, to be ready for our visits, and put into the houses the
fodder and grain for their respective tenants. We then loaded our cart,
and began our march. The animals wished to follow us, but Fritz, on
Lightfoot, covered our retreat, and kept them at the farm till we were
out of sight.

We did not proceed directly, but went towards the wood of monkeys. These
mischievous creatures assaulted us with showers of the fir-apples; but a
few shots dispersed our assailants.

Fritz collected some of these new fruits they had flung at us, and I
recognized them as those of the stone Pine, the kernel of which is good
to eat, and produces an excellent oil. We gathered a bag of these, and
continued our journey till we reached the neighbourhood of Cape
Disappointment. There we ascended a little hill, from the summit of
which we looked upon rich plains, rivers, and woods clothed with verdure
and brilliant flowers, and gay birds that fluttered among the bushes.
"Here, my children," cried I, "here we will build our summer house. This
is truly Arcadia." Here we placed our tent, and immediately began to
erect a new building, formed in the same manner as the Farm House, but
now executed more quickly. We raised the roof in the middle, and made
four sloped sides. The interior was divided into eating and sleeping
apartments, stables, and a store-room for provisions; the whole was
completed and provisioned in ten days; and we had now another mansion
for ourselves, and a shelter for new colonies of animals. This new
erection received the name of Prospect Hill, to gratify Ernest, who
thought it had an English appearance.

However, the end for which our expedition was planned was not yet
fulfilled. I had not yet met with a tree likely to suit me for a boat.
We returned then to inspect the trees, and I fixed on a sort of oak, the
bark of which was closer than that of the European oak, resembling more
that of the cork-tree. The trunk was at least five feet in diameter, and
I fancied its coating, if I could obtain it whole, would perfectly
answer my purpose. I traced a circle at the foot, and with a small saw
cut the bark entirely through; Fritz, by means of the rope ladder we had
brought with us, and attached to the lower branches of the tree,
ascended, and cut a similar circle eighteen feet above mine. We then cut
out, perpendicularly, a slip the whole length, and, removing it, we had
room to insert the necessary tools, and, with wedges, we finally
succeeded in loosening the whole. The first part was easy enough, but
there was greater difficulty as we advanced. We sustained it as we
proceeded with ropes, and then gently let it down on the grass. I
immediately began to form my boat while the bark was fresh and flexible.
My sons, in their impatience, thought it would do very well if we nailed
a board at each end of the roll; but this would have been merely a heavy
trough, inelegant and unserviceable; I wished to have one that would
look well by the side of the pinnace; and this idea at once rendered my
boys patient and obedient. We began by cutting out at each end of the
roll of bark a triangular piece of about five feet long; then, placing
the sloping parts one over the other, I united them with pegs and strong
glue, and thus finished the ends of my boat in a pointed form. This
operation having widened it too much in the middle, we passed strong
ropes round it, and drew it into the form we required. We then exposed
it to the sun, which dried and fixed it in the proper shape.

As many things were necessary to complete my work, I sent Fritz and Jack
to Tent House for the sledge, to convey it there, that we might finish
it more conveniently. I had the good fortune to meet with some very
hard, crooked wood, the natural curve of which would be admirably
suitable for supporting the sides of the boat. We found also a resinous
tree, which distilled a sort of pitch, easy to manage, and which soon
hardened in the sun. My wife and Francis collected sufficient of it for
my work. It was almost night when our two messengers returned. We had
only time to sup and retire to our rest.

We were all early at work next morning. We loaded the sledge, placing on
it the canoe, the wood for the sides, the pitch, and some young trees,
which I had transplanted for our plantation at Tent House, and which we
put into the boat. But, before we set out, I wished to erect a sort of
fortification at the pass of the rock, for the double purpose of
securing us against the attacks of wild beasts or of savages, and for
keeping enclosed, in the savannah beyond the rocks, some young pigs,
that we wished to multiply there, out of the way of our fields and
plantations.

As we crossed the sugar-cane plantation, I saw some bamboos larger than
any I had ever met with, and we cut down one for a mast to our canoe. We
now had the river to our left, and the chain of rocks to our right,
which here approached the river, leaving only a narrow pass. At the
narrowest part of this we raised a rampart before a deep ditch, which
could only be crossed by a drawbridge we placed there. Beyond the
bridge, we put a narrow gate of woven bamboos, to enable us to enter the
country beyond, when we wished. We planted the side of the rampart with
dwarf palms, India fig, and other thorny shrubs, making a winding path
through the plantation, and digging in the midst a hidden pitfall, known
to ourselves by four low posts, intended to support a plank bridge when
we wished to cross it. After this was completed, we built a little
_chalet_ of bark in that part of the plantation that faced the stream,
and gave it the name of the Hermitage, intending it for a
resting-place. After several days of hard labour, we returned to
Prospect Hill, and took a little relaxation. The only work we did was to
prepare the mast, and lay it on the sledge with the rest.

The next morning we returned to Tent House, where we immediately set to
work on our canoe with such diligence that it was soon completed. It was
solid and elegant, lined through with wood, and furnished with a keel.
We provided it with brass rings for the oars, and stays for the mast.
Instead of ballast, I laid at the bottom a layer of stones covered with
clay, and over this a flooring of boards. The benches for the rowers
were laid across, and in the midst the bamboo mast rose majestically,
with a triangular sail. Behind I fixed the rudder, worked by a tiller;
and I could boast now of having built a capital canoe.

Our fleet was now in good condition. For distant excursions we could
take the pinnace, but the canoe would be invaluable for the
coasting service.

Our cow had, in the mean time, given us a young male calf, which I
undertook to train for service, as I had done the buffalo, beginning by
piercing its nostrils; and the calf promised to be docile and useful;
and, as each of the other boys had his favourite animal to ride, I
bestowed the bull on Francis, and intrusted him with its education, to
encourage him to habits of boldness and activity. He was delighted with
his new charger, and chose to give him the name of Valiant.

We had still two months before the rainy season, and this time we
devoted to completing the comforts of our grotto. We made all the
partitions of wood, except those which divided us from the stables,
which we built of stone, to exclude any smell from the animals. We soon
acquired skill in our works; we had a plentiful supply of beams and
planks from the ship; and by practice we became very good plasterers. We
covered the floors with a sort of well-beaten mud, smoothed it, and it
dried perfectly hard. We then contrived a sort of felt carpet. We first
covered the floor with sailcloth; we spread over this wool and goats'
hair mixed, and poured over it isinglass dissolved, rolling up the
carpet, and beating it well. When this was dry, we repeated the process,
and in the end had a felt carpet. We made one of these for each room, to
guard against any damp that we might be subject to in the rainy season.

The privations we had suffered the preceding winter increased the
enjoyment of our present comforts. The rainy season came on; we had now
a warm, well-lighted, convenient habitation, and abundance of excellent
provision for ourselves and our cattle. In the morning, we could attend
to their wants without trouble, for the rain-water, carefully collected
in clean vessels, prevented the necessity of going to the river. We then
assembled in the dining-room to prayers. After that we went to our
work-room. My wife took her wheel, or her loom, which was a rude
construction of mine, but in which she had contrived to weave some
useful cloth of wool and cotton, and also some linen, which she had made
up for us. Everybody worked; the workshop was never empty. I contrived,
with the wheel of a gun, to arrange a sort of lathe, by means of which
I and my sons produced some neat furniture and utensils. Ernest
surpassed us all in this art, and made some elegant little things for
his mother.

After dinner, our evening occupations commenced; our room was lighted up
brilliantly; we did not spare our candles, which were so easily
procured, and we enjoyed the reflection in the elegant crystals above
us. We had partitioned off a little chapel in one corner of the grotto,
which we had left untouched, and nothing could be more magnificent than
this chapel lighted up, with its colonnades, portico, and altars. We had
divine service here every Sunday. I had erected a sort of pulpit, from
which I delivered a short sermon to my congregation, which I endeavoured
to render as simple and as instructive as possible.

Jack and Francis had a natural taste for music. I made them flageolets
of reeds, on which they acquired considerable skill. They accompanied
their mother, who had a very good voice; and this music in our lofty
grotto had a charming effect.

We had thus made great steps towards civilization; and, though
condemned, perhaps, to pass our lives alone on this unknown shore, we
might yet be happy. We were placed in the midst of abundance. We were
active, industrious, and content; blessed with health, and united by
affection, our minds seemed to enlarge and improve every day. We saw
around us on every side traces of the Divine wisdom and beneficence; and
our hearts overflowed with love and veneration for that Almighty hand
which had so miraculously saved, and continued to protect us. I humbly
trusted in Him, either to restore us to the world, or send some beings
to join us in this beloved island, where for two years we had seen no
trace of man. To Him we committed our fate. We were happy and tranquil,
looking with resignation to the future.

END OF THE FIRST PART OF THE JOURNAL.

       *       *       *       *       *

POSTSCRIPT BY THE EDITOR.

It is necessary to explain how this first part of the journal of the
Swiss pastor came into my hands.

Three or four years after the family had been cast on this desert coast,
where, as we see, they lived a happy and contented life, an English
transport was driven by a storm upon the same shore. This vessel was the
_Adventurer_, Captain Johnson, and was returning from New Zealand to the
eastern coast of North America, by Otaheite, to fetch a cargo of furs
for China, and then to proceed from Canton to England. A violent storm,
which lasted several days, drove them out of their course. For many days
they wandered in unknown seas, and the ship was so injured by the storm,
that the captain looked out for some port to repair it. They discovered
a rocky coast, and, as the violence of the wind was lulled, ventured to
approach the shore. At a short distance they anchored, and sent a boat
to examine the coast. Lieutenant Bell, who went with the boat, knew a
little German. They were some time before they could venture to land
among the rocks which guarded the island, but, turning the promontory,
they saw Safety Bay, and entering it, were astonished to see a handsome
pinnace and boat at anchor, near the strand a tent, and in the rock
doors and windows, like those of a European house.

They landed, and saw a middle-aged man coming to meet them, clothed in
European fashion, and well armed. After a friendly salutation, they
first spoke in German and then in English. This was the good father; the
family were at Falcon's Nest, where they were spending the summer. He
had seen the vessel in the morning through his telescope, but, unwilling
to alarm, or to encourage hopes that might be vain, he had not spoken of
it, but come alone towards the coast.

After much friendly conference, the party were regaled with all
hospitality at Tent House, the good Swiss gave the Lieutenant this first
part of his journal for the perusal of Captain Johnson, and, after an
hour's conversation, they separated, hoping to have a pleasant
meeting next day.

But Heaven decreed it otherwise. During the night, another fearful storm
arose; the _Adventurer_ lost its anchor, and was driven out to sea; and,
after several days of anxiety and danger, found itself so far from the
island, and so much shattered, that all thoughts of returning were given
up for that time, and Captain Johnson reluctantly relinquished the hope
of rescuing the interesting family.

Thus it happened that the first part of this journal was brought to
England, and from thence sent to me, a friend of the family, in
Switzerland, accompanied by a letter from the Captain, declaring, that
he could have no rest till he found, and became acquainted with, this
happy family; that he would search for the island in his future voyages,
and either bring away the family, or, if they preferred to remain, he
would send out from England some colonists, and everything that might be
necessary to promote their comfort. A rough map of the island is added
to the journal, executed by Fritz, the eldest son.

       *       *       *       *       *


CONTINUATION OF THE JOURNAL.

CHAPTER XXXIII.

I left the reader at the moment in which I had placed the first part of
my journal in the hands of Lieutenant Bell, to deliver to Captain
Johnson, of the English vessel the _Adventurer_, expecting him to return
the next day with Lieutenant Bell. We separated in this hope, and I
thought it necessary to inform my family of this expected visit, which
might decide their future lot. My wife and elder sons might wish to
seize this only occasion that might occur to revisit their native
country--to quit their beloved island, which would doubtless cost them
much sorrow at the last moment, but was necessary to their future
comfort. I could not help feeling distressed at the prospect of my dear
children's solitary old age, and I determined, if they did not wish to
return with Captain Johnson, to request him to send some colonists out
to people our island.

It will be remembered that I had left home alone, and at an early hour,
having perceived a vessel from the top of our tree with my telescope. I
had set out without breakfast, without giving my sons their tasks, or
making any arrangements for the labours of the day. My conference with
Lieutenant Bell had been long; it was now past noon, and knowing how
prompt my wife was to alarm herself, I was surprised that I did not
meet her, nor any of my sons. I began to be uneasy, and on my arrival I
hastily mounted the tree, and found my faithful partner extended on her
bed, surrounded by her four sons, and apparently in great pain. I
demanded, with a cry of grief, what had happened; all wished to speak at
once, and it was with some difficulty I learned, that my dear wife, in
descending the staircase, had been seized with a giddiness in her head,
and had fallen down and injured herself so much, that she was unable to
rise without assistance; she was now enduring great pain in her right
leg and in her left foot. "Ernest and I," added Fritz, "carried her
without delay to her bed, though not without difficulty, for the
staircase is so narrow; but she continued to get worse, and we did not
know what to do."

_Jack_. I have rubbed her foot continually, but it swells more and more,
as well as her leg, which I dare not touch, it hurts her so much.

_Ernest_. I remember, father, that of the chests that we brought from
the ship there is one unopened, which is marked "_medicines,"_--may it
not contain something that will relieve mamma?

_Father_. Perhaps it may, my son. You did well to remember it; we will
go to Tent House for it. Fritz, you shall accompany me to assist in
bringing it.

I wished to be alone with Fritz, to consult him about the English
vessel, and was glad of this opportunity. Before I left my wife, I
intended to examine her leg and foot, which were exceedingly painful.
When I was preparing to enter the Church, I had studied medicine and
practical surgery, in order to be able to administer to the bodily
afflictions of my poor parishioners, as well as to their spiritual
sorrows. I knew how to bleed, and could replace a dislocated limb. I had
often made cures; but since my arrival at the island I had neglected my
medical studies, which happily had not been needed. I hoped now,
however, to recall as much of my knowledge as would be sufficient to
cure my poor wife. I examined her foot first, which I found to be
violently sprained. She begged me then to look at her leg, and what was
my distress when I saw it was fractured above the ancle; however, the
fracture appeared simple, without splinters, and easy to cure. I sent
Fritz without delay to procure me two pieces of the bark of a tree,
between which I placed the leg, after having, with the assistance of my
son, stretched it till the two pieces of broken bone united; I then
bound it with bandages of linen, and tied the pieces of bark round the
leg, so that it might not be moved. I bound the sprained foot very
tightly, till I could procure the balsam which I expected to find in the
chest. I felt assured, that the giddiness of the head, which had caused
her fall, proceeded from some existing cause, which I suspected, from
the pulse and the complexion, must be a fulness of blood; and it
appeared to be necessary to take away some ounces, which I persuaded her
to allow me to do, when I should have brought my medicine-chest and
instruments from Tent House. I left her, with many charges, to the care
of my three younger sons, and proceeded to Tent House with Fritz, to
whom I now related my morning adventure, and consulted him how we should
mention it to his mother. Fritz was astonished. I saw how his mind was
employed; he looked round on our fields and plantations, increasing and
prospering.

"We must not tell her, father," said he. "I will be at Tent House early
in the morning; you must give me some commission to execute; I will
await the arrival of the Captain, and tell him that my dear mother is
ill,--and that he may return as he came."

"You speak rashly, Fritz," answered I. "I have told you that this ship
has suffered much from the storm, and needs repairs. Have you not often
read the golden rule of our divine Master, _Do unto others as you would
have others do unto you?_ Our duty is to receive the Captain into our
island, and to assist him in repairing and refitting his vessel."

"And he will find," said he, "we know something of that kind of work.
Did you show him our beautiful pinnace and canoe? But can such a large
vessel enter our Bay of Safety?"

"No," replied I; "I fear there will not be sufficient water; but we will
show the captain the large bay at the other end of the island, formed by
Cape Disappointment; he will find there a beautiful harbour."

"And he and his officers may live at the farm, and we can go over every
day to assist in repairing their vessel," continued Fritz.

"Very well," said I; "and when it is finished, he will, in return, give
us a place in it to return to Europe."

"To return to Europe, father!" cried he; "to leave our beautiful winter
dwelling, Tent House, and our charming summer residence, Falcon's Nest;
our dear, good animals; our crystals of salt; our farms; so much that is
our own, and which nobody covets, to return into Europe to poverty, to
war, to those wicked soldiers who have banished us! We want nothing.
Dear father, can you consent to leave our beloved island?"

"You are right, my dear son," said I. "Would to God we might always
remain here happily together; but we are of different ages, and by the
law of nature we must one day be separated. Consider, my dear son, if
you should survive your brothers, how cheerless it would be to live
quite alone on this desert island, without any one to close your eyes.
But let us look at these trees; I see they are tamarind-trees; their
fruit contains a pulp which is very useful in medicine, and which will
suit your mother, I think, as well as the juice of the orange or lemon.
We shall find some of the latter at our plantation near Tent House; but,
in the mean time, do you climb the tamarind-tree, and gather some of
those pods which resemble those of beans, fill one side of the bag with
them, the other we will reserve for the oranges and lemons. Not to lose
any time, I will go on to Tent House to seek for the two chests, and you
can follow me."

Fritz was up the tamarind-tree in a moment. I crossed Family Bridge, and
soon reached the grotto. I lighted a candle, which I always kept ready,
entered the magazine, and found the two chests, labelled.

They were neither large nor heavy, and, having tied cords round them for
the convenience of carrying them, I proceeded to visit the orange and
lemon trees, where I found the fruit sufficiently ripe for lemonade.
Fritz came to meet me, with a good supply of tamarinds. We filled the
other end of his sack with oranges and lemons. He threw it over his
shoulder, and, neither of us being overloaded, we pursued our way
homewards very quickly, notwithstanding the heat, which was excessively
oppressive, though the sun was hidden under the thick clouds, which
entirely concealed the sea from us. Nothing was to be seen but the waves
breaking against the rocks. Fritz expressed his fears that a storm was
coming on, which might prove fatal to the vessel, and wished to take out
the pinnace and endeavour to assist Captain Johnson. Delighted as I felt
with his fearless humanity, I could not consent; I reminded him of the
situation of his mother. "Forgive me, dear father," said he; "I had
forgotten everything but the poor vessel. But the captain may do as we
did, leave his ship between the rocks, and come, with all in the vessel,
to establish themselves here. We will give them up a corner of our
islands; and if there should be any ladies amongst them, how pleasant it
would be for mamma to have a friend!"

The rain now fell in torrents, and we proceeded with great difficulty.
After crossing the bridge, we saw at a distance a very extraordinary
figure approaching us; we could not ascertain what species of animal it
was. It appeared taller than any of the monkeys we had seen, and much
larger, of a black or brown colour. We could not distinguish the head,
but it seemed to have two thick and moveable horns before it. We had
fortunately taken no gun with us, or Fritz would certainly have fired
at this singular animal. But as it rapidly approached us, we soon
recognized the step, and the cry of pleasure which hailed us. "It is
Jack," we exclaimed; and in fact it was he, who was hurrying to meet us
with my large cloak and waterproof caoutchouc boots. I had neglected to
take them, and my dear little fellow had volunteered to bring them to
Tent House. To protect himself on the way, he had put the cloak on,
covering his head with the hood, and my boots being too large for him,
he had put one on each arm, which he held up to secure the hood.
Conceive what a singular figure he made. Notwithstanding our uneasiness,
and our wretched condition, for we were wet to the skin, we could not
but laugh heartily at him. I would not consent to use the coverings he
had brought; neither Fritz nor I could be worse for the distance we had
to go, and Jack was younger and more delicate; I obliged him therefore
to retain his curious protection; and asked how he had left his mother.
"Very uneasy," said he, "about you; else I think she must be much
better, for her cheeks are very red, and her eyes very bright, and she
talks incessantly. She would have come herself to seek you, but could
not rise; and when I told her I would come, she bid me be very quick;
but when I was coming down stairs, I heard her call me back for fear of
the rain and the thunder; I would not hear her, but ran as fast as I
could, hoping to reach Tent House. Why did you come back so soon?"

"To spare you half your journey, my brave little man," said I, hastening
on; for Jack's account of his mother made me uneasy. I perceived she
must be labouring under fever, and the blood ascending to her head. My
children followed me, and we soon reached the foot of our castle in
the air.

       *       *       *       *       *


CHAPTER XXXIV.

We entered our apartment literally as if we had come out of the sea, and
I found my poor Elizabeth much agitated. "Heaven be praised!" said she;
"but where is Jack, that rash little fellow?"

"Here I am, mamma," said he, "as dry as when I left you. I have left my
dress below, that I might not terrify you; for if Mr. Fritz had had his
gun, I might have been shot as a _rhinoceros_, and not been here to tell
you my story."

The good mother then turned her thoughts on Fritz and me, and would not
suffer us to come near her till we had changed our drenched garments. To
oblige her, we retired to a little closet I had contrived between two
thick branches at the top of the staircase, which was used to contain
our chests of linen, our dresses, and our provisions. Our dress was soon
changed; we hung up the wet garments, and I returned to my companion,
who was suffering from her foot, but still more from a frightful
headache. She had a burning fever. I concluded that bleeding was
urgently needed, but commenced by assuaging her thirst with some
lemonade. I then opened my box of surgical instruments, and approached
the opening to the east which served us for a window, and which we
could close by means of a curtain, that was now entirely raised to give
air to our dear invalid, and to amuse my children, who were watching the
storm. The mighty waves that broke against the rocks, the vivid
lightning bursting through the castles of murky clouds, the majestic and
incessant rolling of the thunder, formed one of those enchanting
spectacles to which they had been from infancy accustomed. As in the
Swiss mountains we are liable to frightful storms, to which it is
necessary to familiarize oneself, as one cannot avoid them, I had
accustomed my wife and children, by my own example, to behold, not only
without fear, but even with admiration, these great shocks of the
elements,--these convulsions of nature.

I had opened the chest, and my children had directed their attention to
the instruments it contained; the first were a little rusty, and I
handed them to Ernest, who, after examining them, placed them on a table
inside the window. I was searching for a lancet in good condition, when
a clap of thunder, such as I had never heard in my life, terrified us
all so much, that we nearly fell down. This burst of thunder had not
been preceded by any lightning, but was accompanied by two immense
forked columns of fire, which seemed to stretch from the sky to our very
feet. We all cried out, even my poor wife; but the silence of terror
succeeded, and seemed to be the silence of death. I flew to the bedside,
and found my dear patient in a state of total insensibility. I was
convinced that she was dead, and I was dumb with despair. I was roused
from my stupor by the voice of my children. I then remembered that I
had not lost all: there still remained duties to fulfil, and affection
to console me. "My children," cried I, extending my arms to them, "come
and comfort your unfortunate father: come and lament with him the best
of wives and mothers." Terrified at the appearance of their mother, they
surrounded her bed, calling on her in piercing accents. At that moment I
saw my little Francis was missing, and my grief was augmented by the
fear that he had been killed by the lightning. I hastily turned to the
window, expecting to find my child dead, and our dwelling in flames.
Fortunately, all was safe; but, in my distraction, I scarcely thanked
God for His mercy, at the very moment even when he graciously restored
to me my lost treasures. Francis, frightened by the storm, had hidden
himself in his mother's bed, and fallen asleep; awaked by the thunder,
he had not dared to move, fearing it announced the arrival of the
savages; but at last, the cries of his brothers roused him, and raising
his pretty fair head, supposing his mother sleeping, he flung his arms
round her neck, saying, "Wake, mamma, we are all here,--papa, my
brothers, and the storm, too, which is very beautiful, but frightens me.
Open your eyes, mamma; look at the bright lightning, and kiss your
little Francis." Either his sweet voice, or the cries of her elder
children, restored her faculties: she gradually recovered, and called me
to her. The excess of my joy threatened to be almost as fatal as my
grief. With difficulty I controlled my own feelings and those of my
boys; and, after I had sent them from the bed, I ascertained that she
was not only really living, but much better. The pulse was calm, and
the fever had subsided, leaving only a weakness that was by no means
alarming. I relinquished, joyfully, the intention of bleeding her, the
necessity of which I had trembled to contemplate, and contented myself
with employing the boys to prepare a cooling mixture, composed of the
juice of the lemon, of barley, and tamarinds, which they completed to
the great satisfaction of their mother. I then ordered Fritz to descend
to the yard, to kill a fowl, pluck and boil it, to make broth,--a
wholesome and light nourishment for our dear invalid. I told one of his
brothers to assist him, and Jack and Francis, frequently employed under
their mother, were ready in a moment. Ernest alone remained quietly on
his seat, which I attributed to his usual indolence, and tried to make
him ashamed of it. "Ernest," said I, "you are not very anxious to oblige
your mother; you sit as if the thunderbolt had struck you."

"It has, indeed, rendered me unfit to be of any service to my good
mother," said he, quietly; and, drawing his right hand from under his
waistcoat, he showed it to me, most frightfully black and burnt.

This dear child, who must have suffered very much, had never uttered a
complaint, for fear of alarming his mother; and even now he made a sign
to me to be silent, lest she should hear, and discover the truth. She
soon, however, fell into a sleep, which enabled me to attend to poor
Ernest, and to question him about the accident. I learned that a long
and pointed steel instrument, which he was examining near the large
window, stooping over it to see it better, had attracted the lightning,
which, falling partly on the hand in which he held it, had caused the
misfortune. There were traces on his arm of the electric fire, and his
hair was burnt on one side. By what miracle the electric fluid had been
diverted, and how we, dwelling in a tree, had been preserved from a
sudden and general conflagration, I knew not. My son assured me he had
seen the fire run along the instrument he held, and from thence fall
perpendicularly to the earth, where it seemed to burst with a second
explosion. I was impatient to examine this phenomenon, and to see if any
other traces were left, except those on the hand of my son, which it was
necessary, in the first place, to attend to. I remembered frequently to
have applied with success in burns the most simple and easy of remedies,
which everybody can command: this is, to bathe the hand affected in cold
water, taking care to renew it every eight or ten minutes. I placed
Ernest between two tubs of cold water, and, exhorting him to patience
and perseverance, I left him to bathe his hand, and approached the
opening, to try and discover what had preserved us, by averting the
direction of the lightning, which one might have expected would have
killed my son, and destroyed our dwelling. I saw only some light traces
on the table; but, on looking more attentively, I found that the greater
part of the surgical instruments which Ernest had placed upon it were
either melted or much damaged. In examining them separately, I remarked
one much longer than the rest, which projected beyond the edge of the
table, and was much marked by the fire. I could not easily take it up;
it had adhered somewhat in melting, and, in endeavouring to disengage
it, I saw that the point, which was beyond the opening, touched a thick
wire, which seemed to be suspended from the roof of our tent. All was
now explained to me; except that I could in no way account for this
wire, placed expressly to serve as a conductor for the lightning. It
seemed to be the work of magic. The evening was too far advanced for me
to distinguish how it was fastened, and what fixed it below; therefore,
enjoining Ernest to call loudly if he needed me, I hastened down. I saw
my three cooks very busy, as I passed through, preparing the broth for
their mother--they assured me it would be excellent. Fritz boasted that
he had killed the fowl with all speed, Jack that he had plucked it
without tearing it much, and Francis that he had lighted and kept up the
fire. They had nothing to employ them just then, and I took them with me
to have some one to talk to on the phenomenon of the lightning. Below
the window I found a large packet of iron wire, which I had brought from
Tent House some days before, intending on some leisure day to make a
sort of grating before our poultry-yard. By what chance was it here, and
hooked by one end to the roof of our house? Some time before I had
replaced our cloth canopy by a sort of roof covered with bark nailed
upon laths; the cloth still enclosed the sides and front; all was so
inflammable, that, but for the providential conductor, we must have been
in flames in an instant. I thanked God for our preservation; and little
Francis, seeing me so happy, said--

"Is it quite true, papa, that this wire has preserved us?"

"Yes, it is true, my darling; and I wish to know what good genius has
placed it there, that I may be thankful," said I.

"Ah! father," said my little fellow, "embrace me, but do not thank me;
for I did not know that I was doing good."

Astonished at this information, I requested my boy to tell me why and
how he had fixed the wire?

"I wanted to reach some figs," said he, "when you and Fritz were at Tent
House, and Jack and Ernest were nursing mamma; I wished to do some good
for her. I thought she would like some of our sweet figs; but there were
none in my reach, and I had no stick long enough to beat them down. I
went below, and found that great roll of wire. I tried to break a piece
off, but could not; and I then determined to carry the whole up to our
dwelling, and to bend one end into a hook, by which I might catch some
of the branches, and bring them near me to gather the figs. I was very
successful at first, and secured one or two figs. I had my packet of
wire on the table by the window, and stood near it myself. I thought I
could reach a branch that hung over our roof, loaded with fruit. I
leaned forward, and extended my hook to the branch; I felt I had secured
it, and joyfully began to pull. You know, papa, they bend, and don't
break; but it remained immovable, as well as my hook, which was held by
one of the laths of the roof. I pulled with all my strength, and, in my
efforts, I struck my foot against the roll of wire, which fell down to
the ground without detaching the hook. You may judge how firm it is, for
it is no trifling leap from our house to the ground."

"A good work, indeed, my boy," said I, "is yours, for it has saved us.
God has inspired you, and has made use of the hand of a child for our
preservation. Your conductor shall remain where you have so happily
placed it; we may still have need of it. The sky still looks very
threatening; let us return to your mother, and take a light with us."

I had contrived a sort of portable lantern, made of isinglass, which
lighted us in our offices. Moreover, a calibash pierced with small
holes, with a candle inside, was placed at the top of the winding
staircase, and lighted it entirely, so that we were able to descend
without danger by night as w ell as by day. I was, however, uneasy about
the way we should bring my wife down, if we found it necessary to remove
her during her sickness; I named it to Fritz.

"Have no uneasiness, father," said he, "Ernest and I are very strong
now, and we can carry mamma like a feather."

"You and I might, my dear boy," said I; "but Ernest cannot be of much
assistance to us at present."

I then related his misfortune to them. They were distressed and
astonished, not comprehending the cause, which I promised to explain.
They wished now, however, to see their brother. Fritz then requested, in
a low tone of voice, that he might go to Tent House, to see if the
vessel and the captain had arrived. Seeing his brothers listening with
curiosity, I thought it best to tell them the affair, requesting them,
however, not to name it to their mother at present. Jack, who was now
about fourteen years of age, listened with the most intense interest,
his eyes sparkling with joy and surprise.

"A vessel!--people from Europe! Do you think they have come to seek us?
Perhaps they are our relations and friends."

"How glad should I be," said Francis, "if my good grandmamma were there;
she loved me so much, and was always giving me sweetmeats." This was the
mother of my dear wife, from whom she had parted with extreme regret; I
knew that a single word from the child would have revived all her
sorrows, and would in her present state be dangerous. I therefore
forbade him naming such a thing to his mother, even if we mentioned
the vessel.

We ascended, and found our dear patient awake, with Ernest at her side,
his hand tied up, and somewhat relieved; though, from not having applied
the water immediately, there were several blisters, which he requested
me to open. It was necessary to tell his mother he had had a burn; she
named several remedies, and I was hesitating which to use, when Fritz,
giving me a significant glance, said, "Don't you think, father, that the
leaves of the karata, which cured Jack's leg so well, would be is
serviceable to Ernest's hand?"

"I have no doubt of it," said I; "but we have none here."

"I know very well where they grow," said he. "Come, Jack, we shall soon
be there; we shall have a little rain, but what of that? we shall not be
melted, and we can have a bath."

My wife was divided between her desire to relieve Ernest, and her fear
of the boys venturing out in such a stormy night. She agreed at last,
provided Jack had my cloak, and Fritz the boots, and that they should
take the lantern. Thus equipped, they set out; I accompanied them
outside the tree; Fritz assuring me they would be back in three hours,
at most. He intended to proceed along the rocks towards Tent House, to
make what observations he could; for, as he told me, he could not get
the poor captain and his vessel out of his head. It was now seven
o'clock; I gave them my blessing, and left them with injunctions to be
prudent, and returned with an anxious heart to my invalids.

       *       *       *       *       *


CHAPTER XXXV.

On entering, I found Francis sitting on his mother's bed, telling her
the story of the lightning, of the wire which was called _a conductor_,
of the figs that he was going to gather for her, and that papa had
called him--little Francis--_the preserver of the whole family_. Having
briefly explained to them the results of Francis's fortunate device, I
procured some raw potato to apply to Ernest's hand, which still gave him
great pain, and bathed my wife's foot with some _eau d'arquebusade_,
which I procured from my medicine-chest; here I also met with some
laudanum, a few drops of which I infused into the lemonade, wishing her
to sleep till her sons returned. She soon was in a sweet slumber; the
boys followed her example, and I was left alone with my anxieties;
happy, however, to see them at rest after such an evening of agitation.
The hours passed, still my children returned not. I was continually at
the window, listening for their steps or the sound of their voices; I
heard only the rain falling in torrents, the waves breaking against the
rocks, and the wind howling frightfully. I could not help thinking of
the danger they ran, having twice to cross the river, which was
doubtless swoln by the rain. I was not so much alarmed for Fritz, a
strong, bold youth of nineteen years of age, and a determined hunter: as
for poor Jack, bold even to rashness, and having neither strength nor
experience to secure him, I could not help fancying him carried away by
the stream, and his brother not daring to return without him. My wife
occasionally awoke, but the narcotic stupified her; she did not perceive
the absence of her sons. Francis slept tranquilly; but when Ernest
awoke, and heard the tempest so terribly augmented, he was almost
distracted; all his selfishness, all his indolence disappeared. He
entreated me to allow him to go in search of his brothers, and with
difficulty I detained him. To convince him that he was not the sole
cause of the danger of Fritz and Jack, I related to him, for the first
time, the history of the boat and the vessel, and assured him that the
great cause of their anxiety to go over to Tent House, was to search for
some traces of the unfortunate seamen and their vessel, exposed to that
furious sea.

"And Fritz, also, is exposed to that sea," cried Ernest. "I know it; I
am sure that he is at this moment in his canoe, struggling against
the waves!"

"And Jack, my poor Jack!" sighed I, infected with his fears.

"No, father," added Ernest; "be composed; Fritz will not be so
imprudent; he will have left Jack in our house at the rock; and,
probably, seeing the hopelessness of his undertaking, he is returned
himself now, and is waiting there till the stream subsides a little; do
allow me to go, dear father; you have ordered me cold water for my burnt
hand, and it will certainly cure it to get well wet."

I could not consent to expose my third son to the tempest, which was now
become frightful; the sailcloth which covered our window was torn into a
thousand pieces, and carried away; the rain, like a deluge, forced
itself into our dwelling, even to the bed where my wife and child were
lying. I could neither make up my mind to leave them myself in this
perilous situation, nor to spare my boy, who could not even be of any
use to his brothers. I commanded him to remain, succeeded in persuading
him of their probable safety, and induced him to lie down to rest. Now,
in my terrible solitude, I turned to Him, "who tempers the wind to the
shorn lamb;" who forbids us not to address Him in the trials he sends
us, to beseech Him to soften them, or to give us strength to bear them.
Kneeling down, I dared to supplicate Him to restore me my children,
submissively adding, after the example of our blessed Saviour, "Yet, not
my will, but thine be done, O Lord."

My prayers appeared to be heard; the storm gradually abated, and the day
began to break. I awoke Ernest, and having dressed his wounded hand, he
set out for Tent House, in search of his brothers. I followed him with
my eyes as far as I could see; the whole country appeared one vast lake,
and the road to Tent House was like the bed of a river; but, protected
by his good gaiters of buffalo-skin, he proceeded fearlessly, and was
soon out of my sight.

I was recalled from the window by the voice of my wife, who was awake,
and anxiously inquiring for her sons.

"They are gone," said I, "to gather the leaves of the karata for
Ernest's burnt hand, and he wished to go too."

Her deep sleep had entirely chased from her memory all the events of the
previous evening, and I was glad to allow Francis to repeat his little
tale of the burn and his _conductor_ in order to gain time. She was
astonished and uneasy to hear of Ernest's accident, and was afraid they
would _get wet_ in searching for the karata, little aware of the hours
of anguish I had endured waiting and watching for those she believed had
only just left home. At that moment, the dear and well-known voices were
heard under the great window.

"Father, I am bringing back my brothers," cried Ernest.

"Yes, papa, we are all alive, and as wet as fishes," added the sweet
voice of Jack.

"But not without having had our troubles," said the manly voice of
Fritz.

I rushed down the staircase to meet them, and, embracing them, I led
them, trembling with emotion, to the bed of their mother, who could not
comprehend the transport of joy I expressed.

"Dear Elizabeth," said I, "here are our sons; God has given them to us a
second time."

"Have we then been in any danger of losing them?" said she. "What is the
meaning of this?"

They saw their mother was unconscious of their long absence, and
assured her it was only the storm which had so completely wetted them,
that had alarmed me. I hastened to get them to change their clothes, and
go to bed a little while to rest themselves; as, however anxious I was
myself, I wished to prepare my wife for their recital, and also to tell
her of the vessel. Jack would not go till he had produced his bundle of
the karata leaves.

"There is enough for six-and-thirty thunderstorms," said he; "and I will
prepare them. I have had some experience with my own, and I know the
best method."

He soon divided one of the leaves with his knife, after cutting away the
triangular thorn from the end, and applied it to his brother's hand,
binding it with his handkerchief. Having completed this dressing, he
threw off his clothes, and, jumping into his bed, he and his brothers
were sound asleep in ten minutes.

I then sat down by my wife, and began my tale; from my first view of the
vessel, and my anxious watching for intercourse with it, in order that
we might take the opportunity to return to Europe.

"But why should we return to Europe?" said she; "we want nothing here
now, since I have got flax, cotton, and a wheel. Our children lead an
active, healthy, and innocent life, and live _with us_, which they might
not do in the world. For four years we have been happy here, and what
shall we find in Europe to compensate us for what we leave
here?--poverty, war, and none of those things which we have here
abundantly."

"But we should find grandmamma," said little Francis; and stopped,
recollecting my prohibition.

He had, however, said sufficient to bring tears to his mother's eyes.

"You are right, my darling," said she, "that is my sole regret; but my
dear parent was aged and infirm, in all probability I should no longer
find her in this world; and if removed to Heaven, she watches over us in
this island, as well as if we were in Europe."

After my dear wife had subdued the agitation this remembrance caused
her, I pursued the conversation as follows:--

       *       *       *       *       *


CHAPTER XXXVI.

"I see, my dear wife," said I, "that you, as well as the rest of my
family, are contented to remain on this island, where it seems it is the
will of God for us to dwell, as it is improbable that in such a tempest
Captain Johnson would risk approaching the island, if indeed it has not
been already fatal to him. I am impatient to learn if Fritz has any
tidings of him; for it was on the shore near Tent House that he and Jack
passed the night."

"Well done, my good and courageous boys!" said their mother; "they might
at any rate have given assistance to them if wrecked."

"You are more courageous than I am, my dear Elizabeth," answered I; "I
have passed the whole night mourning for my children, and you think only
of the good they might have done to their fellow-creatures."

My sons were awake by this time, and I eagerly inquired if they had
discovered any traces of the vessel. Fritz said they had not; but he
feared it would never be able to resist the fury of the tempest.

"No, indeed," said Jack; "those mountains of waves, which were not
fixtures like other mountains, came full gallop to swallow up Fritz the
great, Jack the little, and their fine canoe."

My wife nearly fainted when she heard they had ventured on that terrible
sea; and I reminded Fritz that I had forbidden him to do this.

"But you have often said to me, papa," said he, "do unto others as you
would they should do unto you; and what a happiness it would have been
to us, when our vessel was wrecked, if we had seen a canoe!"

"With two bold men coming to our assistance," said Jack;--"but go on
with your story, Fritz."

Fritz continued: "We proceeded first to the rocks, and, with some
difficulty, and not until Jack had shed some blood in the cause, we
secured the karata-leaves, with their ugly thorns at the end. When our
sack was full, we proceeded along the rocks towards Tent House. From
this height I tried to discover the ship, but the darkness obscured
everything. Once I thought I perceived at a great distance a fixed
light, which was neither a star nor the lightning, and which I lost
sight of occasionally. We had now arrived at the cascade, which, from
the noise, seemed much swollen by the rain--our great stones were quite
hidden by a boiling foam. I would have attempted to cross, if I had been
alone; but, with Jack on my shoulders, I was afraid of the risk. I
therefore prepared to follow the course of the river to Family Bridge.
The wet ground continually brought us on our knees, and with great
difficulty we reached the bridge. But judge of our consternation! the
river had risen so much that the planks were covered, and, as we
conceived, the whole was destroyed. I then told Jack to return to
Falcon's Nest with the karata-leaves, and I would swim across the river.
I returned about a hundred yards up the stream to find a wider and less
rapid part, and easily crossed. Judge of my surprise when I saw a human
figure approaching to meet me; I had no doubt it was the captain of the
vessel, and--"

"And it was Captain Jack, _sans peur et sans reproche_," said the bold
little fellow. "I was determined not to return home a poltroon who was
afraid of the water." When Fritz was gone, I tried the bridge, and soon
found there was not sufficient water over it to risk my being drowned. I
took off my boots, which might have made me slip, and my cloak, which
was too heavy, and, making a dart, I ran with all my strength across,
and reached the other side. I put on my boots, which I had in my hands,
and advanced to meet Fritz, who called out, as soon as he saw me, "Is it
you, captain?" I tried to say, "Yes, certainly," in a deep tone, but my
laughter betrayed me.

"To my great regret;" said Fritz, "I should truly have preferred meeting
Captain Johnson; but I fear he and his people are at the bottom of the
sea. After meeting with Jack, we proceeded to Tent House, where we
kindled a good fire, and dried ourselves a little. We then refreshed
ourselves with some wine which remained on the table where you had
entertained the captain, and proceeded to prepare a signal to inform the
vessel we were ready to receive them. We procured a thick bamboo cane
from the magazine; I fixed firmly to one end of it the large lantern of
the fish's bladder you gave us to take; I filled the lamp with oil, and
placed in it a thick cotton-wick, which, when lighted, was very
brilliant. Jack and I then placed it on the shore, at the entrance of
the bay. We fixed it before the rock, where the land-wind would not
reach it, sunk it three or four feet into the ground, steadied it with
stones, and then went to rest over our fire, after this long and
difficult labour. After drying ourselves a little, we set out on our
return, when, looking towards the sea, we were startled by the
appearance of the same light we had noticed before; we heard, at the
same time, the distant report of a gun, which was repeated three or four
times at irregular intervals. We were persuaded that it was the vessel
calling to us for aid, and, remembering the command of our Saviour, we
thought you would forgive our disobedience if we presented to you in the
morning the captain, the lieutenant, and as many as our canoe would
contain. We entered it then without any fear, for you know how light and
well-balanced it is; and, rowing into the bay, the sail was spread to
the wind, and we had no more trouble. I then took the helm; my own
signal-light shone clearly on the shore; and, _except_ for the rain
which fell in torrents, the waves which washed over our canoe, and
uneasiness about the ship and about you, and our fear that the wind
might carry us into the open sea, we should have had a delightful
little maritime excursion. When we got out of the bay, I perceived the
wind was driving us towards Shark's Island, which, being directly before
the bay, forms two entrances to it. I intended to go round it, and
disembark there, if possible, that I might look out for some trace of
the ship, but we found this impossible; the sea ran too high; besides,
we should have been unable to moor our canoe, the island not affording a
single tree or anything we could lash it to, and the waves would soon
have carried it away. We had now lost sight of the light, and hearing no
more signals, I began to think on your distress when we did not arrive
at the hour we promised. I therefore resolved to return by the other
side of the bay, carefully avoiding the current, which would have
carried us into the open sea. I lowered the sail by means of the ropes
you had fixed to it, and we rowed into port. We carefully moored the
canoe, and, without returning to Tent House, took the road home. We
crossed the bridge as Jack had done, found the waterproof cloak and bag
of karata-leaves where he had left them, and soon after met Ernest. As
it was daylight, I did not take him for the captain, but knew him
immediately, and felt the deepest remorse when I heard from him in what
anxiety and anguish you had passed the night. Our enterprise was
imprudent, and altogether useless; but we might have saved life, which
would have been an ample remuneration. I fear all is hopeless. What do
you think, father, of their fate?"

"I hope they are far from this dangerous coast," said I; "but if still
in our neighbourhood, we will do all we can to assist them. As soon as
the tempest is subsided, we will take the pinnace and sail round the
island. You have long urged me to this, Fritz; and who knows but on the
opposite side we may find some traces of our own poor sailors,--perhaps
even meet with them?"

The weather gradually clearing, I called my sons to go out with me. My
wife earnestly besought me not to venture on the sea; I assured her it
was not sufficiently calm, but we must examine our plantations, to
ascertain what damage was done, and at the same time we might look out
for some traces of the wreck; besides, our animals were becoming
clamorous for food; therefore, leaving Ernest with her, we descended to
administer in the first place to their wants.

       *       *       *       *       *


CHAPTER XXXVII.

Our animals were impatiently expecting us; they had been neglected
during the storm, and were ill-supplied with food, besides being
half-sunk in water. The ducks and the flamingo liked it well enough, and
were swimming comfortably in the muddy water; but the quadrupeds were
complaining aloud, each in his own proper language, and making a
frightful confusion of sounds. _Valiant_, especially,--the name Francis
had bestowed on the calf I had given him to bring up,--bleated
incessantly for his young master, and could not be quieted till he came.
It is wonderful how this child, only twelve years old, had tamed and
attached this animal; though sometimes so fierce, with him he was mild
as a lamb. The boy rode on his back, guiding him with a little stick,
with which he just touched the side of his neck as he wished him to
move; but if his brothers had ventured to mount, they would have been
certainly thrown off. A pretty sight was our cavalry: Fritz on his
handsome onagra, Jack on his huge buffalo, and Francis on his young
bull. There was nothing left for Ernest but the donkey, and its slow and
peaceful habits suited him very well.

Francis ran up to his favourite, who showed his delight at seeing him as
well as he was able, and at the first summons followed his master from
the stable. Fritz brought out _Lightfoot_ Jack his buffalo, and I
followed with the cow and the ass. We left them to sport about at
liberty on the humid earth, till we removed the water from their stable,
and supplied them with fresh food. We then drove them in, considering it
advisable to pursue our expedition on foot, lest the bridge should still
be overflowed. Francis was the superintendent of the fowls, and knew
every little chicken by name; he called them out and scattered their
food for them, and soon had his beautiful and noisy family fluttering
round him.

After having made all our animals comfortable, and given them their
breakfast, we began to think of our own. Francis made a fire and warmed
some chicken broth for his mother; for ourselves, we were contented with
some new milk, some salt herrings, and cold potatoes. I had often
searched in my excursions for the precious _bread-fruit_ tree, so highly
spoken of by modern travellers, which I had hoped might be found in our
island, from its favourable situation; but I had hitherto been
unsuccessful. We were unable to procure the blessing of _bread_, our
ship biscuit had long been exhausted, and though we had sown our
European corn, we had not yet reaped any.

After we had together knelt down to thank God for his merciful
protection through the terrors of the past night, and besought him to
continue it, we prepared to set out. The waves still ran high, though
the wind had subsided, and we determined merely to go along the shore,
as the roads still continued impassable from the rain, and the sand was
easier to walk on than the wet grass; besides, our principal motive for
the excursion was to search for any traces of a recent shipwreck. At
first we could discover nothing, even with the telescope; but Fritz,
mounting a high rock, fancied he discovered something floating towards
the island. He besought me to allow him to take the canoe, which was
still where he left it the preceding night. As the bridge was now easy
to cross, I consented, only insisting on accompanying him to assist in
managing it. Jack, who was much afraid of being left behind, was the
first to leap in and seize an oar. There was, however, no need of it; I
steered my little boat into the current, and we were carried away with
such velocity as almost to take our breath. Fritz was at the helm, and
appeared to have no fear; I will not say that his father was so
tranquil. I held Jack, for fear of accidents, but he only laughed, and
observed to his brother that the canoe galloped better than Lightfoot.
We were soon in the open sea, and directed our canoe towards the object
we had remarked, and which we still had in sight. We were afraid it was
the boat upset, but it proved to be a tolerably large cask, which had
probably been thrown overboard to lighten the distressed vessel; we saw
several others, but neither mast nor plank to give us any idea that the
vessel and boat had perished. Fritz wished much to have made the circuit
of the island, to assure ourselves of this, but I would not hear of it;
I thought of my wife's terror; besides, the sea was still too rough for
our frail bark, and we had, moreover, no provisions. If my canoe had not
been well built, it would have run great risk of being overset by the
waves, which broke over it. Jack, when he saw one coming, lay down on
his face, saying he preferred having them on his back rather than in his
mouth; he jumped up as soon as it passed, to help to empty the canoe,
till another wave came to fill it again; but, thanks to my out-riggers,
we preserved our balance very well, and I consented to go as far as
_Cape Disappointment_, which merited the name a second time, for we
found no trace here of the vessel, though we mounted the hill, and thus
commanded a wide extent of view. As we looked round the country, it
appeared completely devastated: trees torn up by the roots, plantations
levelled with the ground, water collected into absolute lakes,--all
announced desolation; and the tempest seemed to be renewing. The sky was
darkened, the wind arose, and was unfavourable for our return; nor could
I venture the canoe on the waves, every instant becoming more
formidable. We moored our bark to a large palm-tree we found at the foot
of the hill, near the shore, and set out by land to our home. We crossed
the Gourd Wood and the Wood of Monkeys, and arrived at our farm, which
we found, to our great satisfaction, had not suffered much from the
storm. The food we had left in the stables was nearly consumed; from
which we concluded that the animals we had left here had sheltered
themselves during the storm. We refilled the mangers with the hay we had
preserved in the loft, and observing the sky getting more and more
threatening, we set out without delay for our house, from which we were
yet a considerable distance. To avoid _Flamingo Marsh_, which was
towards the sea, and _Rice Marsh_, towards the rock, we determined to go
through _Cotton Wood_, which would save us from the wind, which was
ready to blow us off our feet. I was still uneasy about the ship, which
the lieutenant had told me was out of repair; but I indulged a hope that
they might have taken refuge in some bay, or found anchorage on some
hospitable shore, where they might get their vessel into order.

Jack was alarmed lest they should fall into the hands of the
_anthropophagi_, who eat men like hares or sheep, of whom he had read in
some book of travels, and excited the ridicule of his brother, who was
astonished at his ready belief of travellers' tales, which he asserted
were usually false.

"But Robinson Crusoe would not tell a falsehood," said Jack,
indignantly; "and there were cannibals came to his island, and were
going to eat Friday, if he had not saved him."

"Oh! Robinson could not tell a falsehood," said Fritz, "because he never
existed. The whole history is a romance--is not that the name, father,
that is given to works of the imagination?"

"It is," said I; "but we must not call Robinson Crusoe a romance; though
Robinson himself, and all the circumstances of his history are probably
fictitious, the details are all founded on truth--on the adventures and
descriptions of voyagers who may be depended on, and unfortunate
individuals who have actually been wrecked on unknown shores. If ever
our journal should be printed, many may believe that it is only a
romance--a mere work of the imagination."

My boys hoped we should not have to introduce any savages into our
romance, and were astonished that an island so beautiful had not tempted
any to inhabit it; in fact, I had often been myself surprised at this
circumstance; but I told them many voyagers had noticed islands
apparently fertile, and yet uninhabited; besides, the chain of rocks
which surrounded this might prevent the approach of savages, unless they
had discovered the little _Bay of Safety_ where we had landed. Fritz
said he anxiously desired to circumnavigate the island, in order to
ascertain the size of it, and if there were similar chains of rocks on
the opposite side. I promised him, as soon as the stormy weather was
past, and his mother well enough to remove to Tent House, we would take
our pinnace, and set out on our little voyage.

We now approached the marsh, and he begged me to let him go and cut some
canes, as he projected making a sort of carriage for his mother. As we
were collecting them, he explained his scheme to me. He wished to weave
of these reeds, which were very strong, a large and long sort of
pannier, in which his mother might sit or recline, and which might be
suspended between two strong bamboo-canes by handles of rope. He then
purposed to yoke two of our most gentle animals, the cow and the ass,
the one before and the other behind, between these shafts, the leader to
be mounted by one of the children as director; the other would follow
naturally, and the good mother would thus be carried, as if in a litter,
without any danger of jolting. I was pleased with this idea, and we all
set to work to load ourselves each with a huge burden of reeds. They
requested me not to tell my wife, that they might give her an agreeable
surprise. It needed such affection as ours to induce us to the
undertaking in such unpropitious weather. It rained in torrents, and the
marsh was so soft and wet, that we were in danger of sinking at every
step. However, I could not be less courageous than my sons, whom nothing
daunted, and we soon made up our bundles, and, placing them on our
heads, they formed a sort of umbrella, which was not without its
benefits. We soon arrived at Falcon's Nest. Before we reached the tree,
I saw a fire shine to such a distance, that I was alarmed; but soon
found it was only meant for our benefit by our kind friends at home.
When my wife saw the rain falling, she had instructed her little
assistant to make a fire in our usual cooking-place, at a little
distance from the tree, and protected by a canopy of waterproof cloth
from the rain. The young cook had not only kept up a good fire to dry us
on our return, but had taken the opportunity of roasting two dozen of
those excellent little birds which his mother had preserved in butter,
and which, all ranged on the old sword which served us for a spit, were
just ready on our arrival, and the fire and feast were equally grateful
to the hungry, exhausted, and wet travellers, who sat down to
enjoy them.

However, before we sat down to our repast, we went up to see our
invalids, whom we found tolerably well, though anxious for our return.
Ernest, with his sound hand, and the assistance of Francis, had
succeeded in forming a sort of _rampart_ before the opening into the
room, composed of the four hammocks in which he and his brothers slept,
placed side by side, on end. This sufficiently protected them from the
rain, but excluded the light, so that they had been obliged to light a
candle, and Ernest had been reading to his mother in a book of voyages
that had formed part of the captain's small library. It was a singular
coincidence, that while we were talking of the savages on the way home,
they were also reading of them; and I found my dear wife much agitated
by the fears these accounts had awakened in her mind. After soothing her
terrors, I returned to the fire to dry myself, and to enjoy my repast.
Besides the birds, Francis had prepared fresh eggs and potatoes for us.
He told me that his mamma had given up her office of cook to him, and
assured me that he would perform the duties to our satisfaction,
provided he was furnished with materials. Fritz was to hunt, Jack to
fish, I was to order dinner, and he would make it ready. "And when we
have neither game nor fish," said Jack, "we will attack your
poultry-yard." This was not at all to the taste of poor little Francis,
who could not bear his favourites to be killed, and who had actually
wept over the chicken that was _slaughtered_ to make broth for his
mother. We were obliged to promise him that, when other resources
failed, we would apply to our barrels of salt-fish. He, however, gave us
leave to dispose as we liked of the ducks and geese, which were too
noisy for him.

After we had concluded our repast, we carried a part of it to our
friends above, and proceeded to give them an account of our expedition.
I then secured the hammocks somewhat more firmly, to save us from the
storm that was still raging, and the hour of rest being at hand, my sons
established themselves on mattresses of cotton, made by their kind
mother, and in spite of the roaring of the winds, we were soon in
profound repose.

       *       *       *       *       *


CHAPTER XXXVIII.

The storm continued to rage the whole of the following day, and even the
day after, with the same violence. Happily our tree stood firm, though
several branches were broken; amongst others, that to which Francis's
wire was suspended. I replaced it with more care, carried it beyond our
roof, and fixed at the extremity the pointed instrument which had
attracted the lightning. I then substituted for the hammocks before the
window, strong planks, which remained from my building, and which my
sons assisted me to raise with pulleys, after having sawed them to the
proper length. Through these I made loop-holes, to admit the light and
air. In order to carry off the rain, I fixed a sort of spout, made of
the wood of a tree I had met with, which was unknown to me, though
apparently somewhat like the elder. The whole of the tree, almost to
the bark, was filled up with a sort of pith, easily removed. From this
tree I made the pipes for our fountain, and the remainder was now useful
for these rain-spouts. I employed those days in which I could not go
out, in separating the seeds and grain, of which I saw we should have
need, and in mending our work-tools; my sons, in the mean time, nestled
under the tree among the roots, were incessantly employed in the
construction of the carriage for their mother. The karatas had nearly
completed the cure of Ernest's hand, and he was able to assist his
brothers preparing the canes, which Fritz and Jack wove between the flat
wooden wands, with which they had made the frame of their pannier; they
succeeded in making it so strong and close, that they might have carried
liquids in it. My dear wife's foot and leg were gradually improving; and
I took the opportunity of her confinement, to reason with her on her
false notion of the dangers of the sea, and to represent to her the
gloomy prospect of our sons, if they were left alone in the island. She
agreed with me, but could not resolve to leave it; she hoped God would
send some vessel to us, which might leave us some society; and after
all, if our sons were left, she pointed out to me, that they had our
beautiful pinnace, and might at any time, of their own accord, leave
the island.

"And why should we anticipate the evils of futurity, my dear friend?"
said she. "Let us think only of the present. I am anxious now to know if
the storm has spared my fine kitchen-garden."

"You must wait a little," said I. "I am as uneasy as you, for my
maize-plantations, my sugar-canes, and my corn-fields."

At last, one night, the storm ceased, the clouds passed away, and the
moon showed herself in all her glory. How delighted we were! My wife got
me to remove the large planks I had placed before the opening, and the
bright moonbeams streamed through the branches of the tree into our
room; a gentle breeze refreshed us, and so delighted were we in gazing
on that sky of promise, that we could scarcely bear to go to bed, but
spent half the night in projects for the morrow; the good mother alone
said, that she could not join in our excursions. Jack and Francis smiled
at each other, as they thought of their litter, which was now
nearly finished.

A bright sun awoke us early next morning. Fritz and Jack had requested
me to allow them to finish their carriage; so, leaving Ernest with his
mother, I took Francis with me to ascertain the damage done to the
garden at Tent House, about which his mother was so anxious. We easily
crossed the bridge, but the water had carried away some of the planks;
however, my little boy leaped from one plank to another with great
agility, though the distance was sometimes considerable. He was so proud
of being my sole companion, that he scarcely touched the ground as he
ran on before me; but he had a sad shock when he got to the garden; of
which we could not find the slightest trace. All was destroyed; the
walks, the fine vegetable-beds, the plantations of pines and melons--all
had vanished. Francis stood like a marble statue, as pale and still;
till, bursting into tears, he recovered himself.

"Oh! my good mamma," said he; "what will she say when she hears of this
misfortune? But she need not know it, papa," added he, after a pause;
"it would distress her too much; and if you and my brothers will help
me, we will repair the damage before she can walk. The plants may not be
so large; but the earth is moist, and they will grow quickly, and I will
work hard to get it into order."

I embraced my dear boy, and promised him this should be our first work.
I feared we should have many other disasters to repair; but a child of
twelve years old gave me an example of resignation and courage. We
agreed to come next day to begin our labour, for the garden was too well
situated for me to abandon it. It was on a gentle declivity, at the foot
of the rocks, which sheltered it from the north wind, and was
conveniently watered from the cascade. I resolved to add a sort of bank,
or terrace, to protect it from the violent rains; and Francis was so
pleased with the idea, that he began to gather the large stones which
were scattered over the garden, and to carry them to the place where I
wished to build my terrace. He would have worked all day, if I would
have allowed him; but I wanted to look after my young plantations, my
sugar-canes, and my fields, and, after the destruction I had just
witnessed, I had everything to fear. I proceeded to the avenue of
fruit-trees that led to Tent House, and was agreeably surprised. All
were half-bowed to the ground, as well as the bamboos that supported
them, but few were torn up; and I saw that my sons and I, with the
labour of two or three days, could restore them. Some of them had
already begun to bear fruit, but all was destroyed for this year. This
was, however, a trifling loss, compared with what I had anticipated;
for, having no more plants of European fruits, I could not have replaced
them. Besides, having resolved to inhabit Tent House at present,
entirely,--being there defended from storms,--it was absolutely
necessary to contrive some protection from the heat. My new plantations
afforded little shade yet, and I trembled to propose to my wife to come
and inhabit these burning rocks. Francis was gathering some of the
beautiful unknown flowers of the island for his mother, and when he had
formed his nosegay, bringing it to me,--

"See, papa," said he, "how the rain has refreshed these flowers. I wish
it would rain still, it is so dreadfully hot here. Oh! if we had but a
little shade."

"That is just what I was thinking of, my dear," said I; "we shall have
shade enough when my trees are grown; but, in the mean time--"

"In the mean time, papa," said Francis, "I will tell you what you must
do. You must make a very long, broad colonnade before our house, covered
with cloth, and open before, so that mamma may have air and shade
at once."

I was pleased with my son's idea, and promised him to construct a
gallery soon, and call it the _Franciade_ in honour of him. My little
boy was delighted that his suggestion should be thus approved, and
begged me not to tell his mamma, as he wished to surprise her, as much
as his brothers did with their carriage; and he hoped the _Franciade_
might be finished before she visited Tent House. I assured him I would
be silent; and we took the road hence, talking about our new colonnade.
I projected making it in the most simple and easy way. A row of strong
bamboo-canes planted at equal distances along the front of our house,
and united by a plank of wood at the top cut into arches between the
canes; others I would place sloping from the rock, to which I would
fasten them by iron cramps; these were to be covered with sailcloth,
prepared with the elastic gum, and well secured to the plank. This
building would not take much time, and I anticipated the pleasure of my
wife when she found out that it was an invention of her little
favourite, who, of a mild and reflecting disposition, was beloved by us
all. As we walked along, we saw something approaching, that Francis soon
discovered to be his brothers, with their new carriage; and, concluding
that his mamma occupied it, he hastened to meet them, lest they should
proceed to the garden. But on our approach, we discovered that Ernest
was in the litter, which was borne by the cow before, on which Fritz was
mounted, and by the ass behind, with Jack on it. Ernest declared the
conveyance was so easy and delightful that he should often take his
mother's place.

"I like that very much," said Jack; "then I will take care that we will
harness the onagra and the buffalo for you, and they will give you a
pretty jolting, I promise you. The cow and ass are only for mamma. Look,
papa, is it not complete? We wished to try it as soon as we finished
it, so we got Ernest to occupy it, while mother was asleep."

Ernest declared it only wanted two cushions, one to sit upon, the other
to recline against, to make it perfect; and though I could not help
smiling at his love of ease, I encouraged the notion, in order to delay
my wife's excursion till our plans were completed. I then put Francis
into the carriage beside his brother; and ordering Fritz and Jack to
proceed with their equipage to inspect our corn-fields, I returned to my
wife, who was still sleeping. On her awaking, I told her the garden and
plantations would require a few days' labour to set them in order, and I
should leave Ernest, who was not yet in condition to be a labourer, to
nurse her and read to her. My sons returned in the evening, and gave me
a melancholy account of our corn-fields; the corn was completely
destroyed, and we regretted this the more, as we had very little left
for seed. We had anticipated a feast of _real bread_, but we were
obliged to give up all hope for this year, and to content ourselves with
our cakes of cassava, and with potatoes. The maize had suffered less,
and might have been a resource for us, but the large, hard grain was so
very difficult to reduce to flour fine enough for dough. Fritz often
recurred to the necessity of building a mill near the cascade at Tent
House; but this was not the work of a moment, and we had time to
consider of it; for at present we had no corn to grind. As I found
Francis had let his brothers into all our secrets, it was agreed that I,
with Fritz, Jack, and Francis, should proceed to Tent House next
morning. Francis desired to be of the party, that he might direct the
laying out of the garden, he said, with an important air, as he had been
his mother's assistant on its formation. We arranged our bag of
vegetable-seeds, and having bathed my wife's foot with a simple
embrocation, we offered our united prayers, and retired to our beds to
prepare ourselves for the toils of the next day.

       *       *       *       *       *


CHAPTER XXXIX.

We rose early; and, after our usual morning duties, we left our invalids
for the whole day, taking with us, for our dinner, a goose and some
potatoes, made ready the evening before. We harnessed the bull and the
buffalo to the cart, and I sent Fritz and Jack to the wood of bamboos,
with orders to load the cart with as many as it would contain; and,
especially, to select some very thick ones for my colonnade; the rest I
intended for props for my young trees; and this I proposed to be my
first undertaking. Francis would have preferred beginning with the
_Franciade_, or the garden, but he was finally won over by the thoughts
of the delicious fruits, which we might lose by our neglect; the
peaches, plums, pears, and, above all, the cherries, of which he was
very fond. He then consented to assist me in holding the trees whilst I
replaced the roots; after which he went to cut the reeds to tie them.
Suddenly I heard him cry, "Papa, papa, here is a large chest come for
us; come and take it." I ran to him, and saw it was the very chest we
had seen floating, and which we had taken for the boat at a distance;
the waves had left it in our bay, entangled in the reeds, which grew
abundantly here. It was almost buried in the sand. We could not remove
it alone, and, notwithstanding our curiosity, we were compelled to wait
for the arrival of my sons. We returned to our work, and it was pretty
well advanced when the tired and hungry party returned with their
cart-load of bamboos. We rested, and sat down to eat our goose. Guavas
and sweet acorns, which had escaped the storm, and which my sons
brought, completed our repast. Fritz had killed a large bird in the
marsh, which I took at first for a young flamingo; but it was a young
cassowary, the first I had seen in the island. This bird is remarkable
for its extraordinary size, and for its plumage, so short and fine that
it seems rather to be hair than feathers. I should have liked to have
had it alive to ornament our poultry-yard, and it was so young we might
have tamed it; but Fritz's unerring aim had killed it at once. I wished
to let my wife see this rare bird, which, if standing on its webbed
feet, would have been four feet high; I therefore forbade them to
meddle with it.

[Illustration: "Fritz, with a strong hatchet forced the chest open, and
we all eagerly crowded to see the contents."]

As we ate, we talked of the chest, and our curiosity being stronger than
our hunger, we swallowed our repast hastily, and then ran down to the
shore. We were obliged to plunge into the water up to the waist, and
then had some difficulty to extricate it from the weed and slime, and to
push it on shore. No sooner had we placed it in safety than Fritz, with
a strong hatchet, forced it open, and we all eagerly crowded to see the
contents. Fritz hoped it would be powder and fire-arms; Jack, who was
somewhat fond of dress, and had notions of elegance, declared in favour
of clothes, and particularly of linen, finer and whiter than that which
his mother wove; if Ernest had been there, books would have been his
desire; for my own part, there was nothing I was more anxious for than
European seeds, particularly corn; Francis had a lingering wish that the
chest might contain some of those gingerbread cakes which his grandmamma
used to treat him with in Europe, and which he had often regretted; but
he kept this wish to himself, for fear his brothers should call him
"little glutton," and assured us that he should like a little
pocket-knife, with a small saw, better than anything in the world; and
he was the only one who had his wish. The chest was opened, and we saw
that it was filled with a number of trifling things likely to tempt
savage nations, and to become the means of exchange,--principally glass
and iron ware, coloured beads, pins, needles, looking-glasses,
children's toys, constructed as models, such as carts, and tools of
every sort; amongst which we found some likely to be useful, such as
hatchets, saws, planes, gimlets, &c.; besides a collection of knives, of
which Francis had the choice; and scissors, which were reserved for
mamma, her own being nearly worn out. I had, moreover, the pleasure of
finding a quantity of nails of every size and kind, besides iron hooks,
staples, &c, which I needed greatly. After we had examined the contents,
and selected what we wanted immediately, we closed up the chest, and
conveyed it to our magazine at Tent House. We had spent so much time in
our examination, that we had some difficulty to finish propping our
trees, and to arrive at home before it was dark. We found my wife
somewhat uneasy at our lengthened absence, but our appearance soon
calmed her. "Mother," said I, "I have brought back all your chickens to
crowd under your wing."

"And we have not come back empty-handed," said Jack. "Look, mamma; here
are a beautiful pair of scissors, a large paper of needles, another of
pins, and a thimble! How rich you are now! And when you get well, you
can make me a pretty waistcoat and a pair of trousers, for I am in great
want of them."

"And I, mamma," said Francis, "have brought you a mirror, that you may
arrange your cap; you have often been sorry papa did not remember to
bring one from the ship. This was intended for the savages, and I will
begin with you."

"I believe I rather resemble one now," said my good Elizabeth, arranging
the red and yellow silk handkerchief which she usually wore on her head.

"Only, mamma," said Jack, "when you wear the comical pointed bonnet
which Ernest made you."

"What matters it," said she, "whether it be pointed or round? It will
protect me from the sun, and it is the work of my Ernest, to whom I am
much obliged."

Ernest, with great ingenuity and patience, had endeavoured to plait his
mother a bonnet of the rice-straw; he had succeeded; but not knowing how
to form the round crown, he was obliged to finish it in a point, to the
great and incessant diversion of his brothers.

"Mother," said Ernest, in his usual grave and thoughtful tone, "I
should not like you to look like a savage; therefore, as soon as I
regain the use of my hand, my first work shall be to make you a bonnet,
which I will take care shall be formed with a round crown, as you will
lend me one of your large needles, and I will take, to sew the crown on,
the head of either Jack or Francis."

"What do you mean? My head!" said they both together.

"Oh, I don't mean to take it off your shoulders," said he; "it will only
be necessary that one of you should kneel down before me, for a day
perhaps, while I use your head as a model; and you need not cry out much
if I should chance to push my needle in."

This time the philosopher had the laugh on his side, and his tormentors
were silenced.

We now explained to my wife where we had found the presents we had
brought her. My offerings to her were a light axe, which she could use
to cut her fire-wood with, and an iron kettle, smaller and more
convenient than the one she had. Fritz had retired, and now came in
dragging with difficulty his huge cassowary. "Here, mamma," said he, "I
have brought you a little chicken for your dinner;" and the astonishment
and laughter again commenced. The rest of the evening was spent in
plucking the bird, to prepare part of it for next day. We then retired
to rest, that we might begin our labour early next morning. Ernest chose
to remain with his books and his mother, for whom he formed with the
mattresses a sort of reclining chair, in which she was able to sit up in
bed and sew. Thus she endured a confinement of six weeks, without
complaint, and in that time got all our clothes put into good order.
Francis had nearly betrayed our secret once, by asking his mamma to make
him a mason's apron. "A mason's apron!" said she; "are you going to
build a house, child?"

"I meant to say a gardener's apron," said he.

His mamma was satisfied, and promised to comply with his request.

In the mean time, my three sons and I laboured assiduously to get the
garden into order again, and to raise the terraces, which we hoped might
be a defence against future storms. Fritz had also proposed to me to
construct a stone conduit, to bring the water to our kitchen-garden from
the river, to which we might carry it back, after it had passed round
our vegetable-beds. This was a formidable task, but too useful an affair
to be neglected; and, aided by the geometrical skill of Fritz, and the
ready hands of my two younger boys, the conduit was completed. I took an
opportunity, at the same time, to dig a pond above the garden, into
which the conduit poured the water; this was always warm with the sun,
and, by means of a sluice, we were able to disperse it in little
channels to water the garden. The pond would also be useful to preserve
small fish and crabs for use. We next proceeded to our embankment. This
was intended to protect the garden from any extraordinary overflow of
the river, and from the water running from the rocks after heavy rains.
We then laid out our garden on the same plan as before, except that I
made the walks wider, and not so flat; I carried one directly to our
house, which, in the autumn, I intended to plant with shrubs, that my
wife might have a shady avenue to approach her garden; where I also
planned an arbour, furnished with seats, as a resting-place for her. The
rocks were covered with numerous climbing plants, bearing every variety
of elegant flower, and I had only to make my selection.

All this work, with the enclosing the garden with palisades of bamboo,
occupied us about a fortnight, in which time our invalids made great
progress towards their recovery. After the whole was finished, Francis
entreated me to begin his gallery. My boys approved of my plan, and
Fritz declared that the house was certainly comfortable and commodious,
but that it would be wonderfully improved by a colonnade, with a little
pavilion at each end, and a fountain in each pavilion.

"I never heard a word of these pavilions," said I.

"No," said Jack, "they are our own invention. The colonnade will be
called the _Franciade_; and we wish our little pavilions to be named,
the one _Fritzia_, the other _Jackia_, if you please."

I agreed to this reasonable request, and only begged to know how they
would procure water for their fountains. Fritz undertook to bring the
water, if I would only assist them in completing this little scheme, to
give pleasure to their beloved mother. I was charmed to see the zeal and
anxiety of my children to oblige their tender mother. Her illness seemed
to have strengthened their attachment; they thought only how to console
and amuse her. She sometimes told me she really blessed the accident,
which had taught her how much she was valued by all around her.

       *       *       *       *       *


CHAPTER XL.

The next day was Sunday,--our happy Sabbath for repose and quiet
conversation at home. After passing the day in our usual devotions and
sober reading, my three elder boys requested my permission to walk
towards our farm in the evening. On their return, they informed me it
would be necessary to give a few days' labour to our plantations of
maize and potatoes. I therefore determined to look to them.

Though I was out early next morning, I found Fritz and Jack had been
gone some time, leaving only the ass in the stables, which I secured for
my little Francis. I perceived, also, that they had dismounted my cart,
and carried away the wheels, from which I concluded that they had met
with some tree in their walk the preceding evening, suitable for the
pipes for their fountains, and that they had now returned to cut it
down, and convey it to Tent House. As I did not know where to meet with
them, I proceeded with Francis on the ass to commence his favourite
work. I drew my plan on the ground first. At the distance of twelve feet
from the rock which formed the front of our house, I marked a straight
line of fifty feet, which I divided into ten spaces of five feet each
for my colonnade; the two ends were to be reserved for the two pavilions
my sons wished to build. I was busy in my calculations, and Francis
placing stakes in the places where I wished to dig, when the cart drove
up with our two good labourers. They had, as I expected, found the
evening before a species of pine, well adapted for their pipes. They had
cut down four, of fifteen or twenty feet in length, which they had
brought on the wheels of the cart, drawn by the four animals. They had
had some difficulty in transporting them to the place; and the greatest
still remained--the boring the trunks, and then uniting them firmly. I
had neither augers nor any tools fit for the purpose. I had, certainly,
constructed a little fountain at Falcon's Nest; but the stream was near
at hand, and was easily conveyed by cane pipes to our tortoise-shell
basin. Here the distance was considerable, the ground unequal, and, to
have the water pure and cool, underground pipes were necessary. I
thought of large bamboos, but Fritz pointed out the knots, and the
difficulty of joining the pieces, and begged me to leave it to him, as
he had seen fountains made in Switzerland, and had no fears of success.
In the mean time, all hands set to work at the arcade. We selected
twelve bamboos of equal height and thickness, and fixed them securely in
the earth, at five feet from each other. These formed a pretty
colonnade, and were work enough for one day.

We took care to divert all inquiries at night, by discussing the
subjects which our invalids had been reading during the day. The little
library of our captain was very choice; besides the voyages and travels,
which interested them greatly, there was a good collection of
historians, and some of the best poets, for which Ernest had no little
taste. However, he requested earnestly that he might be of our party
next day, and Francis, good-naturedly, offered to stay with mamma,
expecting, no doubt, Ernest's congratulations on the forward state of
the Franciade. The next morning Ernest and I set out, his brothers
having preceded us. Poor Ernest regretted, as we went, that he had no
share in these happy schemes for his mother. I reminded him, however, of
his dutiful care of her during her sickness, and all his endeavours to
amuse her. "And, besides," added I, "did you not make her a
straw bonnet?"

"Yes," said he, "and I now remember what a frightful shape it was. I
will try to make a better, and will go to-morrow morning to choose
my straw."

As we approached Tent House, we heard a most singular noise, echoing at
intervals amongst the rocks. We soon discovered the cause; in a hollow
of the rocks I saw a very hot fire, which Jack was blowing through a
cane, whilst Fritz was turning amidst the embers a bar of iron. When it
was red hot, they laid it on an anvil I had brought from the ship, and
struck it alternately with hammers to bring it to a point.

"Well done, my young smiths," said I; "we ought to try all things, and
keep what is good. Do you expect to succeed in making your auger? I
suppose that is what you want."

"Yes, father," said Fritz; "we should succeed well enough if we only had
a good pair of bellows; you see we have already got a tolerable point."

Now Fritz could not believe anything was impossible. He had killed a
kangaroo the evening before, and skinned it. The flesh made us a dinner;
of the skin he determined to make a pair of bellows. He nailed it, with
the hair out, not having time to tan it, to two flat pieces of wood,
with holes in them; to this he added a reed for the pipe; he then fixed
it by means of a long cord and a post, to the side of his fire, and
Jack, with his hand or his foot, blew the fire, so that the iron was
speedily red hot, and quite malleable. I then showed them how to twist
the iron into a screw,--rather clumsy, but which would answer the
purpose tolerably well. At one end they formed a ring, in which we
placed a piece of wood transversely, to enable them to turn the screw.
We then made a trial of it. We placed a tree on two props, and Fritz and
I managed the auger so well, that we had our tree pierced through in a
very little time, working first at one end and then at the other. Jack,
in the mean time, collected the shavings we made, which he deposited in
the kitchen for his mother's use, to kindle the fire. Ernest, meanwhile,
was walking about, making observations, and giving his advice to his
brothers on the architecture of their pavilions, till, seeing they were
going to bore another tree, he retired into the garden to see the
embankment. He returned delighted with the improvements, and much
disposed to take some employment. He wanted to assist in boring the
tree, but we could not all work at it. I undertook this labour myself,
and sent him to blow the bellows, while his brothers laboured at the
forge, the work not being too hard for his lame hand. My young smiths
were engaged in flattening the iron to make joints to unite their pipes;
they succeeded very well, and then began to dig the ground to lay them.
Ernest, knowing something of geometry and land-surveying, was able to
give them some useful hints, which enabled them to complete their work
successfully. Leaving them to do this, I employed myself in covering in
my long colonnade. After I had placed on my columns a plank cut in
arches, which united them, and was firmly nailed to them, I extended
from it bamboos, placed sloping against the rock, and secured to it by
cramps of iron, the work of my young smiths. When my bamboo roof was
solidly fixed, the canes as close as possible, I filled the interstices
with a clay I found near the river, and poured gum over it; I had thus
an impervious and brilliant roof, which appeared to be varnished, and
striped green and brown. I then raised the floor a foot, in order that
there might be no damp, and paved it with the square stones I had
preserved when we cut the rock. It must be understood that all this was
the work of many days. I was assisted by Jack and Fritz, and by Ernest
and Francis alternately, one always remaining with his mother, who was
still unable to walk. Ernest employed his time, when at home, in making
the straw bonnet, without either borrowing his brother's head for a
model, or letting any of them know what he was doing. Nevertheless, he
assisted his brothers with their pavilions by his really valuable
knowledge. They formed them very elegantly,--something like a Chinese
pagoda. They were exactly square, supported on four columns, and rather
higher than the gallery. The roofs terminated in a point, and resembled
_a large parasol_. The fountains were in the middle; the basins,
breast-high, were formed of the shells of two turtles from our
reservoir, which were mercilessly sacrificed for the purpose, and
furnished our table abundantly for some days. They succeeded the
cassowary, which had supplied us very seasonably: its flesh tasted like
beef, and made excellent soup.

But to return to the fountains. Ernest suggested the idea of ornamenting
the end of the perpendicular pipe, which brought the water to the basin,
with shells; every sort might be collected on the shore, of the most
brilliant colours, and curious and varied shapes. He was passionately
devoted to natural history, and had made a collection of these,
endeavouring to classify them from the descriptions he met with in the
books of voyages and travels. Some of these, of the most dazzling
beauty, were placed round the pipe, which had been plastered with clay;
from thence the water was received into a _volute_, shaped like an
antique urn, and again was poured gracefully into the large
turtle-shell; a small channel conveyed it then out of the pavilions. The
whole was completed in less time than I could have imagined, and greatly
surpassed my expectations; conferring an inestimable advantage on our
dwelling, by securing us from the heat. All honour was rendered to
Master Francis, the inventor, and _The Franciade_ was written in large
letters on the middle arch; _Fritzia_ and _Jackia_ were written in the
same way over the pavilions. Ernest alone was not named; and he seemed
somewhat affected by it. He had acquired a great taste for rambling and
botanizing, and had communicated it also to Fritz, and now that our
labours were ended at Tent House, they left us to nurse our invalid, and
made long excursions together, which lasted sometimes whole days. As
they generally returned with some game, or some new fruit, we pardoned
their absence, and they were always welcome. Sometimes they brought a
kangaroo, sometimes an agouti, the flesh of which resembles that of a
rabbit, but is richer; sometimes they brought wild ducks, pigeons, and
even partridges. These were contributed by Fritz, who never went out
without his gun and his dogs. Ernest brought us natural curiosities,
which amused us much,--stones, crystals, petrifactions, insects,
butterflies of rare beauty, and flowers, whose colours and fragrance no
one in Europe can form an idea of. Sometimes he brought fruit, which we
always administered first to our monkey, as taster: some of them proved
very delicious. Two of his discoveries, especially, were most valuable
acquisitions,--the guajaraba, on the large leaf of which one may write
with a pointed instrument, and the fruit of which, a sort of grape, is
very good to eat; also the date-palm, every part of which is so useful,
that we were truly thankful to Heaven, and our dear boys, for the
discovery. Whilst young, the trunk contains a sort of _marrow_, very
delicious. The date-palm is crowned by a head, formed of from forty to
eighty leafy branches, which spread round the top. The dates are
particularly good about half-dried; and my wife immediately began to
preserve them. My sons could only bring the fruit now, but we purposed
to transplant some of the trees themselves near our abode. We did not
discourage our sons in these profitable expeditions; but they had
another aim, which I was yet ignorant of. In the mean time, I usually
walked with one of my younger sons towards Tent House, to attend to our
garden, and to see if our works continued in good condition to receive
mamma, who daily improved; but I insisted on her being completely
restored, before she was introduced to them. Our dwelling looked
beautiful amongst the picturesque rocks, surrounded by trees of every
sort, and facing the smooth and lovely Bay of Safety. The garden was not
so forward as I could have wished; but we were obliged to be patient,
and hope for the best.

       *       *       *       *       *


CHAPTER XLI.

One day, having gone over with my younger sons to weed the garden, and
survey our possessions, I perceived that the roof of the gallery wanted
a little repair, and called Jack to raise for me the rope ladder which I
had brought from Falcon's Nest, and which had been very useful while we
were constructing the roof; but we sought for it everywhere; it could
not be found; and as we were quite free from _robbers_ in our island, I
could only accuse my elder sons, who had doubtless carried it off to
ascend some tall cocoa-nut tree. Obliged to be content, we walked into
the garden by the foot of the rocks. Since our arrival, I had been
somewhat uneasy at hearing a dull, continued noise, which appeared to
proceed from this side. The forge we had passed, now extinguished, and
our workmen were absent. Passing along, close to the rocks, the noise
became more distinct, and I was truly alarmed. Could it be an
earthquake? Or perhaps it announced some volcanic explosion. I stopped
before that part of the rock where the noise was loudest; the surface
was firm and level; but from time to time, blows and falling stones
seemed to strike our ears. I was uncertain what to do; curiosity
prompted me to stay, but a sort of terror urged me to remove my child
and myself. However, Jack, always daring, was unwilling to go till he
had discovered the cause of the phenomenon. "If Francis were here," said
he, "he would fancy it was the wicked gnomes, working underground, and
he would be in a fine fright. For my part, I believe it is only people
come to collect the salt in the rock."

"People!" said I; "you don't know what you are saying, Jack; I could
excuse Francis and his _gnomes_,--it would be at least a poetic fancy,
but yours is quite absurd. Where are the people to come from?"

"But what else can it be?" said he. "Hark! you may hear them strike the
rock."

"Be certain, however," said I, "there are no people." At that moment, I
distinctly heard human voices, speaking, laughing, and apparently
clapping their hands. I could not distinguish any words; I was struck
with a mortal terror; but Jack, whom nothing could alarm, clapped his
hands also, with joy, that he had guessed right. "What did I say, papa?
Was I not right? Are there not people within the rock?--friends, I
hope." He was approaching the rock, when it appeared to me to be
shaking; a stone soon fell down, then another. I seized hold of Jack, to
drag him away, lest he should be crushed by the fragments of rock. At
that moment another stone fell, and we saw two heads appear through the
opening,--the heads of Fritz and Ernest. Judge of our surprise and joy!
Jack was soon through the opening, and assisting his brothers to
enlarge it. As soon as I could enter, I stepped in, and found myself in
a real grotto, of a round form, with a vaulted roof, divided by a narrow
crevice, which admitted the light and air. It was, however, better
lighted by two large gourd lamps. I saw my long ladder of ropes
suspended from the opening at the top, and thus comprehended how my sons
had penetrated into this recess, which it was impossible to suspect the
existence of from the outside. But how had they discovered it? and what
were they making of it? These were my two questions. Ernest replied at
once to the last. "I wished," said he, "to make a resting-place for my
mother, when she came to her garden. My brothers have each built some
place for her, and called it by their name. I had a desire that some
place in our island might be dedicated to Ernest, and I now present you
the _Grotto Ernestine_."

"And after all," said Jack, "it will make a pretty dwelling for the
first of us that marries."

"Silence, little giddy-pate," said I; "where do you expect to find a
wife in this island? Do you think you shall discover one among the
rocks, as your brothers have discovered the grotto? But tell me, Fritz,
what directed you here."

"Our good star, father," said he. "Ernest and I were walking round these
rocks, and talking of his wish for a resting-place for my mother on her
way to the garden. He projected a tent; but the path was too narrow to
admit it; and the rock, heated by the sun, was like a stove. We were
considering what we should do, when I saw on the summit of the rock a
very beautiful little unknown quadruped. From its form I should have
taken it for a young chamois, if I had been in Switzerland; but Ernest
reminded me that the chamois was peculiar to cold countries, and he
thought it was a gazelle or antelope; probably the gazelle of Guinea or
Java, called by naturalists the chevrotain. You may suppose I tried to
climb the rock on which this little animal remained standing, with one
foot raised, and its pretty head turning first to one side and then to
the other; but it was useless to attempt it here, where the rock was
smooth and perpendicular; besides, I should have put the gazelle to
flight, as it is a timid and wild animal. I then remembered there was a
place near Tent House where a considerable break occurred in the chain
of rocks, and we found that, with a little difficulty, the rock might be
scaled by ascending this ravine. Ernest laughed at me, and asked me if I
expected the antelope would wait patiently till I got to it? No matter,
I determined to try, and I told him to remain; but he soon determined to
accompany me, for he fancied that in the fissure of a rock he saw a
flower of a beautiful rose-colour, which was unknown to him. My learned
botanist thought it must be an _erica_, or heath, and wished to
ascertain the fact. One helping the other, we soon got through all
difficulties, and arrived at the summit; and here we were amply repaid
by the beautiful prospect on every side. We will talk of that
afterwards, father; I have formed some idea of the country which these
rocks separate us from. But to return to our grotto. I went along, first
looking for my pretty gazelle, which I saw licking a piece of rock,
where doubtless she found some salt. I was hardly a hundred yards from
her, my gun ready, when I was suddenly stopped by a crevice, which I
could not cross, though the opening was not very wide. The pretty
quadruped was on the rock opposite to me; but of what use would it have
been to shoot it, when I could not secure it. I was obliged to defer it
till a better opportunity offered, and turned to examine the opening,
which appeared deep; still I could see that the bottom of the cavity was
white, like that of our former grotto. I called Ernest, who was behind
me, with his plants and stones, to impart to him an idea that suddenly
struck me. It was, to make this the retreat for my mother. I told him
that I believed the floor of the cave was nearly on a level with the
path that led to the garden, and we had only to make an opening in the
form of a natural grotto, and it would be exactly what he wished. Ernest
was much pleased with the idea, and said he could easily ascertain the
level by means of a weight attached to a string; but though he was
startled at the difficulty of descending to our labour every day, and
returning in the evening, he would not agree to my wish of beginning at
the outside of the rock, as we had done in our former grotto, He had
several reasons for wishing to work from within. 'In the first place,'
said he, 'it will be so much cooler this summer weather; we should be
soon unable to go on labouring before the burning rock; then our path is
so narrow, that we should not know how to dispose of the rubbish; in the
interior, it will serve us to make a bench round the grotto; besides, I
should have such pleasure in completing it secretly, and unsuspected,
without any assistance or advice except yours, my dear Fritz, which I
accept with all my heart; so pray find out some means of descending and
ascending readily.'

"I immediately recollected your rope ladder, father; it was forty feet
long, and we could easily fasten it to the point of the rock. Ernest was
delighted and sanguine. We returned with all speed. We took first a roll
of cord and some candles; then the rope ladder, which we rolled up as
well as we could, but had great difficulty in conveying it up the rock;
once or twice, when the ascent was very difficult, we were obliged to
fasten a cord to it, and draw it up after us; but determination,
courage, and perseverance overcame all obstacles. We arrived at the
opening, and, on sounding it, we were glad to find our ladder would be
long enough to reach the bottom. We then measured the outside of the
rock, and ascertained that the floor of the grotto was near the same
level as the ground outside. We remembered your lessons, father, and
made some experiments to discover if it contained mephitic air. We first
lighted some candles, which were not extinguished; we then kindled a
large heap of sticks and dried grass, which-burned well, the smoke
passing through the opening like a chimney. Having no uneasiness about
this, we deferred our commencement till the next day. Then we lighted
the forge, and pointed some iron bars we found in the magazine; these
were to be our tools to break open the rock. We secured, also, your
chisel, as well as some hammers, and all our tools were thrown down
below; we then arranged two gourds to serve us for lamps; and when all
was ready, and our ladder firmly fixed, we descended ourselves; and we
have nothing more to tell you, except that we were very glad when we
heard your voices outside, at the very time when our work was drawing to
an end. We were sure, when we distinguished your voices so clearly, that
we must be near the external air; we redoubled our efforts, and here we
are. Now tell us, father, are you pleased with our idea? and will you
forgive us for making a mystery of it?"

I assured them of my forgiveness, and my cordial approbation of their
manly and useful enterprise; and made Ernest happy by declaring that it
should always be called the _Grotto Ernestine_.

"Thanks to you all, my dear children," said I; "your dear mamma will now
prefer Tent House to Falcon's Nest, and will have no occasion to risk
breaking a limb in descending the winding staircase. I will assist you
to enlarge the opening, and as we will leave it all the simplicity of a
natural grotto, it will soon be ready."

