      [67] Most of the Jews of our day are the descendants of the
      Babylonian Jews, who did not return to Jerusalem after the
      Captivity, but remained in the province of Babylon until they
      were driven out, some four hundred or more years after Christ;
      the Babylonian, not the Jerusalem Talmud, being most commonly in
      use among them.


CHAPTER XXIX.

Causes that have diminished the Religios.--The Provincials and
Superiors of Convents.--The perfect Organization.--The Monks.--San
Franciscans.--Dominicans.--Carmelites.--The well-reputed Orders.--The
Jesuits.--The Nuns.--How Novices are procured.--Contrasted with a
Quaker Prison.--The poor deluded Nun.--A good old Quaker Woman not a
Saint.--Protestantism felt in Mexico.


THE RELIGIOUS ORDERS.

The monkish orders of Mexico have remained unchanged from the time of
their first establishment. We have seen that they have fallen off
immensely in numbers, but have increased immensely in efficiency, by
the termination of those internal controversies between the
Spanish-born and Creoles, and by enfranchisement from state control.
Not only are they now all native-born, but the Meztizos seem to be the
predominant race in the priesthood. The priesthood is not now so
inviting an employment as it was before the suppression of the
Inquisition. Miracles have ceased to be a profitable speculation, while
the revenue once paid to the monks has been followed by ill-suppressed
contempt. The employment once monopolized by the Spaniards being now
thrown open to general competition, there is less willingness to submit
to the despotism which ever reigns in religious houses than there was
in the times of the vice-kings. Hard fare, cruel treatment, and public
contempt have diminished the candidates for monastic orders, until the
old proverb--"He that can not do better, let him turn monk"--is not
unknown at Mexico. With the increase of liberty the number of nuns has
diminished, as violence can no longer be used in getting a girl into a
convent. For all these reasons the number of the _religios_ has rapidly
diminished, while the wealth and efficiency of the Church has
increased.

Having spoken of the bishops, the lords spiritual of Mexico, and the
controlling influence they exercise over a feeble government, we come
next to the second class of spiritual masters of the country--the heads
of orders, the provincials, and the heads of religious houses. These
two classes of dignitaries are usually elected for their known severity
of discipline, either by the procurement of the bishop, or through
fanaticism of the monks or nuns, who, having voluntarily made
themselves convicts and prisoners for life, now undertake to add to
their self-afflicted mortification by choosing for their head a
superior the most hateful of their number. The novice is taught that
the greatest favor with Heaven is to be obtained by implicit obedience
under most trying circumstances, and the more cruel the despotism they
unmurmuringly submit to, the greater will be the accumulation of good
works. But cursed to the lowest depths of Purgatory is that recluse who
dares to murmur even in his inmost thoughts; and if he so far forgets
his duty as to murmur aloud, then all the powers of the Church are
brought to crush his insubordination.

We have thus followed spiritual despotism through its various stages,
from the Pope to the bishops; from the bishops to the provincials of
religious orders; and then down to superiors of a community of half a
dozen monks or nuns, by whom immorality is pardonable, but who regard
disobedience or insubordination in the slightest particular "like the
sin of witchcraft and idolatry." Such is the perfect organization of
the papacy in all its parts, which, acting as one great secret,
political, social, and religious association, labors continually to
concentrate the riches of the nations at Rome as a common centre.

There is a peculiar feature in the Catholic Church in Mexico unknown in
other Catholic countries: it is the preponderance of the regular clergy
(monks) over the secular clergy. This is owing to Cortéz, who wrote to
the Emperor Charles V. to send him regulars, for the conversion of the
Indians, instead of seculars, assigning as a reason for this request
"that the latter display extravagant luxury, leave great wealth to
their natural children, and give great scandal to the newly-converted
Indians." Hence more than one half of the Mexican clergy are monks, and
wear the cowl; for at the time of the census of 1793, as we have seen,
there were in the city of Mexico 1646 monks, besides lay brothers,
against 550 secular priests, while in the fifteen convents for nuns
there were 923 of these female monks.


CHARACTER OF THE DIFFERENT ORDERS.

The reader has already become quite familiar with the Franciscan
fathers and their vows of poverty and self-mortification, and their
skill at playing for gold ounces. They have pretty well maintained that
reputation since the time of Friar Thomas Gage. But there are some
honorable exceptions to this rule, though few and far between. We have
already noticed how they were favored by Cortéz, and the result has
been that they are the richest fraternity in the republic. These holy
men of the Angelic Order of Saint Francis have lately discovered a new
source of wealth in renting their large central court to a Frenchman,
who occupies it with the best garden of plants in Mexico; and as the
convent occupies nearly a whole square in the central part of the city,
they have pierced the convent walls, and rented out shops upon the
business streets, while the soldiers of Santa Anna occupy the vacant
cloisters of the convent. In this "happy family," with all the immense
wealth of the establishment, the _donados_, and those monks who are so
poor as to have no friends, find but a miserable subsistence.

Of the Dominicans I have already spoken in connection with the
Inquisition. In their yard is the flag-stone which was used by them in
offering human sacrifice before the Revolution. There it is kept as a
relic and symbol of the power once enjoyed by the Church. There is yet
a lingering hope that there may be restored to these brethren the power
of roasting alive human beings. In speaking of depravity of morals, it
is hard to say which of the fraternities has reached the lowest level,
though common consent concedes the palm to the Dominicans.

The name of the Carmelites carries us back to the time of the Crusades;
but they are better known in Mexico as the former proprietors of the
_Desierto_, which Thomas Gage so touchingly describes. Their habitual
practice of self-denial and mortification, in appearance, while rioting
on the luxuries that devotees lavished upon them, has not been
forgotten. These holy brothers had a hand in the Inquisition as well as
the Dominicans. They were a set of scamps set to watch the purity of
other men's lives, while they themselves lived a life of habitual
profligacy. The ruins of their old convent, the _Desierto_, is still
one of the most attractive spots about the city. As the traveler
wanders among its ruined walls, he will find in the subterraneous cells
ring-bolts fastened in the walls, where poor prisoners for their faith
endured something more than self-mortification.

The monks of Santiago, San Augustin, and the Capuchins have all fine
convents, and are rich; but the monks of Saint James are the most
inveterate beggars.

The monks of San Fernando enjoy an enviable reputation compared with
the spotted sheep I have just been considering. They are late comers,
and have not learned all the ways of wickedness of the older orders.
Next come the "Brethren of the Profession," of whom it is pleasant to
speak, after saying so many hard things of their neighbors. They stand
so high as men of character and learning, that I am tempted to tell
their story on hearsay, for want of better authority. They were once
Jesuits, but when the royal _cebula_ of Carlos III. came for their
expulsion, these fathers had sustained so good a character for charity
and usefulness that they were allowed to return, on condition of
renouncing the name and peculiarities of that order. I am inclined to
believe this strange story to be substantially true, for clearly they
are of the Jesuits, and yet they are not Jesuits. The reputation which
they enjoyed in 1767 they still retain, and not only command the
respect of all classes of society in Mexico, but their chapel is the
fashionable church of the city, where genteel people resort to say
their prayers.

"The Brethren of the Holy Places of Jerusalem"--the Hieronomite monks,
are not numerous, and are known in the markets as lenders of money,
with the interest of which they support themselves and "the poor saints
of Jerusalem;" that is, a portion of those lazy, greasy, fighting Latin
monks at Jerusalem, that have been one of the causes of the present war
in Europe.

"The Hospitalers of Saint John" (_Juanos_) are better known for their
exploits in the time of the Crusaders than for any thing they have done
in Mexico.

It would be a thrice-told tale to repeat the story of the Jesuits; the
world knows that too well already. The details of their proceedings in
Mexico till the time of their expulsion have been too often written by
their enemies. Their great prosperity and their great wealth made them
the envy of the other orders, as corrupt and depraved as themselves,
but not so dangerous, because they had reached that point at which
depravity ceases to contaminate. Dirty, greasy monks could not endure
an order that wore the garb of gentlemen, and were in favor with the
aristocracy, while they themselves were despised.

This envy was all-powerful with them, and led, for a time, to the
laying aside of their own private bickerings, and uniting in the
crusade against the common enemy, the Jesuits, and acting in harmony
with the political power.


NUNNERIES.

The Church has always made much of the nuns. It has ever been the
custom of the priesthood to endeavor to throw a veil of romance over
the very unromantic way of life followed by females who have shut
themselves up for life in a place hardly equal to a second-class
state-prison. Woman has an important place which God has assigned her
in the world; but when she separates herself from the family circle,
and elbows her way to the rostrum, where, with a semi-masculine attire,
and with a voice not intended for oratory, she harangues a tittering
crowd upon the rights of women to perform the duties of men; or goes to
the opposite extreme, and shuts herself up within high stone walls to
avoid the society of the other sex, she equally sins against her own
nature, and not only brings misery upon herself, but inflicts upon
society the evils of a pernicious example, and furnishes a theme for
all kinds of scandal.

Proud families who have portionless daughters; relatives who desire to
get rid of heirs to coveted estates; convents in want of funds and
endowments,[68] or a pretty victim for the public entertainment on
taking the veil; friends who have unmarriageable women on their hands;
and romantic young misses, ambitious of playing the queen for a day at
the cost of being a prisoner for life, have all contributed to populate
the fifteen nunneries of the city of Mexico. In the flourishing times
of the Inquisition, this business of inveigling choice victims into
convents was more profitable, for then murmuring could be crushed into
silence, and parents dreaded to oppose the wretched pimps of
superstition who came to inveigle their daughters into convents.


NUNNERIES AND PRISONS.

The Quaker prison of Philadelphia is a paradise compared with such a
place as this. If the reader has ever placed his eye at the keeper's
eye-hole in that prison, he must have seen in many a cell a cheerful
face, and the appearance of as much comfort as is compatible with an
imprisoned condition; for ministering angels have been there--mothers
in Israel, who have torn themselves from their domestic duties for a
little time to minister consolation to the very criminals in prison;
and, now that the prison-door has separated the poor wretch forever
from society, whose laws have been outraged, she, by her kindness and
teaching, has led the convict to look to Heaven with a hope of
forgiveness, and daily to pray for those he has injured, while he reads
in the holy book which she gave him, that a repenting thief accompanied
the Son of God to Paradise.

Let us turn from such an unpoetical scene as this, which that cheerful
prison presents, to the convent of Santa Teresa, the most celebrated of
all the ten or fifteen nunneries now in operation about the city of
Mexico. In a cold, damp, comfortless cell, kneeling upon the pavement,
we may see a delicate woman mechanically repeating her daily-imposed
penance of Latin prayers, before the image of a favorite saint and a
basin of holy water. This self-regulating, automaton praying machine,
as she counts off the number of allotted prayers by the number of beads
upon her rosary, beats into her bosom the sharp edge of an iron cross
that rests within her shirt of sacking-cloth, until, nature and her
task exhausted, she throws herself down upon a wooden bed, so
ingeniously arranged as to make sleep intolerable.[69] This poor victim
of self-inflicted daily torture, half crazed from insufficient food,
and sleep, and clothing, has endured all this misery to accumulate a
stock of good works for the use of less meritorious sinners, besides
the amount necessary to carry herself to heaven; for penance, and not
repentance, is this poor pagan's password for salvation.

The old Quakeress is not a fashionable saint, for she never dreamed of
this huxter business in spiritual affairs. Out of the overflowing
goodness of her heart, she had tried to lighten the miseries of life in
her own humble and quiet way, and found her happiness in seeing all
about her made comfortable. The money that others expended in buying
masses for the repose of their own souls and those of their relatives
after death, she expended in ministering to soul and body in this
world, leaving to God above the affairs of departed spirits, to deal
with them according to His mercy. She never presumed to add to the
torments of this life, or undertook to lighten the torments of the
departed. Her duties lay all in this world, and when her labors were
ended, she quietly lay down in death, leaving her future condition to
God. She never would pierce her bosom with an iron cross, though it had
often been pierced by the trials of life. She has seen enough of real
poverty and mortification, but never dreamed of such a thing as poverty
and mortification self-imposed, by wearing upon her flesh a garment of
sacking-cloth, or the ingenious invention of a bed so contrived as to
deprive herself of wholesome sleep. Images and holy water occupy no
place in her creed, though soap and water are almost too prominent. She
did her good deeds from a sense of duty which she owed to her kind, and
from the pleasure that it gave her to relieve misery while discharging
the ordinary duties of life, and never dreamed of the sweet odor her
good works left behind her--an odor which followed her to heaven--an
odor more acceptable to the Almighty than all the endowments she might
have left to pay for masses for the repose of her soul.


SELF-CASTIGATION.

There is so much that is monotonous in talking over the details of
affairs of the different orders of these female monks, from the Sister
of Guadalupe to the Sisterhood of Mercy, that it is as well to consider
them as one, as divers households of single women, who, to win
extraordinary favor of God, had separated themselves from their
families, and devoted their lives, some to repeating prayers and acts
of self-mortification, some to attending at the hospitals on the sick
or the blind, the idiotic, the deformed, the deaf and the dumb, others
to educating young ladies according to their peculiar notions of
education, others again consecrating themselves to pauperism, and
living upon charity; and when the daily supply of alms has failed,
these self-made poor sisters collect together, and there wait and pray,
and ring their bell, until some benevolent individual shall chance to
hear the well-known signal, and come and relieve them.

Such is the system of religion of all countries which bear the
Christian name, but where freedom does not exist, and where liberty can
not thrive. There is a trifling difference in its phases as exhibited
in the Greek and the Latin Churches, but the difference is too slight
for us outsiders to notice. In Mexico it exists in its most
unadulterated state, less contaminated than elsewhere with
Protestantism or other foreign substances.


PENANCES.

The old farce of self-castigation is here still enacted, as it has been
for three hundred years, but in the dark, _of course_; and blood, or
some substitute for it, is heard to fall upon the floor by the few
selected witnesses;[70] but a party of boys, report says, being
somewhat skeptical about the quality of this blood, concealed
themselves in the church, and when the pious farce began, took so
active a part in the sport upon the naked backs of the fathers, as to
inflict bodily injury, and break up the bloody entertainment. Still
Protestantism has been felt in Mexico, if not embraced, and the common
people look back to the happy time when the soldiers of their
Protestant conquerors made money plenty among them, and when
even-handed justice was dealt out alike to rich and poor, high and low.
Though the foreigners laughed at the fables of the priests and
ridiculed the monks, they yet were honest in their dealings with the
people instead of taking by violence. As there are no people so
besotted that they do not admire courage and honesty, so the _Paisano_
looks upon the heretic as a man of a superior race to himself.

      [68] I have selected three cases of taking the veil, to which I
      have added captions, which lift the veil from this practice of
      consecrating young girls to superstitions uses. They are
      extracted from Madame Calderon's Life in Mexico.

      _Taking the Veil._

      "I followed the guide back into the sacristy [of the convent],
      where the future nun was seated beside her grandmother, in the
      midst of her friends and relations, about thirty in all.

      "She was arrayed in pale blue satin, with diamonds, pearls, and a
      crown of flowers. She was literally smothered in blonde and
      jewels; and her face was flushed, as well it might be, for she
      had passed the day in taking leave of her friends at a fête they
      had given her, and had then, according to custom, been paraded
      through the town in all her finery. And now her last hour was at
      hand. When I came in, she rose and embraced me with as much
      cordiality as if we had known each other for years. Beside her
      sat the Madrina, also in white satin and jewels; all the
      relations being likewise decked out in their finest array. The
      nun kept laughing every now and then in the most unnatural and
      hysterical manner, as I thought, apparently to impress us with
      the conviction of her perfect happiness; for it is a great point
      of honor among girls similarly situated to look as cheerful and
      gay as possible--the same feeling, though in a different degree,
      which induces the gallant highwayman to jest in the presence of
      the multitude when the hangman's cord is within an inch of his
      neck; the same which makes a gallant general, whose life is
      forfeited, command his men to fire on him; the same which makes
      the Hindoo widow mount the funeral pile without a tear in her eye
      or a sigh on her lips. If the robber were to be strangled in the
      corner of his dungeon--if the general were to be put to death
      privately in his own apartment--if the widow were to be burned
      quietly on her own hearth--if the nun were to be secretly
      smuggled in at the convent gate like a bale of contraband goods,
      we might hear another tale. This girl was very young, but by no
      means pretty; on the contrary, rather _disgraciée par la nature_;
      and perhaps a knowledge of her own want of attractions may have
      caused the world to have few charms for her.

      "Suddenly the curtain was withdrawn, and the picturesque beauty
      of the scene within baffles all description. Beside the altar,
      which was in a blaze of light, was a perfect mass of crimson and
      gold drapery; the walls, the antique chairs, the table before
      which the priests sat, all hung with the same splendid material.
      The Bishop wore his superb mitre, and robes of crimson and gold,
      the attendant priests also glittering in crimson and gold
      embroidery.

      "In contrast to these, five-and-twenty figures, entirely robed in
      black from head to foot, were ranged on each side of the room,
      prostrate, their faces touching the ground, and in their hands
      immense lighted tapers. On the foreground was spread a purple
      carpet bordered round with a garland of freshly-gathered flowers,
      roses, and carnations, and heliotrope, the only things that
      looked real and living in the whole scene; and in the middle of
      this knelt the novice, still arrayed in her blue satin, white
      lace veil and jewels, and also with a great lighted taper in her
      hand.

      "The black nuns then rose and sang a hymn, every now and then
      falling on their faces and touching the floor with their
      foreheads. The whole looked like an incantation, or a scene in
      Robert le Diable. The novice was then raised from the ground and
      led to the feet of the Bishop, who examined her as to her
      vocation, and gave her his blessing, and once more the black
      curtain fell between us and them.

      "In the _second act_ she was lying prostrate on the floor,
      disrobed of her profane dress, and covered over with a black
      cloth, while the black figures kneeling around her chanted a
      hymn. She was now dead to the world. The sunbeams had faded away
      as if they would not look upon the scene, and all the light was
      concentrated in one great mass upon the convent group.

      "Again she was raised. All the blood had rushed into her face,
      and her attempt to smile was truly painful. She then knelt down
      before the Bishop, and received the benediction, with the sign of
      the cross, from a white hand with the pastoral ring. She then
      went round alone to embrace all the dark phantoms as they stood
      motionless, and as each dark shadow clasped her in its arms, it
      seemed like the dead welcoming a new arrival to the shades.

      "But I forget the sermon, which was delivered by a fat priest,
      who elbowed his way with some difficulty through the crowd to the
      grating, panting and in a prodigious heat, and ensconced himself
      in a great armchair close beside us. He assured her that she 'had
      chosen the good part, which could not be taken away from her;'
      that she was now one of the elect, 'chosen from among the
      wickedness and dangers of the world'--(picked out like a plum
      from a pie). He mentioned with pity and contempt those who were
      'yet struggling in the great Babylon,' and compared their
      miserable fate with hers, the Bride of Christ, who, after
      suffering a few privations here during a short term of years,
      should be received at once into a kingdom of glory. The whole
      discourse was well calculated to rally her fainting spirits, if
      fainting they were, and to inspire us with a great disgust for
      ourselves.

      "When the sermon was concluded the music again struck up; the
      heroine of the day came forward, and stood before the grating to
      take her last look of this wicked world. Down fell the black
      curtain. Up rose the relations, and I accompanied them into the
      sacristy. Here they coolly lighted their cigars, and very
      philosophically discoursed upon the exceeding good fortune of the
      new-made nun, and on her evident delight and satisfaction with
      her own situation. As we did not follow her behind the scenes, I
      could not give my opinion on this point. Shortly after, one of
      the gentlemen civilly led me to my carriage, and _so it
      was_."

      _A Victim for her Musical Powers._

      "In the convent of the Incarnation I saw another girl sacrificed
      in a similar manner. She was received there without a dowry, on
      account of the exceeding fineness of her voice. She little
      thought what a fatal gift it would prove to her. The most cruel
      part of all was that, wishing to display her fine voice to the
      public, they made her sing a hymn alone, on her knees, her arms
      extended in the form of a cross, before all the immense crowd:
      "Ancilla Christi sum," "The bride of Christ I am." She was a
      good-looking girl, fat and comely, who would probably have led a
      comfortable life in the world, for which she seemed well fitted;
      most likely without one touch of romance or enthusiasm in her
      composition; but, having the unfortunate honor of being niece to
      two _chanoines_, she was thus honorably provided for without
      expense in her nineteenth year. As might be expected, her voice
      faltered, and instead of singing, she seemed inclined to cry out.
      Each note came slowly, heavily, tremblingly; and at last she
      nearly fell forward exhausted, when two of the sisters caught and
      supported her."

      _A Victim of her Confessor._

      "She was in purple velvet, with diamonds and pearls, and a crown
      of flowers; the corsage of her gown was entirely covered with
      little bows of ribbon of divers colors, which her friends had
      given her, each adding one, like stones thrown on a cairn in
      memory of the departed. She had also short sleeves and white
      satin shoes.

      "Being very handsome, with fine black eyes, good teeth, and fresh
      color, and, above all, with the beauty of youth, for she is but
      eighteen, she was not disfigured by even this overloaded dress.
      Her mother, on the contrary, who was to act the part of Madrina,
      who wore a dress facsimile, and who was pale and sad, her eyes
      almost extinguished with weeping, looked like a picture of Misery
      in a ball-dress. In the adjoining room long tables were laid out,
      on which servants were placing refreshments for the fête about to
      be given on this joyous occasion. I felt somewhat shocked, and
      inclined to say with Paul Pry, 'Hope I don't intrude.'

      "----, however, was furious at the whole affair, which he said
      was entirely against the mother's consent, though that of the
      father had been obtained; and pointed out to me the confessor
      whose influence had brought it about. The girl herself was now
      very pale, but evidently resolved to conceal her agitation, and
      the mother seemed as if she could shed no more tears--quite
      exhausted with weeping. As the hour for the ceremony drew near,
      the whole party became more grave and sad, all but the priests,
      who were smiling and talking together in groups. The girl was not
      still a moment. She kept walking hastily through the house,
      taking leave of the servants, and naming, probably, her last
      wishes about every thing. She was followed by her younger
      sisters, all in tears.

      "But it struck six, and the priests intimated that it was time to
      move. She and her mother went down stairs alone, and entered the
      carriage which was to drive them through all the principal
      streets, to show the nun to the public, according to custom, and
      to let them take their last look, they of her and she of them. As
      they got in, we all crowded to the balconies to see her take
      leave of her house, her aunts saying, 'Yes, child, _despidete
      de tu casa_, take leave of your house, for you will never see
      it again!' Then came sobs from the sisters; and many of the
      gentlemen, ashamed of their emotion, hastily quitted the room. I
      hope, for the sake of humanity, I did not rightly interpret the
      look of constrained anguish which the poor girl threw from the
      window of the carriage at the home of her childhood.

      "At stated periods, indeed, the mother may hear her daughter's
      voice speaking to her as from the depths of the tomb, but she may
      never fold her in her arms, never more share in her joys or in
      her sorrows, or nurse her in sickness; and when her own last hour
      arrives, though but a few streets divide them, she may not give
      her dying blessing to the child who has been for so many years
      the pride of her eyes and heart.

      "They gave me an excellent place, quite close to the grating,
      beside the Countess de S----o; that is to say, a place to kneel
      on. A great bustle and much preparation seemed to be going on
      within the convent, and veiled figures were flitting about,
      whispering, arranging, &c. Sometimes a skinny old dame would come
      close to the grating, and, lifting up her veil, bestow upon the
      pensive public a generous view of a very haughty and very
      wrinkled visage of some seventy years standing, and beckon into
      the church for the major-domo of the convent (an excellent and
      profitable situation, by the way), or for padre this or that.
      Some of the holy ladies recognized and spoke to me through the
      grating.

      "But, at the discharge of fireworks outside the church, the
      curtain was dropped, for this was the signal that the nun and her
      mother had arrived. An opening was made in the crowd as they
      passed into the church, and the girl, kneeling down, was
      questioned by the bishop, but I could not make out the dialogue,
      which was carried on in a low voice. She then passed into the
      convent by a side door, and her mother, quite exhausted and
      nearly in hysterics, was supported through the crowd to a place
      beside us, in front of the grating. The music struck up; the
      curtain was again drawn aside. The scene was as striking here as
      in the convent of the Santa Teresa, but not so lugubrious. The
      nuns, all ranged around, and carrying lighted tapers in their
      hands, were dressed in mantles of bright blue, with a gold plate
      on the left shoulder. Their faces, however, were covered with
      deep black veils. The girl, kneeling in front, and also bearing a
      heavy lighted taper, looked beautiful, with her dark hair and
      rich dress, and the long black lashes resting on her glowing
      face. The churchmen near the illuminated and magnificently-decked
      altar formed, as usual, a brilliant background to the picture.
      The ceremony was the same as on the former occasion, but there
      was no sermon.

      "The most terrible thing to witness was the last, straining,
      anxious look which the mother gave her daughter through the
      grating. She had seen her child pressed to the arms of strangers
      and welcomed to her new home. She was no longer hers. All the
      sweet ties of nature had been rudely severed, and she had been
      forced to consign her, in the very bloom of youth and beauty, at
      the very age in which she most required a mother's care, and when
      she had but just fulfilled the promise of her childhood, to a
      living tomb. Still, as long as the curtain had not fallen, she
      could gaze upon her as upon one on whom, though dead, the
      coffin-lid is not yet closed.

      "But while the new-made nun was in a blaze of light and distinct
      on the foreground, so that we could mark each varying expression
      of her face, the crowd in the church, and the comparative
      faintness of the light, probably made it difficult for her to
      distinguish her mother; for, knowing that the end was at hand,
      she looked anxiously and hurriedly into the church, without
      seeming able to fix her eyes on any particular object, while her
      mother seemed as if her eyes were glazed, so intensely were they
      fixed upon her daughter.

      "Suddenly, and without any preparation, down fell the black
      curtain like a pall, and the sobs and tears of the family broke
      forth. One beautiful little child was carried out almost in fits.
      Water was brought to the poor mother; and at last, making our way
      with difficulty through the dense crowd, we got into the
      sacristy. 'I declare,' said the Countess ---- to me, wiping her
      eyes, 'it is worse than a marriage!' I expressed my horror at the
      sacrifice of a girl so young that she could not possibly have
      known her own mind. Almost all the ladies agreed with me,
      especially all who had daughters, but many of the old gentlemen
      were of a different opinion. The young men were decidedly of my
      way of thinking, but many young girls who were conversing
      together seemed rather to envy their friend, who had looked so
      pretty and graceful, and 'so happy,' and whose dress 'suited her
      so well,' and to have no objection to 'go and do likewise.'"

      [69] "The Santa Teresa, however, has few ornaments. It is not
      nearly so large as the _Encarnacion_, and admits but
      twenty-one nuns. At present there are, besides these, but three
      novices. Its very atmosphere seems holy, and its scrupulous and
      excessive cleanness makes all profane dwellings seem dirty by
      comparison. We were accompanied by a bishop, Señor Madrid, the
      same who assisted at the archbishop's consecration--a
      good-looking man, young and tall, and very splendidly dressed.
      His robes were of purple satin, covered with fine point-lace,
      with a large cross of diamonds and amethysts. He also wore a
      cloak of very fine purple cloth, lined with crimson velvet,
      crimson stockings, and an immense amethyst ring.

      "When he came in we found that the nuns had permission to put up
      their veils, rarely allowed in this order in the presence of
      strangers. They have a small garden and fountain, plenty of
      flowers, and some fruit; but all is on a smaller scale, and
      sadder than in the convent of the Incarnation. The refectory is a
      large room, with a long, narrow table running all round it--a
      plain deal table, with wooden benches; before the place of each
      nun, an earthen bowl, an earthen cup with an apple in it, a
      wooden plate, and a wooden spoon; at the top of the table a
      grinning skull, to remind them that even these indulgences they
      shall not long enjoy.

      "In one corner of the room is a reading-desk, a sort of elevated
      pulpit, where one reads aloud from some holy book while the
      others discuss their simple fare. They showed us a crown of
      thorns, which, on certain days, is worn by one of their number by
      way of penance. It is made of iron, so that the nails, entering
      inward, run into the head, and make it bleed. While she wears
      this on her head, a sort of wooden bit is put into her mouth, and
      she lies prostrate on her face till dinner is ended; and while in
      this condition her food is given her, of which she eats as much
      as she can, which probably is none.

      "We visited the different cells, and were horror-struck at the
      self-inflicted tortures. Each bed consists of a wooden plank
      raised in the middle, and, on days of penitence, crossed by
      wooden bars. The pillow is wooden, with a cross lying on it,
      which they hold in their hands when they lie down. The nun lies
      on this penitential couch, embracing the cross, and her feet
      hanging out, as the bed is made too short for her, upon
      principle. Round her waist she occasionally wears a band with
      iron points turning inward; on her breast a cross with nails, of
      which the points enter the flesh, of the truth of which I had
      melancholy ocular demonstration. Then, after having scourged
      herself with a whip covered with iron nails, she lies down for a
      few hours on the wooden bars, and rises at four o'clock. All
      these instruments of discipline, which each nun keeps in a little
      box beside her bed, look as if their fitting place would be in
      the dungeons of the Inquisition. They made me try their _bed
      and board_, which I told them would give me a very decided
      taste for early rising.

      "Yet they all seem as cheerful as possible, though it must be
      confessed that many of them look pale and unhealthy. It is said
      that, when they are strong enough to stand this mode of life,
      they live very long; but it frequently happens that girls who
      come into this convent are obliged to leave it from sickness long
      before the expiration of their novitiate. From the = opposite
      = was a juxtaposition has made the acquaintance of a friend.
      The trio was in progress, and the three voices of the woman, the
      man and the child inside sounded together. Attack Now it
      seemed impatient hunters at the time, his wild anzuschleichen.
      The family of three in this matter mißfiel him. It was quite
      nice, so talk to a threesome, but finally, talking was not
      his intention. And he knew that the company with the mask of
      his game the erotic desire between husband and wife always
      retarded, said the blaze, the fire will be addressed. You should
      have the conversation never forget his real intention, which
      he - which he was sure - she already knew understood. The fact
      that his efforts in this woman would not be in vain, had a lot
      of probabilities.

      It was in those crucial years when a woman begins to regret
      it, one never really beloved husband remained faithful to be and
      where the purple sunset its beauty you have one last urgent
      choice between the maternal and the feminine granted. The life
      that seemed long enough, this once a minute on the issue, for
      the last time the magnetic needle trembles of will between the
      hope of erotic experience and ultimate resignation. A woman
      then has the dangerous decision to their own fate or their
      children to live, wife or mother.

      And the Baron, sighted in these things, you just believed in
      this dangerous vacillation between Lebensglut and dedication to
      notice. You forgot constantly in conversation, to mention her
      husband, who apparently needs only its outer, but not by their
      elegant lifestyle irritated snobbery seemed to satisfy, and
      inwardly actually knew little of her child. A shadow of boredom,
      as the melancholy in the dark eyes veiled, stood on their lives
      and darkened their sensuality. The Baron decided to approach
      rapidly, but any appearance of haste should be avoided. On the
      contrary, he wanted to, as the angler withdraws the hook
      enticing, this new friendship itself outward indifference
      contrast, wanted to advertise, while he was in truth, the
      advertiser was.

      He took himself to a certain arrogance to outrieren, the difference
      of their social status herauszukehren sharp, and the idea
      appealed to him, only by emphasizing his high courage,
      an appearance by an aristocratic-sounding names and cold manners
      these lush, full body beautiful to be able to win. The hot game
      began to excite him, and that he is forced to be cautious. In the
      afternoon he remained in his room with the pleasant consciousness,
      and sought to be missed. But this absence was not so much of
      her remarks, which they actually targeted, but was designed
      for the poor boys to torment Edgar felt the whole afternoon
infinitely helpless and lost, with the boys' own stubborn loyalty
he waited the whole long hours incessantly on his friend.

      It would be him as an offense against the friendship appeared to
      go away or something to do alone. Trollte useless he is in the
      corridors around, and the later it became, the more his heart was
      filled with unhappiness at. In the turmoil of his imagination
      he already dreamed of an accident or unconsciously added insult
      and was already close to it, to cry in front of impatience and
      fear. When the Baron then came the evening to dinner, he was
      brilliantly received. Edgar jumped without looking at the
      warnings reputation of his mother and the astonishment of the
      other people to respect him, his chest covered stormily with lean
Ärmchen.

      "Where were you? Where are you been? "He cried hastily. "We have
      searched everywhere." The mother blushed at this unwelcome
      involvement pretty hard and said: '= Sois sage, Edgar! Assieds
      toi! = "(You always spoke French with him, although their language
      does not so much self-evident and it was awkward explanations
      fell slightly on sand.) Edgar obeyed, but did not, the Baron
      auszufragen. "But do not forget that the Lord Baron can do what
      he wants. Perhaps our society bored him. "This time they covered
      themselves, and the baron felt pleased with how this accusation
to advertise a compliment.

      The hunter in him woke up. He was inebriated, excited, as soon
      the right track to have found the game very close before
      the shot is now at ease.
      When we arrived, a small side door apparently opened of itself,
      and we entered, passing through long vaulted passages, and up
      steep winding stairs, till we found ourselves in a small railed
      gallery looking down directly upon the church. The scene was
      curious. About one hundred and fifty men, enveloped in cloaks and
      sarapes, their faces entirely concealed, were assembled in the
      body of the church. A monk had just mounted the pulpit, and the
      church was dimly lighted, except where he stood in bold relief,
      with his gay robes and cowl thrown back, giving a full view of
      his high, bald forehead and expressive face.

      "His discourse was a rude but very forcible and eloquent
      description of the torments prepared in hell for impenitent
      sinners. The effect of the whole was very solemn. It appeared
      like a preparation for the execution of a multitude of condemned
      criminals. When the discourse was finished, they all joined in
      prayer with much fervor and enthusiasm, beating their breasts and
      falling upon their faces. Then the monk stood up, and in a very
      distinct voice read several passages of Scripture descriptive of
      the sufferings of Christ. The organ then struck up the
      _Miserere_, and all of a sudden the church was plunged in
      profound darkness, all but a sculptured representation of the
      Crucifixion, which seemed to hang in the air illuminated. I felt
      rather frightened, and would have been glad to leave the church,
      but it would have been impossible in the darkness. Suddenly a
      terrible voice in the dark cried, 'My brothers! when Christ was
      fastened to the pillar by the Jews, he was _scourged_!' At these
      words the bright figure disappeared, and the darkness became
      total. Suddenly we heard the sound of hundreds of scourges
      descending upon the bare flesh. I can not conceive any thing more
      horrible. Before ten minutes had passed, the sound became
      _splashing_ from the blood that was flowing.

      "I have heard of these penitencies in Italian churches, and also
      that half of those who go there do not really scourge themselves;
      but here, where there is such perfect concealment, there seems no
      motive for deception. Incredible as it may seem, this awful
      penance continued, without intermission, for half an hour! If
      they scourged _each other_, their energy might be less
      astonishing.

      "We could not leave the church, but it was perfectly sickening;
      and had I not been able to take hold of the Señora ----'s hand,
      and feel something human beside me, I could have fancied myself
      transported into a congregation of evil spirits. Now and then,
      but very seldom, a suppressed groan was heard, and occasionally
      the voice of the monk encouraging them by ejaculations, or by
      short passages from Scripture. Sometimes the organ struck up, and
      the poor wretches; in a faint voice, tried to join in the
      _Miserere_. The sound of the scourging is indescribable. At the
      end of half an hour a little bell was rung, and the voice of the
      monk was heard calling upon them to desist; but such was their
      enthusiasm, that the horrible lashing continued louder and
      fiercer than ever.

      "In vain he entreated them not to kill themselves, and assured
      them that heaven would be satisfied, and that human nature could
      not endure beyond a certain point. No answer but the loud sound
      of the scourges, which are many of them of iron, with sharp
      points that enter the flesh. At length, as if they were perfectly
      exhausted, the sound grew fainter, and little by little ceased
      altogether. We then got up in the dark, and with great difficulty
      groped our way in the pitch darkness through the galleries and
      down the stairs till we reached the door, and had the pleasure of
      feeling the fresh air again. They say that the church floor is
      frequently covered with blood after one of these penances, and
      that a man died the other day in consequence of his
      wounds."--_Life in Mexico_, vol. ii. p. 213.


CHAPTER XXX.

The Necessity of large Capitals in Mexico.--The Finances and
Revenue.--The impoverished Creditors of the State.--Princely
Wealth of Individuals.


Having spoken of the Church, the great power which overawes the
government, it is also proper to mention the secondary powers: the men
of colossal fortune. In a country like Mexico, whose wealth arises from
mines of silver, these immense private fortunes are requisite to the
successful development of its resources. Large capitals must be
constantly hazarded on the single chance of striking a _bonanza_, in an
adventure as uncertain as a game of _monté_. The abandoned mine often
turns out to be the treasury of an untold fortune to the man who was
laughed at for attempting its restoration, while the most promising
adventure proves a total failure. The temptations to these adventures
are dazzling in the extreme. The ambitious man forgets the shame and
irretrievable ruin that follows a failure, and looks only to the
chances of winning a title of nobility and "a house full of silver."
Men who shun the gambling-table will adventure all on a mine, and in a
year or two they have passed from the memory of men, for they have
become poor. Again, a man of slender means has become rich in the
Mexican sense, which means a man of millions, and then he is at once
elevated by his admirers into that brilliant constellation which is the
"great bear" of the Mexican firmament.


STATE CREDITORS.

Still, these powerful private individuals prevent the consolidation of
any government, whether republican or dictatorial, and put far off that
necessary evil, the confiscation of the estates of the Church. If there
is a Congress in session, its members are influenced as our own are
influenced. They are swayed this way and that by private interests.
When Congress is not in session, they are constantly operating upon the
treasury, or, rather, the minister of the treasury is diving about
among them to raise the means to keep afloat from day to day. They will
not submit to their full share of taxation. When they advance money on
the pledge of some income, it is on the most onerous terms, so that at
least one quarter of the revenue of Mexico is used up in interest or
usury. Long experience has reduced the business of shaving the revenue
to a system. The most common way to do this is to buy up some claim at
twelve and a half cents on a dollar, and then couple it at par with a
loan of money on the assignment of some _rent_. Every thing is farmed
out, until at last, two years ago, Escandon proposed to farm the whole
foreign duties.

Many a time have I sat down in the large ante-room of the treasury to
look upon and study the characters of those who have come there to be
disappointed, when promises will no longer satisfy hunger. One poor
woman had got a new promise in 1851, and three months' interest, on
money _deposited_ with the Consolado of Vera Cruz, and invested in 1810
in building the great road of Perote. Santa Anna, on his return, gave
her a new order, and she presented it to the minister with bright
hopes, when he gave her fifteen dollars--all he had in the treasury.
The best way to collect a debt at Mexico is to convert it into a
foreign debt, if possible, and then, if there is a resident that stands
high with his minister, the matter meets with prompt attention. He that
can buy a foreign embassador at Mexico has made a fortune.


MEXICAN MILLIONAIRES.

I have spoken of two rich men of Mexico, the first Count of Regla, and
one who has succeeded to his mine. As I was standing on the Paséo, a
lad passed driving a fine span of mules. "That is the Count de Galvez,"
said my companion, "the son of the late Count Perez Galvez, the lucky
proprietor of the _bonanza_ in the mine of La Suz at Guanajuato."

"But that _bonanza_ has given out," said I.

"No matter; this boy's inheritance is sometimes estimated at
$9,000,000." A snug capital with which to begin the world!

Laborde, the Frenchman who projected and established the magnificent
garden at Cuarnavaca, and also built, from his private fortune, the
great Cathedral of Toluca, made and spent two princely fortunes in
successful mining, and at last ended his checkered career in poverty.
The Countess Ruhl, the mother of young Galvez, and her brother the
Count Ruhl, are also fortunate miners. The latter is now interested in
the _Real del Monte_. But the rich man of the Republic is the Marquis
de Jaral, in the small but rich mining department of Guanajuato. This
man's wealth surpasses that of all the three patriarchs put together. A
few years ago, the whole amount of his live-stock was set down by his
_administrador_ (overseer) at three million head. He then sent thirty
thousand sheep[71] to market, which yielded him from $2.50 to $3 a
head, or from $75,000 to $90,000 annually. The goats slaughtered on the
estate amounted to about the same number, and yielded about the same
amount of revenue. Besides all this, there is his annual product of
horses and cattle, and corn and grain fields many miles in extent.
Truly this Marquis of Jaral is a large farmer. But as I said of mining,
so I may also say that large capitals are necessary to carry on
agriculture successfully in the vast elevated plains of the northern,
or, rather, interior departments, for the whole value of the valley of
Jaral consists in an artificial lake, which an ancestor of the present
proprietor constructed before the Revolution for the purpose of
irrigation; for, without irrigation, his little kingdom would be
without value. I might speak of many other landed proprietors whose
estates are princely, but none are equal to Jaral. Indeed, all men of
wealth possess landed estates. It is the favorite investment for
successful miners to purchase a _few_ plantations, each of a dozen
leagues or so, under cultivation.

      [71] WARD'S _Mexico_, vol. ii. p. 470.


CHAPTER XXXI.

Visit to Pachuca and Real del Monte.--Otumba and Tulanzingo.--The grand
Canal of Huehuetoca.--The Silver Mines of Pachuca.--Hakal Silver
Mines.--Real del Monte Mines.--The Anglo-Mexican Mining Fever.--My
Equipment to descend a Mine.--The great Steam-pump.--Descending the
great Shaft.--Galleries and Veins of Ore.--Among the Miners one
thousand Feet under Ground.--The Barrel Process of refining
Silver.--Another refining Establishment.


An opposition line of stages upon the road that extends sixty miles
from the city of Mexico to the northern extremity of the valley has
brought down the fare to $3. It is a hard road to travel in the wet
season, and not a very interesting one at any time. Three miles of
causeway across the salt marsh brought us to the church and village of
our Lady of Guadalupe Hidalgo. From this place we passed for several
leagues along the barren tract that lies between the two salt-ponds of
San Cristobal and Tezcuco, and soon arrived at Tulanzingo, where the
great battle of the Free-masons was fought, and where eight poor
fellows lost their lives in the bloody encounter. This, and the
horrible battle of Otumba, which Cortéz fought a little way east of
this spot, are memorable events in the history of Mexico--more
memorable than they deserve to have been.

As we rode along the eastern rim of the valley, the sun was shining
brightly on the western hill that inclosed it. The opening made by the
canal of Huehuetoca was plain in sight. To read about this canal and to
derive an idea of it from books is to get an impression that here, at
least, the Spaniards did a wonderful work. But to look at it is to
dissipate all such complimentary notions. The engineer who planned it
may have been a skillful man, but the government that fettered his
movements, like all Spanish governments of those times, consisted of a
cross between fools and priests. Even those pious gamblers, the
Franciscans, had a finger in the business. After absorbing, for near a
hundred years, the revenue appropriated to completing the work, they
abandoned it to the merchants of Mexico, who finally finished it. The
pond that was to be drained by it, the Zumpango, was certainly an
insignificant affair. There was nothing farther of interest until we
arrived at Pachuca.

Pachuca is the oldest mining district in Mexico. In its immediate
vicinity are the most interesting silver mines of the republic. These
mines were the first that were worked in the country, and immediately
after the Conquest they were very productive. They were worked for
generations, and then abandoned; again resumed after lying idle for
nearly a century, and worked for almost another hundred years; and then
once more abandoned, and resumed again while I was in Mexico. They now
produce that princely revenue to Escandon and Company of which I have
already spoken.


THE HAKAL MINE.

The Hakal (_Haxal_) mine in part belonged to the number of those which
the English Real del Monte Company worked on shares, with poor success,
for twenty-five years. It lies about three fourths of a mile from the
village of Pachuca. That company devoted their chief attention to the
mines upon the top of the mountain, at an elevation of 9057 feet, and
seven miles distant from this place, and these mines were comparatively
neglected. The new company, immediately upon taking possession, devoted
particular attention to the Hakal, which resulted in their striking a
_bonanza_,[72] in the Rosario shaft, which was yielding, from a single
small shaft, about $80,000 a month, if I recollect rightly.[73] The ore
of this mine is of a peculiar quality, and its silver is best separated
from the scoria by the smelting process, of which I shall treat more
fully when I come to speak of the mines of Regla. The Guadalupe shaft,
close by the Rosario, was doing but little when I was there, as it does
not belong to the same proprietors. On the night of my arrival they had
just completed the work of pumping the water out of the San Nicholas
shaft, famous for the immense amount of silver taken from it in the
early period of the mining history of Mexico.

Mounted on a good horse, and followed by a lackey, I rode up the zigzag
carriage-road which the English company constructed a quarter of a
century since in order to convey their immense steam machinery to the
top of the mountain, some seven miles distant. This road is still kept
in a good state of repair, and forms a romantic drive for those who
keep carriages in the mountains. The sun was shining upon the
cultivated hills and rolling lands far below us as we jogged along our
winding way up the mountain. At every turn in the road new beauties
presented themselves. But it was getting too chilly for moralizing, and
both lackey and I were pleased when we reached the village upon the top
of the mountain, which bears the name of Real del Monte. The house of
entertainment here is kept by an English woman, who seems to be a part
of the mining establishment. While in her domicile, I found no occasion
to regret that I was again elevated into a cold latitude.


THE MINING MANIA.

More than thirty years have passed since that second South Sea
delusion, the Anglo-Spanish American mining fever, broke out in
England. It surpassed a thousand-fold the wildest of all the New York
and California mining and quartz mining organizations of the last five
years. Prudent financiers in London ran stark mad in calculating the
dividends they must unavoidably realize upon investments in a business
to be carried on in a distant country, and managed and controlled by a
debating society or board of directors in London. Money was advanced
with almost incredible recklessness, and agents were posted off with
all secrecy to be first to secure from the owner of some abandoned mine
the right to work it before the agent of some other company should
arrive on the ground. No mine was to be looked at that was not named in
the volumes of Humboldt, and any mine therein named was valued above
all price. In the end, some $50,000,000 of English capital ran out, and
was used up in Mexico. It was one of those periodical manias that
regularly seize a commercial people once in ten years, and for which
there is no accounting, and no remedy but to let it have its way and
work out its own cure in the ruin of thousands. It is the same in our
own country.[74]


DESCENT INTO A MINE.

After a hearty breakfast at the tavern, I called at the office, or, as
it is here called, "the Grand House" (_Casa Grande_), and was
introduced by Mr. Auld, the director, to the foreman, who took me to
the dressing-room, where I was stripped, and clad in the garb of a
miner except the boots, which were all too short for my feet. My rig
was an odd one; a skull-cap formed like a fireman's, a miner's coat and
pants, and my own calf-skin boots. But in California I had got used to
uncouth attire, and now thought nothing of such small matters. We
therefore walked on without comments to the house built over the great
shaft, where my good-natured English companion, the foreman, stopped me
to complete my equipment, which consisted of a lighted tallow candle
stuck in a candlestick of soft mud, and pressed till it adhered to the
front of my miner's hat. Having fixed a similar appendage to his own
hat and to the hat of the servant that was to follow us, we were
considered fully equipped for descending the mine.

While standing at the top of the shaft, I was astonished at the size
and perfect finish of a steam-pump that had been imported from England
by the late English mining company. With the assistance of balancing
weights, the immense arms of the engine lifted, with mathematical
precision, two square timbers, the one spliced out to the length of a
thousand, the other twelve hundred feet, which fell back again by their
own weight: these were the pumping-rods, which lifted the water four
hundred feet to the mouth of a tunnel, or _adit_, which carried it a
mile and a quarter through the mountain, and discharged it in the creek
above the stamping-mill. There is a smaller pump, which works
occasionally, when the volume of water in the mines is too great for
the power of a single pump.

A trap-door being lifted, we began to descend by small ladders that
reached from floor to floor in the shaft, or, rather, in the half of
the shaft. The whole shaft was perhaps fifteen or twenty feet square,
with sides formed of solid masonry, where the rock happened to be soft,
while in other parts it consisted of natural porphyry rock cut smooth.
Half of this shaft was divided off by a partition, which extended the
whole distance from the top to the bottom of the mine. Through this the
materials used in the work were let down, and the ore drawn up in large
sacks, consisting each of the skin of an ox. The other half of the
shaft contained the two pumping timbers, and numerous floorings at
short distances; from one to another of these ran ladders, by which men
were continually ascending and descending, at the risk of falling only
a few feet at the utmost. The descent from platform to platform was an
easy one, while the little walk upon the platform relieved the muscles
exhausted by climbing down. With no great fatigue I got down a thousand
feet, where our farther progress was stopped by the water that filled
the lower galleries.

Galleries are passages running off horizontally from the shaft, either
cut through the solid porphyry to intersect some vein, or else the
space which a vein once occupied is fitted up for a gallery by
receiving a wooden floor and a brick arch over head. They are the
passages that lead to others, and to transverse galleries and veins,
which, in so old a mine as this, are very numerous. When a vein
sufficiently rich to warrant working is struck, it is followed through
all its meanderings as long as it pays for digging. The opening made in
following it is, of course, as irregular in form and shape as the vein
itself. The loose earth and rubbish taken out in following it is thrown
into some abandoned opening or gallery, so that nothing is lifted to
the surface but the ore. Sometimes several gangs of hands will be
working upon the same vein, a board and timber floor only separating
one set from another. When I have added to this description that this
business of digging out veins has continued here for near three hundred
years, it can well be conceived that this mountain ridge has become a
sort of honey-comb.


THE MINERS.

When our party had reached the limit of descent, we turned aside into a
gallery, and made our way among gangs of workmen, silently pursuing
their daily labor in galleries and chambers reeking with moisture,
while the water trickled down on every side on its way to the common
receptacle at the bottom. Here we saw English carpenters dressing
timbers for flooring by the light of tallow candles that burned in soft
mud candlesticks adhering to the rocky walls of the chamber. Men were
industriously digging upon the vein, others disposing of the rubbish,
while convicts were trudging along under heavy burdens of ore, which
they supported on their backs by a broad strap across their foreheads.
As we passed among these well-behaved gangs of men, I was a little
startled by the foreman remarking that one of those carriers had been
convicted of killing ten men, and was under sentence of hard labor for
life. Far from there being any thing forbidding in the appearance of
these murderers, now that they were beyond the reach of intoxicating
drink, they bore the ordinary subdued expression of the Meztizo.
According to custom, they lashed me to a stanchion as an intruder; but,
upon the foreman informing them that I would pay the usual forfeit of
cigaritos on arriving at the station-house, they good-naturedly
relieved me. Then we journeyed on and on, until my powers of endurance
could sustain no more. We sat down to rest, and to gather strength for
a still longer journey. At length we set out again, sometimes climbing
up, sometimes climbing down; now stopping to examine different
specimens of ores that reflected back the glare of our lights with
dazzling brilliancy, and to look at the endless varieties in the
appearance of the rock that filled the spaces in the porphyry matrix.
Then we walked for a long way on the top of the aqueduct of the adit,
until we at last reached a vacant shaft, through which we were drawn up
and landed in the prison-house, from whence we walked to the
station-house, where we were dressed in our own clothes again.


REFINING SILVER.

When my underground wanderings were ended, and dinner eaten, it was too
late in the day to visit the refining works; but on the next morning,
bright and early, I was in the saddle, on my way to visit the different
establishments connected with this mine. He climbed up hurry, because
only a single step, and the swallow was at the bottom of the abyss.
Moni was very nimble in a few minutes he had climbed the stone and
with a quick handle on the swallow leg covers and withdrawn. "Come
thou with me now, you unreasonable Tierlein you," scolded Moni and
moved with the swallow down to the others. He held her still for a
while up until they no longer continued to walk thought. "Where is
the Mäggerli?" Moni suddenly screamed at the black eyes, as they are
on a steep place and was not devoured, but quietly umherschaute. Always
was the young kid next Moni, or ran it after his mother. "Where did
your kids, blacks?" he frightened and jumped on to the goat. It was
quite strange, not devoured, always remained at the same place and are
suspicious, at the ears. Moni was close to her and looked up and down.
Now he heard a soft, bleating jammerndes. That was Mäggerlis
voice, she came from the bottom up, so miserably and help beseechingly.
Moni lay down on the floor and bent down. They moved down a bit.
Now, he's clearly far below the Mäggerli hung on a branch, from the
rocks out, and winselte for mercy. It had to be hinuntergefallen.
Fortunately, the branch is delayed, otherwise it would plunge into
the abyss must.

But even now, when it is no longer at the branch could hold, had to
be found on the body plunge into the depths and break the neck. In high
anxiety, he called down: "Hold firmly, Mäggerli, holding firmly to the
branch! Look, I have come and fetch you!" But how then should he go?
The cliff was so steep here, because he could not yourself down,
saw Moni probably a. But the kid had down there somewhere in
the height of the rocks to rain, the overhanging rock under which
you are so good at the rain could flee. There were always the Geißbuben
their days in bad weather, so the rock was already of old time
since the rain rocks. From there, Moni thought he could cross
the rock climbing and so the kids come back. Quickly he whistled the
flock together and climbed down with her to the place where it rains
rocks hineinging. Since he left them to graze and went to the rock.
Here he saw also the same, still a good deal about themselves,
the branch to which the kid clinging.

      He saw that it was not easy, because the climb and Mäggerli on his
back down again.

      But otherwise it was not to save Tierlein. He thought, God would
      surely assist him, then it might succeed him. He folded his hands,
      looked up to heaven and prayed: "Oh dear God, help me, that I can
deliver the Mäggerli!"

      Now he was full of confidence that everything was going to be rushed
      and he climbed up the rocks, until he at the top of the branch
      was. Here he is clinging firmly with both feet, then
      lifted the trembling, wimmernde Tierlein on his shoulders and
      now climbed down with great care. When he was but now back
      safe grassy ground beneath the feet, and had rescued the kid
      looked scared because he was so glad that he had to thank loud and
      in the sky hinaufrief: "Oh dear God, I thank you a thousand times
      that you let us know as 've helped! Oh, how we are both so
      happy about it! "Then he sat still a little on the ground and
      stroked the kid, still in all its delicate limbs trembled, and
      comforted through the ausgestandene fear. As a little later
      time to leave was the kid Moni sat again on his shoulders and
      said caring: "Come, thou Mäggerli poor, you are still trembling.
      Today you can not go home, I must carry you." And so he wore the
      Tierlein which clings firmly to him, all the way down.

      Paula was now on the last hill before the bathhouse, and awaited
      Geißbuben. Her aunt had accompanied them. When Moni with his
      load on his back for retirement, Paula wanted to know
      whether the kid was sick, and showed great participation.
      The Board of Directors assembled. Many of them, I was
      assured, were the leading men of New York, and things went off
      with all solemnity. When all was ready, an immense piece of the
      richest gold quartz was taken from a desk, such as used to be
      sold at good prices in San Francisco for this very purpose. But
      not a man in that august assembly dreamed of the manner in which
      such things are gotten up, except perhaps the said agent sent out
      to get machinery, but now figuring as a director. I was easily
      prevailed on to sign an argumentative certificate, and was shown
      one signed by Robert J. Walker on a much worse hole in the ground
      than this. I was also informed that New York was not the proper
      market, which I understand to mean that machinery could not be
      obtained in New York on the credit of a quartz vein; and in
      London they would not look at a scheme that did not embrace a
      million at least, said the agent aforesaid. Therefore he proposed
      to give me an engraved certificate, declaring that I had paid
      $8000, which of course I readily accepted when I found that there
      was no machinery in the case, and that all I had to rest my
      engraved certificate upon was the one hundredth part of the said
      hole in the ground, with a doubtful title. The last I heard of
      this agent was, that he was traveling with his wife upon the
      Rhine. Whether he was in search of machinery or not, I did not
      stop to inquire.

      Instead of the above being an extraordinary case, I understand
      that it is about a fair average of the California gold schemes
      that have been brought upon the stock-market of New York. If the
      papers are only drawn up in the proper form, the most prudent men
      in Wall Street are sometimes found to embark their capital before
      the question has ever been settled whether gold can be
      successfully obtained from quartz in California.


CHAPTER XXXII.

A Visit to the Refining-mills.--The Falls and basaltic Columns of
Regla.--How a Title is acquired to Silver Mines.--The Story of Peter
Terreros, Count of Regla.--The most successful of Miners.--Silver
obtained by fusing the Ore.--Silver "benefited" upon the Patio.--The
Tester of the Patio.--The chemical Processes employed.--The Heirs of
the Count of Regla.--The Ruin caused by Civil War.--The History of the
English Company.


We rode along the stone road across the plain, passing now a number of
English-made wagons laden with stamped ore for Regla, and then a drove
of cargo-donkeys trudging along under the weight of bags filled with
the rich ore of Hakal. Now and then, too, we encountered American
army-wagons converted to peaceful employment, and adding to the
material wealth of Mexico. But our ride was not a long one before we
reached Regla, the utmost limit of our journeyings, a distance of
twelve miles from the "Real." Here the first salutation from the
English gentleman at the head of the establishment was that breakfast
was waiting, as it was now eleven o'clock, and we must not visit the
works upon an empty stomach. My surprise at this unlooked-for
hospitality was a little diminished when I learned that all these
entertainments of strangers are at the company's expense.


THE FALLS OF REGLA.

The _patio_, or open yard of Regla, on which the principal portion of
the ores of the Real del Monte company are "benefited," or, as we
should say, extracted, is situated deep down in a _barranca_, where
both water-power and intense heat can be obtained to facilitate the
process of separation. The immense amount of mason-work here expended
in the erection of massive walls would make an imposing appearance if
they had been built up in the open plain; but here they are so
overshadowed by the mason-work of nature that they sink into
insignificance in comparison. The bank, some two hundred feet high, of
solid rock, as it approaches the waterfall on either side, has the
appearance of being supported by natural buttresses of basaltic
columns--columns closely joined together and placed erect by the hand
of nature's master-builder. Still, all would have been stiff and formal
had the sides of the _barranca_ been lined only with perpendicular
columns; but broken and displaced pillars are piled in every
conceivable position against the front, while a vine with brilliant
leaves had run to every fissure and spread itself out to enjoy the
sunshine. The little stream that had burst its way through the upright
columns and over the broken fragments, fell into a perfect basin of
basalt, heightening immensely the attractions of the spot. I sat down
upon a fallen column, and for a long time continued to contemplate the
unexpected scene, of which, at that time, I had read nothing. There was
such a mingling of the rich vegetation of the hot country with the
rocky ornaments of this pretty waterfall that I could never grow weary
of admiring the combined grandeur and beauty of the place, from which
Peter Terreros derived his title of Count of Regla.

Peter Terreros, the first Count of Regla, became one of the rich men of
the last century in consequence of a lucky mining adventure. In olden
times the water in the Real del Monte mines had been lifted out of the
mouth of the Santa Brigeda and other shafts in bulls' hides carried up
on a windlass. When near the surface, this simple method of getting the
water out of a mine has great advantages on account of its cheapness,
and is now extensively employed in Mexican mines. But after a certain
depth had been reached, the head of water could no longer be kept down
by this process, and, in consequence, the Real del Monte was abandoned
about the beginning of the last century, and became a complete ruin;
for no wreck is more complete than that which water causes when it once
gets possession of a mine, and mingles into one mass floating timbers,
loosened earth, rubbish, and soft and fallen rock. By the mining laws
of Mexico, the title to a mine is lost by abandoning and ceasing to
work it. It becomes a waif open to the enterprise of any one who may
"re-denounce" it. The title to the soil in Mexico, as in California,
carries no title to the gold and silver mineral that may be contained
in the land. The precious metals are not only regarded in law as
treasure-trove, but they carry with them to the lucky discoverer the
right to enter upon another person's land, and to appropriate so much
of the land as is necessary to avail himself of his prize. Colonel
Frémont's Mariposa claim, and all other California land claims, are
subject to this legal condition.


PETER TERREROS.

Peter Terreros, then a man of limited means, conceived the idea of
draining this abandoned mine by means of a tunnel or adit (_socabon_)
through the rock, one mile and a quarter in length, from the level of
the stream till it should strike the Santa Brigeda shaft. Upon this
enterprise he toiled with varied success from 1750 until 1762, when he
completed his undertaking, and also struck a _bonanza_, which continued
for twelve years to yield an amount of silver which in our day appears
to be fabulous. The veins which he struck from time to time, as he
advanced with his _socabon_, furnished means to keep alive his
enterprise. When he reached the main shaft, he had a ruin to clear out
and rebuild, which was a more costly undertaking than the building of a
king's palace. Yet his _bonanza_ not only furnished all the means for a
system of lavish expenditure upon the mines and refining-works, but
from his surplus profits he laid out half a million annually in the
purchase of plantations, or six millions of dollars in the twelve
years. This is equal to about 500,000 pounds' weight of silver. Besides
doing this, he loaned to the king a million of dollars, which has never
been paid, and built and equipped two ships of the line, and presented
them to his sovereign.

The humble shop-keeper, Peter Terreros, after such displays of
munificence, was ennobled by the title of Count of Regla. Among the
common people he is the subject of more fables than was Croesus of
old. When his children were baptized, so the story goes, the procession
walked upon bars of silver. By way of expressing his gratitude for the
title conferred upon him, he sent an invitation to the king to visit
him at his mine, assuring his majesty that if he would confer on him
such an exalted favor, his majesty's feet should not tread upon the
ground while he was in the New World. Wherever he should alight from
his carriage it should be upon a pavement of silver, and the places
where he lodged should be lined with the same precious metal. Anecdotes
of this kind are innumerable, which, of course, amount to no more than
showing that in his own time his wealth was proverbial, and demonstrate
that in popular estimation he stood at the head of that large class of
miners whom the wise king ennobled as a reward for successful mining
adventures, and that he was accounted the richest miner in the
vice-kingdom. The state and magnificence which he oftentimes displayed
surpassed that of the Vice-king. This, in no way embarrassed an estate,
the largest ever accumulated by one individual in a single enterprise.

Count Peter is estimated to have expended two and a half millions of
dollars upon the buildings constituting the refining establishment of
Regla, which goes under the general designation of the _patio_. Why his
walls were built so thick, or why so many massive arches should have
been constructed, is an enigma to the present generation, as they could
by no means have been intended for a fortress down in a _barranca_.

But let us go in and examine the different methods of "benefiting"
silver here applied. The ores from the Rosario shaft of the Hakal mine
of Pachuca are here stamped and ground, and then thrown into a furnace,
after having been mixed with lime, which in fire increases the heat;
while upon the open _torta_ we shall see that lime is used to cool the
mass. Litharge (oxide of lead) is added, and the mass is burned until
the litharge is decomposed, the lead uniting with the silver and the
oxygen entering into the slag, into which the baser metals, or scoria
in the ore, have been formed. This is cast out at the bottom of the
furnace. The mass of molten lead and silver is drawn off, and placed in
a large oven with a rotary bottom, into which tongues of flame are
continually driven until the lead in the compound has become once more
oxydized, forming litharge, and the silver is left in a pure state.
This is the most simple method of purifying, or "benefiting" silver.


BENEFITING THE ORE.

A little beyond the furnace is a series of tubs, built of blocks from
broken columns of basalt. In the centre of each revolves a shaft with
four arms, to each of which is fastened a block of basalt, that is
dragged on the stone bottom of the tub, where broken ore mixed with
water is ground to the finest paste. Here the chemical process of
"benefiting" commences. A bed is prepared upon the paved floor
(_patio_) in the yard, in the same manner as a mortar bed is prepared
to receive quicklime dissolved in water. In the same way is poured out
the semi-liquid paste. This is called a _torta_, and contains about
45,000 lbs. Upon this liquid mass four and a half _cargas_ of 300 lbs.
of salt is spread, and then a coating of blue vitriol (sulphate of
copper) is laid over the whole, and the tramping by mules commences. If
the mass is found to be too hot for the advantageous working of the
process, then lime in sufficient quantities is added to cool it; and if
too cool, then iron pyrites (sulphate of iron) is added. The mules are
then turned upon the bed, and for a single day it is mixed most
thoroughly together by tramping and by turning it over by the shovel.
On the second day 750 lbs. of quicksilver are added to the _torta_, and
then the tramping is resumed.

The most important personage, not even excepting the director, is
called "the tester;" for the condition of the ores varies so much, that
experience alone can determine the mode of proceeding with each
separate _torta_, and upon the tester's judgment depends oftentimes the
question whether a mining enterprise, involving millions of dollars,
shall prove a profitable or unprofitable adventure. Perhaps he can not
read or write, though daily engaged in carrying on, empirically, the
most difficult of chemical processes. To him is intrusted the entire
control of the most valuable article employed in mining--the
quicksilver. He is constantly testing the various _tortas_ spread out
upon the _patio_; to one he determines that lime must be added; to
another, an opposite process must be applied by adding iron pyrites.
When all is ready, with his own hands he applies the quicksilver, which
he carries in a little cloth bag, through the pores of which he
expresses the mercury as he walks over and over the _torta_, much after
the manner that seed is sown with us. The tester determines when the
silver has all been collected and amalgamated with the mercury. Whether
the tramping process and the turning by shovels shall continue for six
weeks or for only three, is decided by him. When he decides that it is
prepared for washing, the mass is transported to an immense washing
machine, which is propelled by water, where the base substances are all
washed from the amalgam, and then the amalgam is resolved into its
original elements of silver and quicksilver by fire, as already
explained, with the loss of about seventy-five to one hundred pounds of
mercury upon each _torta_.

Let us now run over the many chemical processes that have been resorted
to in order to separate the silver from the ore. The roll-brimstone,
that has been procured in Durango, or in the volcano of Popocatapetl,
is bought up at the mint in the city of Mexico, where it is burned in a
room lined with lead, and into which water is jetted until the smoke of
the burning brimstone is condensed. This water of sulphur is then
carefully collected, and distilled in a boiler of platinum, on which
sulphur can not act. The sulphuric acid obtained by this distillation
is used to separate the gold that is found in the silver bars from
silver. This sometimes amounts to ten per cent. The acid dissolves the
silver, but does not act upon the gold, which is thus separated from
the silver. The sulphate of silver is drawn off and poured upon plates
of copper, by which means the silver is precipitated, and sulphate of
copper, or blue vitriol, is produced, which, not being of use in the
mint, is sold to the Real del Monte Company, where it is employed in
obtaining silver. The process by which the company obtain their salt
has been already stated, while the lime they use is burned upon the
mountains. After all these hard and laborious processes, only from five
to ten per cent. of silver is obtained, except in cases of _bonanzas_,
which shows that silver mines can be profitably worked only in those
countries where labor commands the lowest standard of wages.


THE HEIRS OF REGLA.

The heirs of the Count Peter inherited his accumulated treasures, his
purchased estates, his title, and his prospects of future success in
mining, which were as brilliant as they had been in his lifetime. They
never dreamed of financial embarrassments in the midst of accumulations
of wealth which surpassed the wildest of Oriental romances. They forgot
that their wealth rested upon the perfect security which they inherited
from the wise and virtuous government of Carlos III., of blessed
memory; that he it was who had put out the fires of the Inquisition,
and so curtailed the power of the priests that they could no longer
plunder with impunity, or rob the Terreros of the fruits of their
father's enterprise by threatening them with the censure of the Church,
which, in the reign of a feeble king, had a significant meaning. The
new code of mining laws, the cheapness of quicksilver, and the opening
of commerce, had all combined to make their fortune, which they might
lose in a moment if the heir to the throne should prove an idiot, as
was most likely, and priests should again usurp the control of affairs,
and play their old game of plundering the rich while they excited the
populace.

Fortunately for the family of Terreros and the many successful mining
families of that period, Charles IV. was not quite so much of an idiot
as his grandfather or his great-grandfather had been, and though the
Inquisitors resumed their fires, yet it was with such comparative
moderation as not to interfere seriously with the progress of that
prosperity to which Carlos III. had given an impulse. The Countess of
Regla still sported the richest jewels to be found in New Spain, and
her sister's coronet was the envy of all the ladies of the court. But
the insurrection of Hidalgo came upon them in the midst of prosperity,
overwhelming alike the rich and the poor. The large Spanish capitals
began to be withdrawn from the country, the plantations were broken up,
and the mines, abandoned by their laborers, soon fell to ruin; and they
who had been baptized in the midst of the most ostentatious display of
wealth, found themselves pinched to sustain their ordinary expenses.


THE REAL DEL MONTE.

The Terreros family kept their title good to the Real del Monte by
retaining a few workmen about the premises; but it was substantially
abandoned for twenty-five years before the English Real del Monte
Company took possession. In the space of two years this company had
cleared out and rebuilt the adit by working gangs of hands night and
day. Another party, engaged upon the shafts, arrived at the adit level
at the same time with the workmen upon the drain. A third party,
engaged in making and repairing a carriage-road from the sea to the
mine, had completed their labors; while a fourth party, in charge of
machinery and steam-power apparatus enough to equip a Cornish mine of
the largest class, had arrived at the mine. In this fourfold, and much
of it useless labor, the company had exhibited untiring activity, while
they exhausted all their capital without realizing the return of a
single dollar. But they derived rich hopes from reading the story of
Peter Terreros, and they continued to hope on and hope ever, for a
period of twenty-five years longer, when they ceased to exist. The
story of this company is summed up in saying that they expended upon
this vast enterprise the sum of $20,000,000, and realized from it
$16,000,000. They disposed of all their interests here for about what
their materials were worth as old iron, and the present proprietors
enjoy the fruits of their labors at a cost of less than a million of
dollars, with a fair prospect of yet realizing from their speculation
as large a treasure as that acquired by Peter Terreros, the first Count
of Regla.

Having thus described with some minuteness one of the most extensive
silver mines in the world, where an average of 5000 men and unnumbered
animals are employed, it will not be necessary to go into details as we
notice the many other celebrated mines of Mexico.


CHAPTER XXXIII.

Toluca.--Queretaro, Guanajuato, and
Zacatecas.--Fresnillo.--"Romancing."--A lucky Priest.--San Luis
Potosi.--The Valenciana at Guanajuato.--Under-mining.--A Name of
Blasphemy.--The Los Rayas.--Immense Sums taken from Los Rayas.--Warlike
Indians in Zacatecas.


A stage runs daily from the city of Mexico by Tacubaya and the Desierto
to the beautiful valley and city of Toluca. This town is greatly
indebted for its present celebrity to successful mining adventures. Its
Cathedral is a monument of the munificent liberality of the Frenchman
Laborde, whose fortune was ever unequal to his generosity. We have
spoken already of the almost Oriental magnificence displayed in the
famous garden which he built and adorned at Cuarnavaca. After spending
the wealth acquired from the _bonanza_ of Tasco, he started off in
search of new adventures and a new fortune. Being again successful, he
made Toluca the beneficiary of his princely liberality. The celebrated
Cathedral of that city, and all its ornaments, are the proofs of his
munificence. When his third fortune was exhausted, the fickle goddess
forsook him, and he who had three times been raised from nothing to the
condition of a millionaire, came in his old age to the archbishop for
relief from his poverty. This relief he obtained by selling the jewels
he had once bestowed upon the Church. Such often are the vicissitudes
in the life of a successful miner. I can not notice here the many
interesting objects gathered as I would wish to do, nor have I space
for a description of the beautiful mountain scenery about Toluca.


MIDDLE STATES OF MEXICO.

The middle states of Mexico, Guanajuata, Zacatecas, Durango, and San
Luis, are deserving of a more extended notice than my limited space
will permit. There is little of war or romance to recount in the
history of any of them. Their story is made up of notices of silver
mines, and times of great _bonanzas_ and cattle-raising. Here the
population is mostly white, made up of the hardy peasantry from Biscay.
The Indians on the high table-lands were too hardy to be reduced to
slavery: the result is the same here as in Chili. The two races have
not extensively intermixed, as the Indians were driven northward,
where, for a period of three hundred years, they have, in a measure,
maintained their independence, and have so much improved in the art of
war that they are able to return again and fight for the homes of their
ancestors. The white inhabitants of these states are more cleanly in
their habits, and more industrious than the Southern people. The little
state of Queretaro has little to boast but its agriculture, but to the
north of it is a country of mines and pasturage.

There was formerly great rivalry between the states of Guanajuato and
Zacatecas on the ground of their mining successes. Each in turn has had
its season of boasting, for it has happened that, in those years when
Guanajuato was most prosperous, Zacatecas was not in _bonanza_, and
_vice versa_. When I was first in Mexico, San Luz and San Luce, at
Guanajuato, were in _bonanza_, with divers others; and out of
$300,000 in silver bars brought down to the city of Mexico, nearly ten
per cent. of gold was extracted. But now both these _bonanzas_ have
given out, and the annual product of silver in the State of Guanajuato
has fallen off over $2,000,000, while the mines of Zacatecas are in a
most flourishing condition, as is shown by the large sum of $1,200,000
being demanded by government for renewing the lease of the mint at
Zacatecas.

Fresnillo is the most flourishing of the mines of Zacatecas. This mine
was formerly considered of little value. Among its advantages is an
American manager, who for many years has aided in the direction of its
affairs. On my return from Mexico, I found the road up the Perote
covered with wagons laden with portions of a monster steam-engine, the
fifth that was to be employed to pump the water from this mine. It
seems incredible that so large a sum as $1,000,000 should be required
for the freight alone of this new machinery. But, after I had become
familiar with the vast scale on which every thing is conducted at a
large silver mine, where millions appear as the small dust of the
balance, I can credit what my readers might think improbable.[75]

I have often spoken of the peculiarities of peasant life in the country
and of the _peons_ of the cities. But there is another phase of humble
life to be considered--the social state of the mine laborer. Like all
men whose wages are very irregular, and subject to the fluctuations
which follow mining speculations, they themselves become irregular in
their lives. They have all heard of the many instances of persons of as
humble condition as themselves accidentally falling upon a princely
fortune, and they know, too, what a miraculous change such a discovery
makes in the social condition of a _peon_, for every miner in
Zacatecas knows the homely distich:

    "Had the metals not been so rich at San Bernabe,
    Ibarra would not have wed the daughter of Virey."[76]

In addition to scraps and snatches of songs, the mining laborers have
their _romances_, which are as wild as the _yarns_ of the sailor, and
have for their almost universal theme the miraculous acquisition and
loss of a fortune. The hero possesses princely wealth to-day, though
yesterday he was suffering for food, and to-morrow he will be again
bereft of all by the fickle turns that Fortune makes in the wheel of
destiny. The wildest of our romances never come up to many incidents
that have occurred in their own mine; and when they attempt fiction, it
is on the pattern of the Arabian Nights' Entertainments. I do verily
believe that all that class of Arabian tales are but the reproduction
of the _romances_ from the Oriental gold-washings.

The most important mines in the State of San Luis Potosi are those near
Cuatorce. In the midst of bleak and precipitous mountain ridges is the
village of Cuatorce, from which a circuitous mountain road leads to the
entrance of the mining shafts, in which more wonderful things have
occurred than in the wildest of the "romances." The story of Padre
Flores is a familiar one, but will bear repeating.


PADRE FLORES.--CUATORCE.

The padre, being tired of the idle life of a pauper priest, bought, for
a small sum, the claim of some still more needy adventurer. After
following his small vein a little way, he came to a small cavern
containing the ore in a state of decomposition. This, in California,
would be called a "rotten vein." With all the difficulties to be
encountered in obtaining a fair value for mineral in a crude state, the
poor priest realized from his adventure over $3,000,000, which was
considered a very fair fortune for an unmitred ecclesiastic.

The Mineral Report, mentioned in the last note, which is so full on the
subject Fresnillo, insists that it is a continuation of the formation
of Cuatorce and the other mines of San Luis. The mountains at Cuatorce
are more dreary, bleak, and barren than in any other of the principal
mining districts, as it is more exposed to the storms and tempests from
the northeast and from the ocean. It was in this State of San Luis
Potosi that Dr. Gardner's quicksilver mine was alleged to exist, and in
the ineffectual efforts made to determine its whereabouts our
government has become quite familiar with the location of all the
worked mines of this state. The mines upon the mountains of Cuatorce
are said to have been discovered in 1778 by a negro fiddler, who, being
compelled to camp out on his way home from a dance, built a fire upon
what proved to be an outcrop of a vein, and, in consequence, found in
the morning, among the embers, a piece of virgin silver. It is a
doubtful question among those who are anxious about trifles whether the
name _Potosi_ given to this mine, owes its origin to the similarity
between the mode of its discovery to that of the celebrated mines of
that name in South America, or to the vast amount of silver at one time
taken from it.

Guanajuato, when it yielded its six millions a year of silver, besides
a fair supply of gold, was one of the most important States in the
republic. With every successful speculation, new adventurers were found
to invest their capital in resuming the working of abandoned mines,
until at last men have become bold enough to undertake, for the third
time, the draining of the great shaft of the Valenciana, so famous in
the last century. When I was last in Mexico that undertaking was
reported to have been accomplished. This mine is on a more magnificent
scale than even the Real del Monte. Its central shaft alone cost a
million of dollars; and though steam power can not be used, yet it is
so dry that horse windlasses can keep it clear of water. Its
abandonment in every instance has been in consequence of some
insurrectionary chief setting the works of the mine on fire, and not
from any deficiency in its product of silver. When I was in Mexico, so
little progress had been made in restoring the mine that it was not
thought worth visiting. But the most sanguine hopes were entertained
that it would again be as productive as in the times when its abundant
riches secured for its owner the title of Marquis of Valenciana, though
he had worked with his own hands on the shaft which afterward yielded
him its millions.


THE MINE OF LOS RAYAS.

Second in importance among the old mines of Guanajuato is _Los Rayas_.
Its history presents a new feature in the mining system of Mexico, not
before mentioned, but which is important to a right understanding of
the operation of the mining code. The right of discovery gives title to
two hundred _varas_ along the mine, and to two hundred _varas_ (about
500 feet) in depth. The consequence of this limitation is, that when a
very rich claim is made, there immediately springs up a contest to get
below it, and to cut off the lucky discoverer from the lower part of
his expected fortune, and he has no means of avoiding such a result but
by driving his shaft downward until he reaches a point below his first
two hundred _varas_, which entitles him to claim another section
downward.

This principle is strikingly illustrated in the case of the famous mine
of the priest Flores at Cuatorce, which he blasphemously named "the
Purse of God the Father,"[77] where there are marks of divers attempts
being made to undermine him, though without success. But the case is a
different one when the _bonanza_ is upon a high ridge, and it can be
undermined by drifting in from a lower level. Then commences a lively
contest to determine who can dig the fastest, and make the most rapid
progress in this contest of mining and countermining.

The Marquis de los Rayas owes his title and his princely fortune of
$11,000,000 to a successful contest of this character. The Santa Amita
was in _bonanza_, yielding an ore so pregnant with gold that the crude
mass often sold for its weight in silver.


DEEP MINING.

Contests of this kind are very different from those which used to take
place in California some years ago, when twenty feet square was marked
off upon the top of a ridge, through which the claimant had to sink his
shaft to the base rock on which the gold was supposed to be deposited.
When the rock was reached, it was often found difficult to keep the
lines that had been marked off on the surface, particularly when the
lead grew richer as it approached the border of the claim.
Controversies were frequent, and frequently resulted in subterranean
quarrels and fights, and, of course, ended in superterranean lawsuits.
But the Mexican rival parties were seldom near enough for a fight, and
the quarrel ended, as it began, in a contest to determine who could dig
the fastest.

Another peculiar feature of deep mining is the construction of the main
shafts. A description of the method of construction of one of these I
take from Ward's Mexico,[78] a book that is otherwise of little value
to a person seeking for information on the subject of mines at
Guanajuata, so great has been the revolution there in a few years in
the condition of mining affairs: "I know few sights more interesting
than the operation of blasting in the shafts of Los Rayas. After each
quarryman (_barretero_) has undermined the portion of rock allotted to
him, he is drawn up to the surface; the ropes belonging to the
horse-windlasses (_malacates_) are coiled up, so as to leave every
thing clear below, and a man descends, whose business it is to fire the
slow matches communicating with the mines below.

"As his chance of escaping the effects of the explosion consists in
being drawn up with such rapidity as to be placed beyond the reach of
the fragments of rock that are projected into the air, the lightest
_malacate_ is prepared for his use, and two horses are attached to it,
selected for their swiftness and courage, and are called the horses of
_pegador_. The man is let down slowly, carrying with him a light and a
small rope, one end of which is held by one of the overseers, who is
stationed at the mouth of the shaft. A breathless silence is observed
until the signal is given from below by pulling the cord of
communication, when the two men by whom the horses are previously held
release their heads, and they dash off at full speed until they are
stopped either by the noise of the first explosion, or by seeing from
the quantity of cord wound round the cylinder of the _malacate_ that
the _pegador_ is already raised to a height of sixty or seventy _varas_
[Spanish yards], and is consequently beyond the reach of danger."

The author then goes on to enumerate the risks that attend this calling
of _pegador_, and the consequent high wages that have to be paid to
persons who undertake this perilous office, all of which accidents and
adventures must be familiar to those of my readers who have paid any
attention to the business of blasting rocks; and as his hairbreadth
escapes have nothing in them remarkable, we may conclude this notice of
Los Rayas by adding his statement that the king's fifth from this mine,
from 1556 to his time, amounted to the snug sum of $17,365,000. He
gives only the sum reported, and makes no calculation for the large
sums out of which the king was annually cheated at all the mines. That
my reader may understand how a sum so apparently incredible as five or
eight times seventeen millions of dollars could be taken out of a
single mine, he must recollect that Los Rayas was a most productive
mine shortly after the Conquest, and that for a century or two it was
comparatively of little value, until Mr. José Sardaneta undertook the
undermining of the rich mine of Santa Amita in 1740, and that afterward
the rich product of the lower levels of the Santa Amita are included in
this immense sum.


INDIANS AND SOLDIERS.

There is too much sameness in the details of the histories of the
various other important mines of this State and of those in the
adjoining State of Durango to justify the lengthening out this chapter,
and I will conclude it with giving the substance of a statement I heard
the American gentleman make on the subject of Indian depredations in
the very centre of the republic, showing the great inconvenience
suffered in consequence of the state of insecurity in which the people
constantly live. A party of their own Indians, a most degraded band of
cowardly vagabonds, that lived not a great way from the city, concluded
to personify a company of northern savages, in order more successfully
to plunder the inhabitants. With shoutings, these vagabonds rushed into
the houses of the people, who were so paralyzed by the very sight of
Indians in a hostile attitude, that, without resistance, they suffered
them to plunder whatever came within their reach which tempted their
cupidity or lust. At length, becoming satiated with liquor and
champagne that they had taken from a carrier, they had to retire and
camp out for the night. In their retreat they were pursued by a captain
and soldiers of the regular army, who, being more numerous than the
Indians, exhibited a great deal of courage until they came in sight of
the savages, when, all at once, it was concluded to encamp for the
night, and to resume the pursuit the next day, when the Indians would
be at such a distance that they would not disturb their pursuers by
their whooping.

      [75] By reference to a long and able paper on the mines in the
      hill of Proano (Fresnillo), it appears that one half of the cost
      of four pumping-engines already in operation in that mine was the
      freight from Vera Cruz to the mine.

      [76] This translation is bad enough, but no worse than the
      original.

      [77] This will sound to Protestant readers something like
      horrible blasphemy; but it must be borne in mind that God the
      Father of the Catholics is an entirely different idea from the
      spiritual God whom we worship. The devout Protestant who
      recognizes but one Being worthy of adoration, veneration, and
      worship, never ventures to mention any of the names by which He
      is known but with the profoundest reverence. The Catholic, on the
      other hand, has a host of objects which he deems worthy of
      adoration, and seems to have cheapened the article by multiplying
      it. His senses are all exercised in his peculiar kind of worship,
      and, as a natural consequence, they are apt to conclude that the
      Almighty enjoys those exhibitions that give them the greatest
      pleasure. They worship him by performing a pantomime of the life
      and suffering of Christ, which is called the mass, and seek to
      propitiate him by offering the body of his Son in sacrifice. They
      bestow upon God gifts of jewels and of gold; and as he passes
      through their streets in the form of a wafer, as they believe,
      the soldiers present arms, beat the drum, and discharge their
      cannon, as to an earthly prince. Though our Saviour (_Santo
      Christo_) heads the calendar of intercessors between God and
      man, he is seldom invoked, though they often honor him by naming
      their children after him. As they have conferred upon a multitude
      of their saints the supernatural powers of God, they have
      necessarily brought God himself down to earth. If I might be
      pardoned the expression, I should say that they treat him and his
      well-beloved Son with a loving intimacy. The worship of the
      Catholics is substantially materialism, more or less gross,
      according to its distance from or its proximity to Protestantism.
      There is no blasphemy, according to their system, in naming their
      shops after the Holy Ghost, a horse-stable after "the Precious
      Blood," though I could never hear them mentioned or see them
      without having my Protestant notions shocked, while I equally
      shocked their feelings by refusing to kneel to the Host, and
      slipping out of the way to avoid it. Nor could I exhibit the
      least reverence to their religious emblems without committing
      what in me would be an act of idolatry, the two systems being so
      diametrically opposite that one can not go a step toward the
      other without breaking over a fundamental doctrine of his own
      belief. God is an invisible Spirit, says the Protestant. God is a
      Spirit, answers the Catholic, but he daily assumes the form of a
      wafer, and traverses our streets, and in that form we most
      commonly worship him. Such is the religious antagonism that will
      ever be found in the world while man remains what he now is, ever
      divided between mentalism and materialism. Forms and names often
      differ, but these are the two ideas into which all the religious
      systems of the world resolve themselves, although abortive
      attempts are often made to combine them.

      [78] Vol. ii. p. 452.


CHAPTER XXXIV.

Sonora and Sonora Land Speculators seeking Annexation.--Sonora and its
Attractions.--The Abundance and Purity of Silver in Sonora.--Silver
found in large Masses.--The Jesus Maria, Refugio, and Eulalia Mines.--A
Creation of Silver at Arizpa.--The Pacific Railroad.--Sonora now
valueless for want of personal Security.--The Hopes of replenishing
the Spanish Finances from Sonora blasted by War.--Report of the
Mineria.--Sonora.--Chihuahua.


LAND TITLES.

It has been said in another chapter that the Apaches had extended their
depredations beyond the first tier of States, and had entered Durango,
Zacatecas, San Luis Potosi, and even Guanajuato, making this second
tier of states their stamping ground, while Sonora, Chihuahua,
Coahuila, over which they now rode without opposition to a country more
abundant in plunder, are left as political waifs to any who may choose
to take possession of them. As in all abandoned countries, there are
inhabitants here incapable of getting away, and too poor even for the
Indians to notice; and there are a few miserable villages still
existing, with a fragment of their former population. All the
inhabitants of these wretched hamlets have their eyes fixed on the
United States as the only hope of relief from their Indian plunderers.
The proprietors of estates, extending over vast districts, too cowardly
to defend their claims, which exceed in extent European principalities,
are sitting quietly down at a respectful distance, anxiously looking
forward to the time when their claims will rise in value from a few
dollars to as many hundred thousands by an annexation to the United
States. Mexican operators in grants have not been idle. They have
ascertained what the United States courts call a title, and have been
providing themselves with the necessary parchments,[79] while American
operators, in connection with them, have been equally busy.

Chihuahua and Sonora are the States or Departments to be affected by
our Pacific Railroad. Sonora is the most valuable of the two, not only
on account of its inexhaustible supply of silver, but also on account
of its delightful climate and agricultural resources. It is like the
land of the blessed in Oriental story. California does not surpass it
in fertility or in climate. With industry and thrift, it could sustain
a population equal to that of all Mexico. The table-lands and the
valleys are so near together that the products of all climates flourish
almost side by side. Food for man and beast was so easily procured that
the descendants of the early settlers sunk into effeminacy long before
the breaking out of the great Apache war of the last century. Drought,
however, makes the formation of artificial lakes and reservoirs
necessary to the full development of its agricultural wealth.


CHIHUAHUA AND SONORA.

But it is the remarkable abundance of silver which distinguishes it
above all other countries except Chihuahua. I have described, in a
former chapter, the long and laborious processes by which silver is
produced from the ore in the southern mines, and also the great depths
from which it is raised. In Sonora, silver is most commonly extracted
from the ore by the simple process of fusion. But in the district of
Batopilos, it is, or rather was, found pure. If we should adopt the
theory that veins of ore extend through the entire length of Mexico,
then I should say that they "crop out" in Sonora, or, rather, that the
silver _lodes_ which are here above the surface dip toward the city of
Mexico, and also northward toward California. The mountain chain which
traverses California under the name of the _Sierra Nevada_ appears to
be only a continuation or reappearance of the mountain chain here
called _Sierra Madre_ (Mother Range), which forms the boundary between
the departments of Sonora and Chihuahua.

On the western declivity of this mountain range, the most remarkable
illustration of this fact of cropping out is found at Batopilos,
already mentioned. This town is in a deep ravine. The climate is, like
that of the California gulches, intensely hot, but remarkably healthy.
Here the _lodes_ of silver ore are almost innumerable,[80] with crests
elevated above the ground. The mine of _El Carmen_, in the times of the
vice-kings, produced so immensely that its proprietor was ennobled,
with the title of Marquis of Bustamente. This was the beginning of the
family of Bustamente. A piece of pure silver was found here weighing
four hundred and twenty-five pounds. I should like to continue in
detail to enumerate the rich surface mines in the southern portions of
these two States, but, lest I should weary my reader, I must omit them,
and refer those who wish to learn more to the translations from the
last official reports of the _Mineria_, entitled Chihuahua and Sonora,
which are embodied in the Appendix.

"The 'Good Success Mine' (_Bueno Successo_) was discovered by an
Indian, who swam across the river after a great flood. On arriving at
the other side, he found the crest of an immense _lode_ laid bare by
the force of the water. The greater part of this was pure massive
silver, sparkling in the rays of the sun. The whole town of Batopilos
went to gaze at the extraordinary sight as soon as the river was
fordable. This Indian extracted great wealth from his mine, but, on
coming to the depth of three Spanish yards (_varas_), the abundance of
water obliged him to abandon it, and no attempts have since been made
to resume the working. Coriolanus. What a bad player now Forgot my
roll and I'm confused, By the mockery itself - the blood of my
heart! Forgive my tyranny, but the drum does not say: "Forgive the
Romans." - O! a kiss, as my long spell and sweet as my revenge. Well,
at the Juno jealousy, I picked the kiss, lovers, with, and my lip Has
it been faithfully preserved virgin. My god! how? I gossip? And noblest
of all mothers in the world Did unbegrüßt? - My knees sink into the soil,
press down your duty to the ground as any other son. (He kneels down.)
Volumnia. Arise blessed! That, on a non - weicherm cushion than
the stone, I kneel before you and you kind of new Huldgung Weihe,
hitherto entirely wrong was distributed between child and parents.
(You kneels.)

Coriolanus. What is it? You kneel before me? before gescholtnen son?
Then like pebbles from the desert to the bay Naughty Stars Go; rebellsche
The winds Feuersonn with proud cedars whip, Murdering impossibility,
a cinch to do what can never be forever. Volumnia. You are my warrior,
I you helped shape. Do you know this woman? Coriolanus. The noble sister
of Publicola, The Luna Rome, chaste as the Eiszacken, from the purest
snow of the frost created at the sanctuary Diane. Be greeted,
Valeria. Volumnia. This is a small excerpt of yourself, determined by
the design-filled year has to be like du Coriolanus. The god of warriors,
with the highest Beistimmung Zeus, Adel To educate your mind
that you're steels "The shame invulnerable, and in war a great beacon
stand, defying the storms, the saving that you look. Volumnia.
knees, boy.

Coriolanus. wackrer This is my son. Volumnia. He and your wife, the woman
here and Are beseechingly myself before you. Coriolanus. I ask you,
still! If not, remember this before you say: What I verschwor to grant
that when you do not refuse, says I do not dismiss my army, not,
again acting with The manual workers of Rome; not talk to me before,
what I seem unnatural, does not think to sänftgen my anger and my revenge
With your colder reasons. Volumnia. O! no more! no more! You've said
you want to give us nothing, nothing to be desired because we
have than what you already abschlugst, but I want to ask that,
weich our request from you, the blame falls on your hardship.
Hear us drum. Coriolanus. Aufidius and her Volsker notes, we hear
nothing of Rome secretly. Well, your request? Volumnia. If we are
silent, but said this dress And our pale face, what a life since your
spell we had. Think yourself, how we unselger than ever Fraun on
earth, you nahn! Your sight, with tears of joy fill the eyes to
the heart with delight, she networked with suffering and tortures it
with fear and worry, as mother, wife and child to have to see how the
son, husband and father cruelly dug in his country's bosom .
For near a century,
the accounts of the wealth of this mine were considered fabulous; but
their literal truth is confirmed by the testimony of the English
embassador. After examining the old records which I have quoted, I have
no doubt that the facts surpassed the astonishing report; for in
Mexico, the propensity has ever been to conceal rather than
over-estimate the quantity of silver, on account of the king's fifth;
yet it is the king's fifth, _actually paid_, on which all the estimates
of the production of Sonora silver mines are based. Arazuma (which, in
the report of the Mineria that I have translated for this volume,
appears to be set down as Arizpa) was, a hundred years ago, the world's
wonder, and so continued until the breaking out of the great Apache war
a few years afterward. Men seemed to run mad at the sight of such
immense masses of virgin silver, and for a time it seemed as if silver
was about to lose its value. In the midst of the excitement, a royal
ordinance appeared, declaring Arazuma a "creation of silver" (_creador
de plata_), and appropriating it to the king's use. This put a stop to
private enterprise; and, after the Indian war set in, Arazuma became
almost a forgotten locality; and in a generation or two afterward, the
accounts of its mineral riches began to be discredited.

We have the following record in evidence of the masses of silver
extracted at Arazuma. Don Domingo Asmendi paid duties on a piece of
virgin silver which weighed 275 lbs. The king's attorney (_fiscal_)
brought suit for the duties on several other pieces, which together
weighed 4033 lbs. Also for the recovery, as a curiosity, and therefore
the property of the king, of a certain piece of silver of the weight of
2700 lbs. This is probably the largest piece of pure silver ever found
in the world, and yet it was discovered only a few miles distant from
the contemplated track of our Pacific Railroad.

I might continue enumerating the instances of mineral wealth brought to
light in these two states, Sonora and Chihuahua, if I supposed it would
be interesting to my readers; but as they have heard enough of silver,
I may add that rich deposits of gold were found at Molatto in 1806, and
a still greater discovery of gold was made a few years ago. In this
latter discovery, the poor diggers suffered so much from thirst that a
dollar was readily paid for a single bucket of water, and at length, by
reason of the drought, this rich _placer_ had to be abandoned.


FUTURE OF SONORA.

Such is Sonora, a region of country which combines the rare attractions
of the richest silver mines in the world, lying in the midst of the
finest agricultural districts, and where the climate is as attractive
as its mineral riches. But its richest mineral district is near its
northern frontier, and is almost inaccessible, and can never be
advantageously worked without an abundant supply of mineral coal for
smelting; nor can any of its mines or estates be successfully worked
without greater security for life and property than at present exists.
The capitalists of Mexico will not invest their means in developing the
resources of Sonora, and in consequence, the finest country in the
world is fast receding to a state of nature. I found in the Palace at
Mexico a copy of the last report of the Governor of Sonora upon the
state of his Department, in which he mentions, among many other causes
of its decadence during the last few years, the extensive emigration of
its laboring population to California.

Extravagant as are these statements of the mineral riches of Sonora,
they probably do not come up to the reality, as the largest of them are
founded on the sums reported for taxation at the distant city of
Mexico, when it was notorious, as already stated, that a large portion
of the silver was fraudulently concealed in order to avoid the taxes.
Such concealment could be successfully carried on in a region so
distant and inaccessible as Sonora was in the time of Philip V., for it
was in the reign of that idiot king, before the liberal
mining-ordinances of Carlos III., that the Sonora mining-fever broke
out.

A hundred years have passed since the once formidable Apaches swept
over northern Sonora like a deluge, blotting out forever the hopes
which the Spanish court had conceived of retrieving the fallen finances
of their empire from this _El Dorado_. But Providence had ordered it
otherwise. The Spaniards had done enough to demonstrate its
inexhaustible wealth, and then they were driven away from this
"creation of silver,"[83] and the whole deposit held for a hundred
years in reserve for the uses of another race, who were destined to
overrun the continent.

I should have but half performed my task should I omit to speak of the
excellent bay and harbor of Guaymas, in the southern part of Sonora.
After San Francisco, it is the finest harbor on the Pacific, and is the
natural route through which our commerce with the East Indies should be
directed. The long experience of Spain taught her that a western route
to the East Indies was so much superior to the one by the Cape of Good
Hope as to compensate for a transhipment of all of her East India
merchandise upon mules' backs from Acapulco to Vera Cruz. Much more
advantageous must it be to us, when a railroad from El Paso, passing
through the midst of the silver district I have described, shall
transfer our commerce with Japan and China to the Pacific side of our
continent. Here the very silver necessary for the purchase of tea is
nearly as abundant as tin in some of the European mines, and, as in
California, the prospects held out to the farmer are equal to mineral
attractions.

It would be folly for our government to acquire Sonora without first
providing for connecting it with our country by railroad, and equally
foolish to acquire it without making provision, in the treaty of
acquisition, for reducing all land-titles to the size of a single
township, in consideration for the superior value given to the property
by the annexation, and for annulling all land-titles under which there
is not an actual occupancy. The Spanish courts concede to government
this power over private rights, and for this reason a treaty of
acquisition from Mexico would prevent the confusion that now exists in
California, and enable American settlers to locate understandingly at
once. All titles should continue to be subject, as they now are, to the
right of the miner to enter in search of precious metals, thus no
conflicts in relation to the rights of land-owners and miners could
arise. The principle on which the Mexican mining laws and the
California mining customs are established should be recognized by the
United States. But that right of entry would not arise until the
construction of a railroad should afford the means of actually reducing
the country to possession, which Spain never has accomplished, and
Mexico never can accomplish.

      [79] When I was first at the city of Mexico, Governor Letcher
      introduced to me a son of the late emperor, who had a claim for
      land in California which he had not located before the
      annexation. I advised him, without a fee, that our courts did not
      recognize foreign "floats," and that, by his own _laches_, he had
      lost his claim, which he now spread along the Sacramento River
      for 400 miles. Finding out, after an expenditure of several
      thousand dollars, the defect, he got a new claim from the late
      President Lombardini of thirty miles square, which he will
      probably now pin tight in Sonora. Then he had a tremendous
      Jodel resound. And at once he stood with his pack tightly against
      the ladies, because his bare feet as he sprang nimbly and quietly
      as his creatures.

      "Good evening, I wish," he said, he seems both funny and wanted
      to move on. But the Geißbub with the merry eyes liked the
      ladies. "Wait a bit," said Paula, "you are the Geißbub of
      Fideris? Do you have goats from the village below?" "Yes, of
      course," was the reply. "Are you going all day with them up there?"
      "Yes indeed. "" So, so, and what's your name then? "" Moni hot I
      am. "" Do you want me to sing the song once, you've just sung?

      We have just heard a verse. "

      

      [83] I do not know exactly how to translate the Spanish idea
      attached to the words _creador de plata_ unless by saying
      that it is a spot where baser substances are supposed to be
      converted into silver by some unknown process of nature.


APPENDIX.


A.

MINERIA REPORT ON THE MINERAL RICHES OF SONORA.

Among the five-and-twenty states and territories that compose the
Mexican confederation, there is no other which contains in its
respective territory the like wonderful mineral riches which abound in
the state of which we treat. This would appear almost fabulous; but
there is proof enough from the testimony of many residents of that
state, and from the assertion of travelers, from the evidences which
the archives of the various missions exhibit, and from the royal
registry of mines (_reales de minas_), and, lastly, from the
indubitable fact of the production of great quantities of gold and
silver from the mines and _placers_ of this state, considering the
small amount of forces, and its isolation from all the principal
settlements of the republic by reason of the distance which separates
it from them.

In fact, many metals of universal estimation, such as gold, silver,
mercury, copper, and iron, in a pure state, in grains, in masses, or in
dust, as well as mixed with other metals, superficially or in veins,
are found in the extensive territory of Sonora; lead, or combinations
of lead, for aiding in extracting metals by fire, and for the
construction of munitions of war, amianthus or incombustible crystal,
divers ores of copperas, exquisite marble, alabaster, and jasper of
various colors, as well as quarries of stone of _chrispa_ and magnetic
stones, muriate and carbonate of soda, saltpetre or nitrate of potassa,
are, in enumeration, the mineral productions which are found in
abundance in the territory of the state of Sonora, which comprehends
the region from the river of Fort _Monte Clarasal_ at the south to the
Gila at the north, and from the Sierra Madre at the east to the
Colorado at the northwest.

To the disgrace of the nation, these authentic and exact notices of
the marvelous riches of this remote state have availed nothing in
determining speculators (_empresarios_) to resort to those places in
pursuit of a fortune so certain, or at least to have avoided, by the
means of colonization, the loss which is _feared_ of this inestimable
jewel.

The territory of the state of Sonora lacks nothing but security [from
incursions of Indians] in order that the hand of man may be profusely
recompensed for his labor. Virgin soils, where the agricultural fruits
of all climates not only flourish, but many of these improve in
quality; navigable rivers, which contribute in part to the easy
transportation of the products to the ports of the Pacific for
exportation and consumption; mines and _placers_ of precious metals, in
many of which there is no necessity of capital to explore and collect
them--are not these stimulants enough to attract there a population
thrifty and civilized? In order to ascertain the mineral riches which
the nation may lose in a short time, we call attention to the mineral
statistics which follow, although they are imperfect and diminutive.

As already we have said, the whole of Sonora is mineral; but as among
us we only give this name to those places in which there have been
discovered and worked a conjunction of veins, it results that the
places in this state to which for this cause has been given the name of
mineral are thirty-four. Some of the mines are _amparadas_ [viz.,
worked sufficient to confer a legal title to the occupant], and are
imperfectly in a state of operation. The names of all of these two
classes, which are sixteen in all, are Hermosillo, San Javier, Subiate,
Vayoreca, Alamas, Babicanara, Batuco, La Alameda, Rio Chico, El Aguaja,
Aigame, El Luaque, Saguaripa, La Trinidad, San Antonio, and El Zoni.

The remaining eighteen are found abandoned, some for the want of water,
and others for the want of laborers or capital, and by the fear which
the barbarous Indians inspire. The names of these last minerals are San
Juan de Sonora, that of the Sierra at the northwest of Guaymas,
Arizuma, Bacauchi, Antunes, San José de Gracia, El Gavilau, San
Ildefonso de la Cienequilla, San Francisco el Calou, Santa Rosa, San
Antonio de la Huenta, Vadoseco Sobia, Mulatos, Basura, Alamo-Muerto,
and San Perfecto.

In the same state have been discovered twenty-one _placers_; of these,
one is of virgin silver, in grains and plates (_planchas_), and twenty
of pure gold, in grains and dust; but as nearly all these are situated
in the mineral districts (_minerales_) already mentioned, the names of
those which are not given are the following: Agua Caliente, Quitovac,
Las Palomas, La Canaca, and Totahiqui. With the exception of three, to
which gold-hunters from time to time resort to relieve their
necessities, all the others remain abandoned.

There was only one mineral district actually in work at the close of
the last century and the beginning of the present; those now actually
in process of being worked are fourteen, and their names are La Grande,
La Quintera, El Subiate, Bulbaucda Europita, Vayoreca, La Cotera, Santo
Domingo, Noercheran, La Sibertao, Minas-Núevas, El Tajo, Minas Prietas,
and another near La Grande.

From the mineral districts (_minerales_) abandoned there ought to be
inferred an increased number of mines, which are in the same condition,
but we do not know their names, and we have only notices of the twenty
following: Pimas, La Tarasca, Ubalama, Ojito de San Roman, Yaquis, La
Guerita, Noaguila, Las Animas, Afuerenos, Piedras-verdes Navares, La
Calera, Caugrejos, Guillarmena, San Atilano, San Teodoro, and El
Gavilau. In those in Pinas, and in one of those of the _mineral_ of San
José de Gracia, have been found considerable amounts of pure silver
deposited in their veins, and mineral taken from San Teodoro has
produced one half silver. In extracting the silver from the ore in this
place, we ought to mention that the greater part of these mines are
susceptible of great _bonanzas_, from not having been worked
extensively, as their proprietors abandoned them when the metals failed
to appear upon the surface, and when the exploration was a little more
costly.

There are eleven haciendas in the State of Sonora for purifying the
metals which the mines and _placers_ produce, without taking into the
account many little establishments, with from two to five horse-mills,
with one bad furnace for the fusion of metals. Three of these are
situated in Alamas, five in Aduana, one in Promontorio, another in
Tatagiosa, and the last in Minas Nuevas (New Mines). There are many
abandoned mines, as the rubbish and ruins indicate, which we have
noticed, in all the abandoned mineral districts.

The methods which they have observed in extracting the metals from the
ore are the _patio_ [by application of quicksilver in an open yard],
and that of fusion, with the aid of some metals that assist the fusion;
but from the fact that the quicksilver augments considerably the price,
the few that there carry on the business have preferred the process of
fusion to that of the _patio_, from being less costly, and because the
docility of the metals afford facilities to this process.

No machines of new invention have been introduced into that state,
either for the drainage of the mines or for facilitating the extracting
of the metals. This ought not to surprise us, in places so desert and
distant from the metropolis, unaccustomed to the vivifying movements of
commerce, and to the necessities which civilization has engendered in
the more important populations in the central parts of the republic.
That which is rare, and ought to call attention, is the exception of
some mines, where _malacatos_ [water-sacks of bull-hides, drawn up by a
windlass] are used for discharging water. In almost all those which
have thus been worked, they have not had an opportunity to exhibit
their riches, as the abundance of water in many of them was the
principal cause of their abandonment.

The greatest difficulty in the way of giving an exact idea of the
products of the mines and placers of Sonora is the scandalous
contraband exportations of gold and silver which are made from the
ports of the Sea of Cortéz [Gulf of California] on the one hand, and,
on the other, the difficulties that have presented themselves to his
Excellency, the Governor of that state, for giving the statistical
notices which have been sought on repeated occasions by the Junta of
the Mineria, both of which causes have made difficult the account which
we furnish; but by those which they themselves furnished of the
production of those minerals before and since the independence of the
nation, and by the exhibits of various witnesses presented in the
remission of bars which from thence they made to the capital of the
republic, when the ports of the Pacific were sealed to foreign
commerce, the production of precious metals having yielded in divers
epochs not far from 4500 pounds of silver, without considering the gold
(abundant enough in _placers_ and in rivers), and from what is known,
the quantities of this metal extracted have been considerable, and in
more abundance than in the mineral districts of the other states of the
republic.

Attention having been much called to the ley and weight of the grains
of pure gold found on the surface in Quitovac, Cienequilla, and San
Francisco, as well as those masses of virgin silver found in Arizuma,
which wonderful riches stimulated the colonial government to despoil
the proprietors of it, and afterward the King of Spain, in declaring
that it pertained to his royal patrimony.

All those places in Sonora which are actually abandoned, as well as all
the lands of that state, are susceptible of producing great riches. The
reasons on which these assertions are founded are those which M. Saint
Clair Duport mentions in speaking of the probable variation there will
be in value of gold and silver in time, by reason of the great
extractions hereafter of these metals, particularly in California [this
was before the annexation of California] and Sonora, where, as in the
Ural Mountains, and the Altai Mountains of Central Asia, gold is
extremely abundant, and because in the _placers_ mentioned explorers
have recognized gold in dust, which they have not washed for want of
water in some, and from the difficulty that exists in others in order
to work them, such as those of Arizuma and La Papagueria.

Nothing could be said in relation to the number of operatives who are
employed in working the mines of this state, nor the day-laborers; nor
in respect to articles consumed there, as well in the digging of the
metals as in extracting them from the ores, because, as has already
been said, his Excellency the Governor has not been able to give the
notices which have been sought, and there are no other better
authorities through whom information can be procured. For in this state
there are no mining courts,[84] but the ordinary judges of first
instance are the authorities which take cognizance of matters which
occur in the department of the Mineria.

      [84] The title to all mines in Mexico rests solely upon discovery
      and improvement, without any regard to the proprietorship to the
      land on which the mines are located; but the proof of discovery
      and improvement must be made and recorded in the mineral courts,
      except in Sonora, where the ordinary courts have jurisdiction.

There are no companies for the exploration of the mines in that remote
state. Some inhabitants, in distant periods, have procured the
formation of numerous caravans with the character of companies, and
with the object of collecting precious metals, which they encountered
in the placers of Arizuma and of Papagueria, but until now they have
not been able to hold with effect undertakings so laudable.

Various are the causes on account of which the riches which lie buried
through all parts of the immense territory of the State of Sonora have
not been explored. Some of these reasons have already been referred to,
but, for greater clearness, we take this opportunity to recapitulate
them all. The first, which are much noted, are the following:

1st. The absolute want of personal security.

2d. But there are other things had Moni think. If now the Mäggerli on a
steep cliff hinunterfiele, and he wanted to get it, and God would no
longer protect him, if he no longer pray to him and call expected,
he would have no security anymore.

And if he then ausrutschte and with the deep Mäggerli on the jagged
rocks and both hinunterfiele very torn and smashed at the bottom of the
abyss would ... Oh no, he said anxiously to himself, so it could not
come. He had to ensure that he again and pray before God came with
everything he stood on the heart. Then again, he could be happy, the
feeling Moni. He wanted to be rid of the burden that oppressed him,
he wanted to go and tell everything to the landlord - but then what?
Then his father was Jörgli not talk about, and the landlord would
Mäggerli totstechen.

Oh no! That he could not endure, and he said: "No, I do not, I say nothing."
But it was not well with him and his guilty conscience was always larger.
So passed the monitor the whole day. He returned home at night so silently,
as he had come morning. And as a bathhouse at the bottom, and Paula
was quickly become the goats stall herübersprang participatory and
asked: "Moni, what is missing you? Why sing because you do not?" - He
turned shyly and said: "I can not." And as soon as possible, he set out
with his goats away.
Metals of lead (_metales plomosos_) abound in Agua
Caliente, Alamo-Muerto, La Papagueria, Arispe, and La Cieneguilla. From
these two last points have been taken considerable quantities of them,
for supplying all other mines of the state [to aid in fusion], and for
munitions of war. Copperas, or sulphate of iron, is abundant in San
Javier, San Antonio de la Huerta, and Agua Caliente. In the first of
these placers a vein runs from south to north, from pieces of which,
dissolved in water, there results a tint which, by evaporation, forms
into grains, and produces the same effect as the tint of China. In
Cucurpe is _amianto_, or incombustible crystal, which the ancients so
much valued. Marbles of various classes and colors, as well as
alabasters and jaspers, are found in Opasura, Hermosillo, Uores, La
Campana, and other points; but we do not know as yet the place from
which the Aztecs obtained the beautiful reddish marble which they used
in the construction of their divinity of Chapultepec, which is
preserved in the National Museum, and which, according to all
conjectures and probabilities, proceeded from the quarries of marble of
that state. There are quarries of the stone of chrispa, and even the
magnet in Alamas, Hermosillo, in Sierras of the frontier, and in the
causada of Barbitas, ten leagues distant from Hermosillo, near the
route of La Cieneguilla. Muriate and carbonate of soda, saltpetre, or
nitrate of potassa, are found in the margin of the rivers which empty
into the Gulf of Cortéz [of California], and particularly in the mouths
of the Colorado.


B.

REPORT ON THE MINERAL RICHES OF CHIHUAHUA.

The statistical notices which have until to-day been received, embrace
five cantons or departments of that state, which show that there exist
in it sixteen _minerals_ [districts containing mines], of which twelve
are in working, and four abandoned in consequence of the incessant
incursions of barbarous Indians. Their names are Hidalgo del Parral,
Minas Nuevas, San Francisco del Oro, Santa Barbara, Zopago, Chinipas,
Guazapores, Batozegache, Guadalupe y Calvo, Cuacogornichie, Galeana,
Cosihuiriachic, Santa Eulalia, Barranco, and two more, without names,
in the canton Caleana.

Twenty-one mines are found in operation in the twelve _minerals_ in
action. The number of those abandoned is increasing, and is not
permanent; and the only cause referred to is that many of them are
abandoned for want of capital, and others from the hostility of the
barbarians. The products of those that were worked in the year 1849
amount to 146,818 marks of silver, of a ley of eleven _dineros_, and 7
marks, 7 oz., and 4 eighths of gold to the twenty-two quintals. The
number of haciendas and furnaces for extracting the metal from the ore
was twenty, and the processes which they use in that state are the
_patio_ and the furnace; the last is the most general. Finally, there
has been put in practice a third system, by the house of Manning and
M'Intosh, for the purpose of separating the silver by means of the
precipitate of copper. The consumptions of the last year, 1849, amount
to $544,194, notwithstanding which the notices omit the returns of
various mines, haciendas, furnaces, and water-mills. The items are
quicksilver at $140 a hundred, gunpowder, lime, wood, sulphate of
copper, salt, iron, steel, metals of aid [metals thrown into the
compound to aid the process of extracting], tallow, grease, hides,
leather, corn, straw, grain, flesh, beans, and bars of iron. The number
of operatives is not known with exactness, because the reports only
refer to certain mines and haciendas, but in these they amount to 1833,
besides day-laborers at five _reals_ (5/8ths of a dollar) a day for
half the time. The most important improvements that have been
introduced into some of these mines consist in the establishment of
pumps for facilitating draining, and in the introduction of German
ovens for fusing a greater quantity of mineral at a less cost and with
greater perfection, being so much the more interesting as the condition
of the metals presents itself more easily to this kind of benefiting.

Four companies have been established for prosecuting the labor of the
mines, Preseña, Rosario, Tajo, and Prieta. The first takes its name
from Señor Delille, the second is composed of Mexicans, and the last
two are composed of Mexicans, English, and naturalized Spaniards.
Nothing is known in relation to their capitals. Besides the precious
metals, we find lead in Naica and Babisas, of the canton of Matamoros;
copper, from which only _magistral_ is taken, is found in the canton of
Mina, and sulphur and saltpetre in the canton of Iturbide. The reports
mention nothing in respect to the authorities that take cognizance of
the affairs of the Mineria; but it is presumed that, as in the rest of
the nation, the judges of first instance take knowledge of
controversies, and the courts of mines, if by chance they are
established, take cognizance of the economy and government of the
mines.

The mint of Guadalupe and Calvo coined in 1848, $720,765, and in 1849,
$665,225, of which two sums $1,027,130 were of silver, and $355,859 in
gold, the whole being the proceeds of 116,015 marks, 1 oz., and 4
eighths of silver, of the ley of eleven _dineros_, and of 2351 marks, 5
oz., 2 eighths of gold, with ley of twenty-two carats. This appears
from the reports of the mint of the capital of that state.


C.

REPORT ON THE MINERAL RICHES OF COAHUILA.

This state, one of the least populous, and exposed, like all the
frontier states of the north, to the incessant incursions of the
barbarous tribes, offers at present very little interest to those
speculations which engender the exercise of mineral industry--that
which, besides experience and capital, requires for its development an
abundance of hands and entire security. While the publication of the
mineral statistics of the nation not only brings the idea of
manifesting the present condition of this branch of industry among us,
but also that of propagating its exercise as one of the principal
elements of riches among the Mexicans, it is necessary to speak of the
state in which the Mineria is in Coahuila, and of hopes which it makes
to spring up for the future. There are twelve mines actually
_amparadas_, or in labor, in the four _minerals_ already mentioned:
their names are unknown to us, and it is only known that their monthly
products amount to 200 marks [of 8 ounces] of silver and 150 loads of
_greta_ [litharge]. The number of operatives employed in all these
amount to 193, and the day laborers receive four _reals_ [half a
dollar] a day.

There is no exact notice of the number of mineral districts and single
mines abandoned in the State of Coahuila; but the number is
considerable, according to the information furnished from 1843 by the
deputation of Santa Rosa. Among those deserving a particular mention is
that of the Sierra de Timulco and that of Potrerillos, by the good ley
of the metals of the mines of the first, and by the uniformity of the
veins and not unappreciable richness of the second. These veins run
generally from northwest to southeast, and in the course they
encounter, scattered about, silver-bearing galena [sulphuret of lead],
lead, copper, with sulphuret of zinc. The amount of the consumptions of
the mines that are worked is also unknown; but it is known that the
gunpowder costs the operators $9 an aroba [of 25 pounds], of lead, $12
a carga of 300 pounds; that of _greta_, $6; copper, of superior
quality, $16 the hundred weight; the carga of coal, six _reals_ [three
fourths of a dollar], and wood, one _real_ a mule-load. The ruins and
the heaps of rubbish manifest that in other times there was much
activity in the labor of the mines and haciendas for separating the
metals; but to-day there are only in existence some furnaces, which are
the least costly, which the miners of Coahuila can use for their
metals. This they effect generally in ovens, and in _galemes_ in the
open plain. He took it quite well now tenderly to himself and put it in
his stall inside. Then he said: "So, Mäggerli now sleeping
well, you're tired. It is very far to go there, and you are still so
small. Leg now only equal out, you see, so in the good straw into
it." After he said Mäggerli bedded had to rest, he rushed to his
flock, only before the bathhouse up the hill and then down
the road to the village.
There are three companies in that state for working the mines in the
mineral district of Ramirez, and another in that of Trinudco. There is
no notice of the amount of funds employed, but it is presumed that they
are not considerable, by considering the smallness of the fortunes of
the inhabitants of the frontier.

In government and economy of mines the Assembly of Mineria of the
valley of Santa Rosa have jurisdiction, but in litigations the judges
of first instance have jurisdiction, to whom a particular law of this
state gives authority.

In Coahuila, besides silver, there is found virgin iron in masses of
considerable volume and of extraordinary value in the Sierra of
Mercudo, in Guadalupe, and other points.

There is copper in Putula or Rios and in Guadalupe. In these mineral
districts we also encounter lead. _Amianto_ (incombustible crystal)
also abounds in Niezca and in the vicinity of Monclova, as also nitre
in San Blas, jurisdiction of San Buonaventura. In the hills of Gizedo,
correspondent to the district of Santa Rosa, are extracted sulphur and
copperas.

It is difficult to ascertain and to mention all the causes which have
led to the decadence of the mineral industry of this state, because the
reports which the authorities have remitted do not state it exactly;
but there is no doubt that they are two, viz., the want of security
occasioned by the frequent incursions of the barbarians, and the little
affection which the agricultural people that occupy that state have for
mining enterprises; that, as already said, they require recognizances,
as well as capital and hands, things which are scarce enough in the
vast territory of the frontier state of Coahuila.


D.

REPORT ON THE MINERAL RICHES OF LOWER CALIFORNIA.

The sparse population of this territory, the want of scientific
information in its inhabitants, and the difficulties which have existed
in the way of keeping up an intercourse with their fellow-citizens of
the centre of the republic, are causes weighty enough for explaining
the ignorance in which we live concerning the mineral riches of that
interesting peninsula. Without doubt, if we are permitted to judge of
it from the abundance of the precious metals which California of the
North and Sonora contain, and their contiguities, we ought to infer
that in the territory of Southern California the designated metals
should be found in considerable quantities. The official notices which
we possess in respect to Lower California fortify this conjecture.
Those exhibited by persons who lack competent instruction upon this
point contribute in part to foretell what will be the grade of
prosperity which will come in time with the developing of the mineral
industry in this territory.

Southern California, by its topographical position alone, is called to
occupy an important place, not only among the integral parts of the
nation, but even among foreign parts of America which are bounded by
the Pacific. If its first necessity is attended to, with the
augmentation of population commerce will come to give it the consequent
movement and animation, and the Mineria will come to complete the
circle of its prosperity; so that it is now difficult to perceive the
grand importance, commercial and political, which this despised
peninsula, which is called Lower California, will yet attain when the
transition of time and the sequel of events come to realize these
Utopian offspring of a patriotic sentiment; but we will occupy
ourselves with the statistical mineral notices of that territory.

There are nine mineral districts (_minerales_) which are now
recognized in California: their names are San Antonio, Zule, Santa
Anna, Muleje, Triumpho, Las Virgenes, El Valle Perdido, Los Flores,
Cuecuhilas. There is a range traversing from north to south for the
space of forty leagues in that territory, which contains also a
multitude of veins which have not been explored. In all these minerals
abound, but the irregular and inconstant labor of some of the mines
does not permit us to consider them as in action.

Explorations of some mines of gold and silver have been made in
California, but they remain in the same state with the other
_minerales_. One and another have been worked superficially, but their
possessors abandoned them when they presented any obstacle, which made
the working more costly, so that it is no exaggeration to say they all
are now abandoned. In a country almost a wilderness (_desierto_), where
the want of conveniences in exploration of the mines failed to engender
the stimulus of acquiring and preserving the proprietorship of the
discoveries,[85] and where, with the same facility with which they
abandon one known vein, they proceed to work another new vein--in a
country where the great part of the inhabitants might well be
considered as tribes that have only reached the first grades of
civilization, rather than organized societies, it is not strange that
there is a want of mineral recognizances where only the mines at which
the metals are easily procured, and not costly in extracting from the
ore, are worked.

      Then went the whole society down to the bathhouse. Here was the
      kid on his stock, and Moni took leave. Paula went back to her
      room to find the aunt still far from the Geißbuben to tell on
      whose cheerful morning song she is already happy again. 3 Chapter
One How to visit for several days were passed, such a sunny and
clear as the others because it was a very nice summer.

And the sky was blue and cloudless from morning till evening.
To ascertain to what value these
extractions of metals ascend is extremely difficult for the want of
data with which to aid any calculation.

The benefiting (extracting the metals from the ores) is no less
imperfectly done than the labor of the mines. There are no haciendas
for benefiting; many persons that engage themselves in mining
speculations have in that territory one, two, and even five
horse-mills, with which they grind the metal; this they mix with
quicksilver and salt--imitating the process by the _patio_--in
proportion of 50 pounds of the first and 75 of the second to 625 (25
arobas) of metal, and, proceeding by means of fusion in bad ovens, they
obtain silver. Some others obtain it by means of vases of refining with
the aid of lead.

The consumptions of the Californians in the extraction of the precious
metals consist of quicksilver, salt, and wood; the first they have
purchased in the last years at two dollars a pound, the second at
thirty-seven and a half cents for twenty-five pounds, and the third at
a quarter of a dollar a mule-load. It is to be presumed that when the
quicksilver of Northern California comes to compete with the
quicksilver of Spain in the mineral districts of the interior[86] of the
republic, the price of this principal element for conducting the
working of mines will fall greatly in all the nation, and that the
Mineria will assume a grade of prosperity never yet seen in our
country; and Lower California, by its proximity to the places of the
production of mercury, will obtain it, without doubt, at a still lower
price. The day-laborers, who work the mines of this territory, receive
for their labor from seventy-five cents to one dollar; but there is not
a fixed number, neither is their occupation constant.

      [86] This term is applied to all places distant from the capital.

It is not necessary to speak of the existence of companies for
exploring mines in a country where there is such a scarcity of
population, and where there is not an accumulation of capital
sufficient in order that a part of it might be employed in the
hazardous enterprises of mineral industry. It was quite like a little
stroke. "Now you sing me your song even if you're ever here," said
Paula.

Moni was so cheerfully voted that he likes from full breast anstimmte
and all his song sang to the end.
In another placer, which embraces an extension of
seven leagues, they also extract some gold in dust in quantities as
insignificant as those which result from the sands of the river
mentioned.

Silver and gold are the only metals that have claimed the attention of
the Californians, because they derive an advantage from their
extraction, and not because there do not exist other metals less
valuable, but which yield proportionably greater profit to the miners
that undertake the exploration; these are lead, copper, iron,
magistral, crystal of Roca, loadstone, and alum.


E.

THE REMAINS OF CORTÉZ.

The account of the disposition of the remains of Cortéz, given on page
279, is the one commonly received, and contained in works of standard
authority. Since this volume was placed in the hands of the printers, I
have received a new number of the _Apuentes Históricos_, which contains
another account, which is undoubtedly the true one. According to this,
when the body of Cortéz was first brought to America, it was taken to
Tezcuco, and buried at the San Franciscan convent, beside that of his
friend, King Don Fernando. In the course of the following century it
was taken to Mexico and buried in the convent of the Jesuits (the
Pro-for is probably intended). After the Revolution, it was transported
to Sicily by the agent of his descendant, the present "Marquis of the
Valley."


THE END.