The Customs were so far from being in a conciliatory mood as to be
absolutely deaf to entreaty, cajolery, argument, explanation or threat.
They cut the operations summarily short by confiscating everything
liable to duty. As may be imagined a rich harvest was garnered at the
expense of the luckless returning patriot. While the Customs were busy
the military officials, who appeared to be swarming everywhere, were
equally exacting. They boarded the train and literally turned it inside
out. Every man and woman and child was subjected to a close personal
investigation and cross-examination. Foreigners were handled with even
greater stress and with less ceremony. I saw four fellow passengers
sorted out and rushed under a military escort into the waiting room.

At last it was my turn for military inquisition. I presented all my
credentials, which were scanned from end to end, turned over, and even
held up to the light, lest there should be something interwoven with the
watermark. I followed the operations with a quiet amusement, confident
in my security, but could not resist remarking upon the thoroughness of
the search and the determination to leave nothing to chance. My passport
created the greatest interest. It was dated July 7th, 1914. The official
looked at me queerly in silent interrogation as he placed his finger
beneath the date. I nodded and made no comment.

With a slight smile of self-satisfaction the officer turned on his heel
and beckoned me to follow him. At the same moment two soldiers clicked
their heels behind me and I saw that I was already under severe military
suspicion. I was taken to a long-bearded individual sitting in state on
a pedestal. The officer handed to him the papers he had found upon me.
There was a hurried whispering, the superior individual eyeing me
narrowly meanwhile. They compared the date of the passport with August
2nd, Sunday, the day on which I was travelling, and also examined the
visé of the Russian Embassy in the corner.

Suddenly the long-bearded officer hurled a torrent of questions at me
and at such a velocity that I was quite unable to follow him. Observing
that his volcanic interrogative eruption was non-productive he slowed
down and repeated the questions.

"Why are you travelling at this time?"

"To take up an appointment in Russia. There is the name--Prince ----"

"Ah!" and his eyebrows were elevated so much as to mingle almost with
his hair.

"But why have you so much photographic apparatus?"

"It is necessary for the work I am taking up."

"Ah!" once again the eyebrows vanished scalp-wards.

"Have you a camera upon you?"

"No!"

"Ah!" another dance of the eyebrows.

He rapped out a short command and before I was aware of the circumstance
two pairs of hands were running rapidly over my body and in and out of
my pockets with the dexterity of men who had served a long
apprenticeship under an Artful Dodger. It proved a blank search. I gave
a sigh of relief, because had the searchers run their hands over the
lower part of my person they would have come across two cameras, and my
treasured little companion, wrapped in his leather jacket, alert and
ready for silent service, but concealed in a most unexpected corner. I
could scarcely repress a smile when I recognised that I was immune from
further search. Evidently the Pooh-bah was somewhat disconcerted at the
negative results achieved, because, after firing one or two other
desultory questions at me, he handed back my passport and other papers,
and told me I could continue my journey.

Desiring to disarm suspicion completely I did not hurry away but
lingered around the little court and even indulged in a short idle
conversation with my interlocutor, who, however, somewhat resented my
familiarity. I lounged back to the train, hugely delighted with myself,
more particularly as, quite unbeknown to the fussy individual with the
beard, I had snapped a picture of his informal court with my little
camera.

The frontier formalities at last concluded, the train resumed its crawl,
ambling leisurely along for some two hours, stopping now and then to
draw into a siding. On such occasions troop train after troop train
crowded with soldiers thundered by us _en route_ to Berlin. The sight of
a troop train roused our passengers to frenzy. They cheered madly,
throwing their hats into the air. The huzzas were returned by the
soldiers hanging out of the windows with all the exuberant enthusiasm of
school boys returning home at the end of the term.

But we were not destined to make a through run to the capital. Suddenly
the train was pulled up by a military guard upon the line. We were
turned out pell-mell and our baggage was thrown on to the embankment.
This proceeding caused considerable uneasiness. What had happened? Where
were we going? and other questions of a similar character were hurled at
the soldiers. But they merely shook their heads in a non-committal
manner. They either did not or would not know. Our feelings were not
improved when the empty carriages were backed down the line, the engine
changed ends, and we saw the train steam off in another direction. The
hold-up of the train had taken place at a depressing spot. We were
completely stranded, without provisions or any other necessities, and at
an isolated spot where it was impossible to obtain any supplies. The
passengers pestered the guard for information, and at last the officers,
to still any further enquiry, declared that they were going to do
something, to carry us "somewhere."

Some two-and-a-half hours slipped by when a loud cheer rang out at the
appearance of a train of crazy carriages which backed towards us. The
passengers scrambled in and made themselves as comfortable as they
could. But where was the baggage to go? The soldiery had overlooked this
item and they surveyed the straggling mass of bags and trunks littering
the embankment ruefully. But they solved the problem in their own way.
What could not be stacked within the trucks would have to go on top.

We forged ahead once more to pull up at a small station. Here there was
a mad scramble for supplies and the refreshment room was soon cleared
out of its small stock. On the platform an extortionate German drove a
brisk trade selling small bottles of lemonade at sixpence a bottle. More
excitement was caused by a newsvendor mounting a box and holding aloft a
single copy of the latest newspaper which he would sell to the highest
bidder.

Being ignorant of what had transpired since I had left London I resolved
to have that copy. I scrambled over a pile of baggage and came within
arm's length of the newsvendor. I threw down coins to the value of 2s.
8d., grabbed his paper and vanished before he could voice a protest. I
scrambled back to my car. Here the paper was snatched from me to be read
aloud to the expectant crowd thirsting for news. There was a tense
silence as the reader ran through the items until he gravely announced
the latest intelligence--Russia and Germany had declared war. The news
was official. For a second a profound silence reigned. Then there broke
out a further outburst of wild, maniacal cheering, above which, however,
could be heard hysterical screams and shrieks from women, especially
from those bound for Russia, which they now realised they would never
reach.

I saw at once that it was hopeless to get to my destination, as the
Russo-German frontier was now closed. But as it was quite as impossible
to turn back I decided to push on to Berlin there to await events. So
far Britain was not involved and might even keep clear of the tangle.
This I might say was the general opinion on the train. The remainder of
the journey to the capital was now far more exciting, and the animated
conversation served to while away the tedium of the slow travelling,
although the latter part was completed in darkness, the train running
into Berlin at 1.30 in the morning of August 3rd, the journey from
Flushing having taken about 18 hours.

The platform at Berlin was overrun with officials of all sorts and
descriptions, ranging from puny collectors to big burly fellows
smothered with sufficient braid and decorations to pass as
field-marshals. But one and all seemed to be entrusted with swords too
big for them which clanked and clattered in the most nerve-racking
manner. They strutted up and down the platform with true Prussian
arrogance, jostling the fatigued, cursing the helpless who lounged in
their path, ignoring the distress of the children, sneering at the
pitiful pleadings of the women--in fact caring about nothing beyond
their own importance. They disdained to reply to any question, and said
nothing beyond the terse statement that no more trains were going East
to Russia. At this intelligence the travellers bound for the latter
country collapsed, the majority, women, flopping upon their baggage and
dropping their heads in their hands in grief and utter despair.

Yet, although the authorities were fully aware that no more trains were
going East they made no attempt to cope with the influx of arriving and
stranded passengers. They were left to their own devices. The majority
of the women and children were famished, thirsty, and tired, but the
officials resolutely refused to open the waiting rooms and buffets
before the usual hour. Accordingly the travel-tired, grief-stricken
women either threw themselves prone upon the platforms, or crawled into
corridors, sub-ways, and corners to seek a little repose, using their
luggage as head-rests, or being content with the cold hard steps. The
few seats upon the platform were speedily occupied but the occupants
were denied more than a brief repose. At the end of 15 minutes officials
came round and emptied the seats of those in possession to allow other
parties to have a quarter of an hour's rest.

While the worn-out passengers slept the light-fingered German gentry
passed swiftly from bag to bag, the conditions offering favourable
opportunities for the light-fingered gentry. They appeared to suffer no
molestation from the officials, who could plainly see what was going on,
but possibly officialdom regarded the belongings of tired and exhausted
foreigners as legitimate loot to those who were prepared to take it.
Outside the station the heavier baggage was stacked in barricades in a
wildly haphazard manner with the heavier articles at the top. These,
crushing the lighter and more fragile packages beneath, spread the
contents of the latter in the roadway to serve as sport for gamins and
other loungers who prowled around.

The utter chaos was aggravated by the rain which pelted down with
torrential fury. Mothers with their little children drew closely into
corners or sat upon doorsteps seeking the slightest shelter. As I turned
out of the station my attention was attracted by a woman--she had come
up on our train--who was sitting on the kerb, her feet in the gutter,
the rushing water coursing over her ankles, feeding her child at the
breast, and vainly striving to shelter the little mite from the
elements. The woman was crying bitterly. I went up to her. She spoke
English perfectly. She was Russian and had set out from England to meet
her husband at Kalish. But she could not get through, she had very
little money, could not speak German, and knew not what to do, or what
would become of her. I soothed her as well as I could. There were
hundreds of similar cases around. Notwithstanding their terrible plight
not a hand was moved by the authorities on their behalf. They were even
spurned and roughly moved out of the way by the swaggering officials. It
was not until the British colony got busy the next day that they
received the slightest alleviation, and the majority, being strangers
in a strange land, were sent back to England, the Germans mutely
concurring in the task. The wild rush from the Continent may have
precipitated congestion at our ports and railway stations, but there
never could have been that absolute chaos which reigned at Berlin on the
fateful night of the 2nd of August. From the end of this year, 1777,
victory over England was a practical certainty.

CHAPTER VI.

THE SOUTHERN CAMPAIGNS
[1778]
After the summer of 1778 little of military importance occurred at the
North. July and November of that year were marked by bloody Indian
massacres at Wyoming, Pa., and Cherry Valley, N. Y., the worst in all
that border warfare which was incessant from the beginning to the
end of the Revolution.

In August an unsuccessful attempt to regain Newport was made by General
Sullivan, co-operating with a French fleet under D'Estaing. In the spring
and summer of 1779, Clinton, who lay at New York with a considerable
army, closely watched by Washington, sent out to Connecticut and
the coasts of Virginia a number of plundering expeditions which did
much damage. "Mad Anthony Wayne" led a brilliant attack against Stony
Point on the Hudson, captured the British garrison, and destroyed the
fortifications. This year was also marked by a great naval victory.
Paul Jones lashed his vessel, the Bonhomme Richard, to the British
Serapis, off the northeast coast of England, and after a desperate
fight of three hours forced the Serapis to surrender.

But the brunt of the war now fell on the South, where the British,
unsuccessful in the Northern and Middle States, hoped for an easy
conquest.

The capture of Savannah in December, 1778, and of Augusta the next month,
laid Georgia prostrate. The royal government was re-instated by
Prevost, the British general. Our General Lincoln, who had been placed
in command of the Southern army, assisted by D'Estaing with his
fleet, besieged Savannah, but on October 9, 1779, was repulsed with
heavy loss.

[1780]
In the spring of 1780 Clinton arrived from New York with a fleet and
troops. Charleston, S. C, was besieged by land and sea. Lincoln
was compelled to surrender with his whole army. Beaufort, Ninety-Six,
and Camden capitulated in rapid succession. Marauding expeditions
overran the State. President Andrew Jackson carried to his grave
scars of hurts, one on his head, another on his hand, given him by
Tarleton's men when he was a boy at Waxhaw. The patriots lay helpless.
The loyalists organized as militia and joined the British. Clinton,
elated by success, hoped to force the entire population into
allegiance to the king. The estates of patriots were sequestered.
Any Carolinian found in arms against the king might be, and multitudes
were, hung for treason.
Clinton even issued a proclamation requiring all inhabitants to
take active part on the royalist side.This was received
with enthusiasm, the result being that I made the sudden acquaintance of
the pavement outside once more, being assisted in my hurried departure
by fisticuffs and heavy boots.

I picked myself up and walked until I caught sight of an hotel. I
entered, booked a room, and indulged in an elaborate wash and brush-up
of which I was sorely in need, following this with a substantial
breakfast. Then I sauntered into the vestibule for a smoke. Three German
officers and a squad of soldiers came clanking in. There was a short
sharp order. One officer remained at the door while the others
disappeared into the depths of the building.

I went over to the officer and entered into conversation with him. He
spoke English fluently and was fairly affable. We discussed things in
general and also the political situation, from which I gathered that
matters were rapidly approaching a climax, and that there was no telling
what would happen next. This was the first time I had been brought face
to face with the situation and my outlook was serious. The officer at
last turned to me, and with a friendly smile, remarked--

"Look here, my English friend, I would advise you to make for your
country at once. Don't stop for anything!"

"Why?"

"Don't ask questions. Do as I say! Can't you take a friendly warning?
Take to-day's train home! If you don't--well, you may be detained!"

His advice was expressed in such significant tones that I looked at him
sharply. He answered with another smile and a shrug which intimated only
too plainly that he had said as much as he dared.

I was debarred from prosecuting the conversation farther by the return
of his comrades with a crowd of waiters. They were all Russians and they
had been rounded up by the military. No opportunity was given them to
pack a few necessities. They were arrested at their tables, while
performing their duties, were corralled and now were off to prison. No
one possessed any more than he stood up in.

I followed them down the street, intending to proceed to the British
Consulate. The streets were full of soldiers and the air rang with
martial music. While proceeding to the Consulate I became aware that I
was being shadowed. An individual resolutely dogged me. I had seen him
previously but had taken no serious notice of his presence. Now he began
to get a bit irksome. I bought some picture post-cards and addressed
them to friends at home, announcing my immediate return, also
introducing brief comments on the condition of things in Berlin as they
appeared to me. A few hours later I regretted writing those
post-cards.[2]

    [Footnote 2: Upon my return to England I made enquiries and
    discovered that not a single one had been received. Undoubtedly
    they were stopped by the German military authorities and
    contributed somewhat materially to my subsequent
    troubles.--H.C.M.]

The Consulate was besieged by hundreds of compatriots thirsting for
guidance as to what to do. After waiting an hour-and-a-half I secured an
audience. I briefly explained my position.

"Get home at once. The train leaves 1.13 mid-day."

"But I've got luggage worth £400 at the station!"

"Get home!"

"But--"

"Leave your luggage where it is!"

"Do you think--?"

"You take the 1.13 train. Good morning."

Further enquiries convinced me that the 1.13 was very likely to be the
last train which would leave Berlin for Britain, so I scurried off to
the station to recover my luggage. Many of the photographic instruments
were exceedingly valuable because they had been made specially. I was
bandied from one official to another. At last I alighted upon one who
knew something. He led me to a huge building and flung open the door. It
was stacked from floor to roof with baggage, which had been packed in
without any semblance of order. I surveyed the pile ruefully. I asked
him if he could trace my luggage but he shook his head. I held out a
tempting pourboire. It was of no avail. If I wanted the luggage I could
look for it myself. Reflecting that some six weeks at least would be
required to complete the search I concluded that I should have to leave
it behind willy-nilly. So somewhat depressed I prepared to leave by the
1.13 train.

The express was heavily laden and to it was attached a carriage reserved
for the military, who were accompanying the departing Britishers to the
frontier. Curiously enough, not one of us knew definitely what had
happened. Rumour was busy, but it was inconclusive. The general feeling
was that Britain had taken some drastic action which must have serious
results, otherwise we should not have been bundled home so hurriedly.

We had been travelling some time when I noticed a lady sauntering along
the corridor vainly searching for a seat. I was comfortable, but I
instantly surrendered my place to assume a standing position in the
corridor where I chatted with several fellow-travellers. I may say that
slung over my shoulder was a black leather strap carrying a small camera
case in the manner frequently affected by tourists. Ever after I have
cursed that innocent looking camera case, and certainly when travelling
in the future will favour some other means of carrying photographic
apparatus.

About half-an-hour passed in this way. Then I observed a young German
ambling along the corridor. He came up to us and entered into an idle
conversation. One by one the others dropped away from him, not caring to
talk with a German. I would have done the same but the strange youth
would not let me. He pinned me to the spot with his conversation. At
first his questions were extremely innocent, but they soon became
somewhat inquisitive and searching, and were purposely directed to
discover why I was travelling, where I had been, how long I had been in
Germany, and so forth. As the conversation assumed this turn I came to
the alert. He was a typical German with all the inexperience of youth,
though he doubtless prided himself upon his powers of observation,
deduction, and cross-examination by apparently idle questions. But to
one and all of his interrogations I gave the retort courteous. His
pressing attentions did not escape the notice of my fellow-travellers
within earshot. Looking out of the corner of my eye I saw that they did
not regard this questioning of myself as being so innocent as it
appeared. Many were apparently familiar with German methods of
inter-espionage and they extended me silent warning, by sign, frown, and
wink.

The raw youth disappeared and I forgot all about him. But to my surprise
five minutes later I saw him returning along the corridor accompanied by
a military official whom he had evidently brought from the military
carriage attached to the train. They came straight up to me. The youth
pointing directly at me remarked,

"Here he is. See! There's the camera on his back!"

The officer looked at the strap and turning me round caught sight of the
camera case. He nodded in acquiescence.

"And I saw him using it," went on the youth triumphantly. "He has been
taking photographs of the bridges and sentries along the line!"

I was distinctly amused at this charge because it was absolutely untrue.
But I was somewhat impressed by the strange silence which had settled
upon my fellow-travellers and the inscrutable look upon the officer's
face. Something serious was evidently amiss. I turned to the officer.

"The accusation is absurd. Why! Look at the windows! They have been kept
closed all the time according to the military orders. And you could not
take a photograph through the closed windows even if you wanted to. They
are too begrimed with dirt."

The officer did not say a word but continued to eye me narrowly.

I began to feel uncomfortable before that piercing gaze, so I decided to
floor the aspiring detective working so zealously for the Fatherland and
to point out the danger of jumping at conclusions. I turned to him:

"You say you saw me taking photographs?"

"Yes, with that camera on your back."

"You are quite sure?"

"Yes!"

I swung the case which had been so offensive to his eyes round to the
front of me.

"Now I'll ask you again. You are quite certain you saw me taking
photographs?"

"Ach! I distinctly saw you take the camera out of the case, take the
pictures, and then put it back again!" was his rejoinder given with
great emphasis.

I did not attempt to argue any further. I clicked the catch of the case.
The lid flew open. Both the officer and the youth craned forward
expectantly, to draw back, the officer giving vent to a smothered
ejaculation.

_The camera case was full of cigarettes._

Being a heavy smoker I had stocked myself with cigarettes with which I
had filled the camera case. I turned them out into my hands leaving the
case empty.

The youth's face was a study. He was so completely trapped in his lying
that he went all colours, while his jaw dropped. My fellow passengers
who had been watching and listening in profound silence gave expression
to uproarious mirth at the complete manner in which the immature
detective had been bowled out. But their mirth was misplaced. A German
resents discomfiture. The officer, too, was not disposed to throw over
his subordinate, who undoubtedly had been acting in accordance with
orders. Looking me steadily in the face the officer placed his hand on
my shoulder and in cold tones said,

"_I formally charge you with being a spy in the pay of the British
Government!_"


CHAPTER II

COMMITTED TO WESEL PRISON


To say that I was completely dumbfounded by this accusation is to
express my feelings very mildly. But, with an effort, I succeeded in
keeping my _sang-froid_, which I am afraid only served to convince the
officer that he was correct in his charge.

He assailed me with interrogations, demanded my passport, and after
perusing it closely, enquired why I was travelling to Russia at such a
time. "Why!" he pointed out, "you only left England on August 1st, when
Russia and Germany were on the eve of war!"

I gave a detailed explanation of my mission, but I failed to shake his
suspicions. I had to surrender my ticket for inspection and this caused
him to frown more heavily than ever.

"Where is your camera?"

I produced two which were in my pockets, keeping my tiny companion in
its secret resting place.

At the sight of the two cameras he gave a smile of complete
self-satisfaction. He handed them to the guard together with my ticket.
Turning on his heel he remarked:

"You'll ask for these articles when you reach Wesel!"

As he strode down the corridor the serious character of my situation
dawned upon me. My companions had already formed their opinions
concerning my immediate future. All thoughts of the war vanished before
a discussion of my awkward predicament. I saw that the injunction to
make enquiry for my cameras and ticket at Wesel, which is an important
military centre, was merely a ruse to prevent my escape. My arrest at
Wesel was inevitable.

I was carrying one or two other articles, such as a revolver, about me.
I saw that although they were apparently harmless, and could be fully
explained, they would incriminate me only still more. I promptly got rid
of them. I had half-a-mind to discard my little camera also, but somehow
or other I could not bring myself to part with this. I thought it might
come in useful. Moreover there was very little likelihood of it being
discovered unless I was stripped. So I left it where it was. Afterwards
I was thankful I acted upon second thoughts on that occasion.

The outlook was certainly discouraging and when the train stopped at
Wesel--outside the station I afterwards discovered--I acted on the
impulse for self-preservation, darted along the corridor, found a place
of concealment and tucked myself in. Now I realise that this was the
worst thing I could have done, but then my thoughts were centred upon
effecting my escape, in the half-hope that the Germans, unable to find
me, would assume that I had surreptitiously left the train.

But I misjudged German thoroughness, especially when a suspected spy is
the quarry. Fifteen, thirty, fifty minutes slipped by and still the
train did not move. The other passengers were not being regarded kindly
at my non-appearance. So, stealing out of my hiding place I sauntered as
composedly as I could along the corridor to come face to face with the
officer, who with his guard was diligently searching every nook and
cranny and cross-questioning the other passengers. Directly he caught
sight of me he sprang forward, uttering a command. The next instant I
was surrounded by soldiers. I was under arrest.

The officer gave a signal from a window and the train pulled into the
station. I was hustled unceremoniously on to the platform, where eight
soldiers closed around me to form an escort and I was marched forward.
As we crossed the platform the locomotive whistle shrieked, and about
9.30 p.m. the last train to leave Berlin on the outbreak of war bore my
companions homewards.

Personally I was disposed to regard the whole episode as a joke, and an
instance of Teuton blind blundering. The gravity of the situation never
struck me for an instant. I argued with myself that I should speedily
prove that I was the victim of circumstances and would be able to
convince the military of my _bona fides_ without any great effort.

But as I reflected it dawned upon me that my arrest had been skilfully
planned. The youth on the train, whom I never saw again, had played but
a minor part in the drama of which I was the central figure. My
departure must have been communicated from Berlin. Otherwise how should
Wesel have learned that a spy had been arrested? The station was
besieged with a wildly shouting excited crowd who bawled:

"English spy! English spy! Lynch him! Lynch him!"

I was bundled into a military office which had evidently been hurriedly
extemporised from a lumber room. The crowd outside increased in
denseness and hostility. They were shouting and raving with all the
power of their lungs. These vocal measures proving inadequate, stones
and other missiles commenced to fly. They could not see through the
windows of the room so an accurately thrown brick shivered the pane of
glass. Through the open space I caught glimpses of the most ferocious
and fiendish faces it has ever been my lot to witness. Men and women
vied with one another in the bawling and ground their teeth when they
caught sight of me.

The excitement was intense and the chant "Bring him out! Give him to us!
Let us lynch him! Down with the English spy!" even began to grate upon
me. At the time it appeared to me to be somewhat extraordinary, seeing
that we were not at war with Germany, but it conveyed a graphic
illustration of the anti-British sentiment prevailing in the military
centre. Indeed, the crowd became so menacing that my guard became
apprehensive of my safety, and I was hurriedly thrust into an inner
room. My removal there was more abrupt than dignified. I was hustled to
the door. Then a German soldier, by an adroit movement of his rifle
which he held reversed, pricked my leg with the bayonet and at the same
time brought the butt against my head with a resounding thwack!
Simultaneously he let drive with his heavily-booted foot in the small of
my back. I discovered afterwards, from actual experience, that this is a
very favourite movement of the rifle by the Germans, and is used on
every possible occasion.

The outcome of this action was to send me sprawling headlong into the
room to pull up with a crash against the floor. The entrance was
rendered additionally dangerous to myself because I stumbled over the
legs of several sleeping soldiers. I felt inclined to remonstrate with
the officer-in-charge of the escort at the treatment I was receiving,
but the uninviting armed sentry at the door frustrated my efforts very
effectively.

It was an improvised guard-room. The soldiers sprawled upon the straw
littering the floor, striving to snatch a brief rest before going on
duty, sleepily raised themselves to ascertain the cause of the
disturbance. The sentry told them excitedly the charge upon which I had
been arrested, at which the men turned to blink wonderingly upon the
"Englandische Spion!" I was not sorry when they at last wearied of
gazing upon me as if I were a freak side-show, and sank down to finish
their two hours' rest before going on guard once more.

I had barely recovered my senses when the door again flew open and two
further prisoners were injected into the room in a manner comparable
with my own entrance. They were Hindoo students--young fellows returning
to England after a continental holiday, who had been detained. Both were
somewhat alarmed, but I speedily composed them. Later there was a
repetition of the performance to admit three more Indian students. We
all agreed that the German methods of introduction were decidedly novel
and forceful if informal and unpleasant. I had a presentiment of it when
he came to spend the night here without bringing a bull-dog. That
frightening of the bull-dog out of his wits has always been our most
effective bit of business."
Hereupon the dark ghost took another tone.

"Our fair but unfortunate victim has a sore throat to-night," he
announced.

"The performance is consequently postponed;" and he seated himself
sulkily upon the coffin, when the limelight-man from the wings promptly
bathed him in a flood of the most beautiful rose-colour.
"Oh, this is intolerable!" he exclaimed, starting to his feet.

"It is not first-rate, I agree," said John, "but, such as it is,
we had better go through with it. Should the company doubt its
genuineness, I can go around afterwards and show the brand on the
cork."Seeing me asleep he would either give me a prod with
his bayonet or a smart rap with the butt-end of his rifle to wake me up,
the idea no doubt being to impress upon me the serious nature of my
position and to inflict upon me the utmost discomfort.

Being prevented from sleeping and commencing to feel the pangs of
hunger, having eaten nothing since lunch upon the train, I asked for
something to eat. The sentry was very sorry but related that food was
quite out of the question because none of the officers in charge of me
from whom he could obtain the necessary instructions were available.

[*large gap]

The absence of the officers was explained a little later. They had been
searching for an interpreter, so that I might be put through another
inquisition. This interpreter was about the most incompetent of his
class that one could wish to meet. His English was execrable--far worse
than Chinese pidgin--and he had an unhappy and disconcerting manner of
intermingling German and English words, while either through a physical
defect or from some other cause, he could not pronounce his consonants
correctly.

I was taken through the usual rigmarole such as I had at first
experienced at Goch. The evidence also, as usual, was committed to
paper. It was a perfunctory enquiry, however, and was soon completed.
Naturally upon its conclusion I considered that I would be free to
resume my journey. I turned to my interpreter.

"Now this is all over I suppose I can go?"

"Ach! nein zoo tant doh!"

His English was so vile that I thought he said and meant "ah! at nine
you can go!"

Seeing that it was about eleven o'clock at the time, I thought I had
better hurry in case there was another Flushing-bound train. So I
scuttled towards the door only to receive another heavy clout from the
sentry's rifle. What the interpreter really said was "Ah! No, you can't
go!" As I rubbed my bruised head I treated that interpreter to a candid
opinion of his English speaking qualifications, but he did not
understand half what I said.

As I realised nothing further could be done that night I lay down to
snatch another rest. But after midnight my trials and troubles
increased. Every few minutes the door would rattle and be clanked open
to admit an officer who had brought a number of friends to see the
latest sensation--the English spies. The friends, who were
brother-officers, regarded us with a strange interest, while the officer
who had charge of me strutted to and fro like a peacock drawn to his
full height, at the unique greatness thrust upon him, and dwelling at
great length upon the enormity of our offence related a weird story
about my capture.

