Stanza XIV. line 257. 'St. Cuthbert was, in the choice of his
sepulchre, one of the most mutable and unreasonable saints in the
Calendar. He died A. D. 688, in a hermitage upon the Farne Islands,
having resigned the bishopric of Lindisfarne, or Holy Island, about
two years before. {1}  His body was brought to Lindisfarne, where it
remained until a descent of the Danes, about 793, when the monastery
was nearly destroyed. The monks fled to Scotland, with what they
deemed their chief treasure, the relics of St. Cuthbert. The Saint
was, however, a most capricious fellow-traveller; which was the more
intolerable, as, like Sinbad's Old Man of the Sea, he journeyed upon
the shoulders of his companions. They paraded him through Scotland
for several years, and came as far west as Whithorn, in Galloway,
whence they attempted to sail for Ireland, but were driven back by
tempests. He at length made a halt at Norham; from thence he went to
Melrose, where he remained stationary for a short time, and then
caused himself to be launched upon the Tweed in a stone coffin,
which landed him at Tilmouth, in Northumberland. This boat is finely
shaped, ten feet long, three feet and a half in diameter, and only
four inches thick; so that, with very little assistance, it might
certainly have swam:  it still lies, or at least did so a few years
ago, in two pieces, beside the ruined chapel at Tilmouth. From
Tilmouth, Cuthbert wandered into Yorkshire; and at length made a
long stay at Chester-le-street, to which the bishop's see was
transferred. At length, the Danes continuing to infest the country,
the monks removed to Rippon for a season; and it was in return from
thence to Chester-le-street, that, passing through a forest called
Dunholme, the Saint and his carriage became immovable at a place
named Wardlaw, or Wardilaw. Here the Saint chose his place of
residence; and all who have seen Durham must admit, that, if
difficult in his choice, he evinced taste in at last fixing it. It
is said, that the Northumbrian Catholics still keep secret the
precise spot of the Saint's sepulture, which is only intrusted to
three persons at a time. When one dies the survivors associate to
them, in his room, a person judged fit to be the depositary of so
valuable a secret.'--SCOTT.

'The resting-place of the remains of this Saint is not now matter of
uncertainty. So recently as 17th May, 1827,--1139 years after his
death--their discovery and disinterment were effected. Under a blue
stone, in the middle of the shrine of St. Cuthbert, at the eastern
extremity of the choir of Durham Cathedral, there was then found a
walled grave, containing the coffins of the Saint. The first, or
outer one, was ascertained to be that of 1541, the second of 1041;
the third, or inner one, answering in every particular to the
description of that of 698, was found to contain, not indeed, as had
been averred then, and even until 1539, the incorruptible body, but
the entire skeleton of the Saint; the bottom of the grave being
perfectly dry, free from offensive smell, and without the slightest
symptom that a human body had ever undergone decomposition within
its walls. The skeleton was found swathed in five silk robes of
emblematical embroidery, the ornamental parts laid with gold leaf,
and these again covered with a robe of linen. Beside the skeleton
were also deposited several gold and silver insignia, and other
relics of the Saint.

'(The Roman Catholics now allow that the coffin was that of St.
Cuthbert.)

'The bones of the Saint were again restored to the grave in a new
coffin, amid the fragments of the former ones. Those portions of the
inner coffin which could be preserved, including one of its rings,
with the silver altar, golden cross, stole, comb, two maniples,
bracelets, girdle, gold wire of the skeleton, and fragments of the
five silk robes, and seme of the rings of the outer coffin made in
1541, were deposited in the library of the Dean and Chapter, where
they are now preserved.'--LOCKHART.

For ample details regarding St. Cuthbert, see 'St. Cuthbert,' by
James Raine, M. A. (4to, Durham, 1828).

line 263. For 'fair Melrose' see opening of Canto II, 'Lay of the
Last Minstrel,' and Prof. Minto's note in the Clarendon Press
edition.

Stanza XV. line 292. 'Every one has heard, that when David I, with
his son Henry, invaded Northumberland in 1136, the English host
marched against them under the holy banner of St. Cuthbert; to the
efficacy of which was imputed the great victory which they obtained
in the bloody battle of Northallerton, or Cuton-moor. The conquerors
were at least as much indebted to the jealousy and intractability of
the different tribes who composed David's army; among whom, as
mentioned in the text, were the Galwegians, the Britons of Strath-
Clyde, the men of Teviotdale and Lothian, with many Norman and
German warriors, who asserted the cause of the Empress Maud. See
Chalmers's "Caledonia," vol. i. p. 622; a most laborious, curious,
and interesting publication, from which considerable defects of
style and manner ought not to turn aside the Scottish antiquary.

'Cuthbert, we have seen, had no great reason, to spare the Danes,
when opportunity offered. Accordingly, I find in Simeon of Durham,
that the Saint appeared in a vision to Alfred, when lurking in the
marches of Glastonbury, and promised him assistance and victory over
his heathen enemies; a consolation which, as was reasonable, Alfred,
after the battle of Ashendown, rewarded, by a royal offering at the
shrine of the Saint. As to William the Conqueror, the terror spread
before his army, when he marched to punish the revolt of the
Northumbrians, in 1096, had forced the monks to fly once more to
Holy Island with the body of the Saint. It was, however, replaced
before William left the north; and, to balance accounts, the
Conqueror having intimated an indiscreet curiosity to view the
Saint's body, he was, while in the act of commanding the shrine to
be opened, seized with heat and sickness, accompanied with such a
panic terror, that, notwithstanding there was a sumptuous dinner
prepared for him, he fled without eating a morsel (which the monkish
historian seems to have thought no small part both of the miracle
and the penance,) and never drew his bridle till he got to the river
Tees.'--SCOTT.

Stanza XVI. line 300. 'Although we do not learn that Cuthbert was,
during his life, such an artificer as Dunstan, his brother in
sanctity, yet, since his death, he has acquired the reputation of
forging those Entrochi which are found among the rocks of Holy
Island, and pass there by the name of St. Cuthbert's Beads. While at
this task, he is supposed to sit during the night upon a certain
rock, and use another as his anvil. This story was perhaps credited
in former days; at least the Saint's legend contains some not more
probable.'--SCOTT.

See in Mr. Aubrey de Vere's 'Legends of the Saxon Saints' a fine
poem entitled 'How Saint Cuthbert kept his Pentecost at Carlisle.'
The 'beads' are there referred to thus:--

     'And many an age, when slept that Saint in death,
      Passing his isle by night the sailor heard
      Saint Cuthbert's hammer clinking on the rock.'

The recognised name of these shells is still 'St. Cuthbert's beads."

