Manfred, whose spirits were inflamed, and whom Isabella had driven
from her on his urging his passion with too little reserve, did not
doubt but the inquietude she had expressed had been occasioned by
her impatience to meet Theodore.  Provoked by this conjecture, and
enraged at her father, he hastened secretly to the great church.
Gliding softly between the aisles, and guided by an imperfect gleam
of moonshine that shone faintly through the illuminated windows, he
stole towards the tomb of Alfonso, to which he was directed by
indistinct whispers of the persons he sought.  The first sounds he
could distinguish were -

"Does it, alas! depend on me?  Manfred will never permit our
union."

"No, this shall prevent it!" cried the tyrant, drawing his dagger,
and plunging it over her shoulder into the bosom of the person that
spoke.

"Ah, me, I am slain!" cried Matilda, sinking.  "Good heaven,
receive my soul!"

"Savage, inhuman monster, what hast thou done!" cried Theodore,
rushing on him, and wrenching his dagger from him.

"Stop, stop thy impious hand!" cried Matilda; "it is my father!"

Manfred, waking as from a trance, beat his breast, twisted his
hands in his locks, and endeavoured to recover his dagger from
Theodore to despatch himself.  Theodore, scarce less distracted,
and only mastering the transports of his grief to assist Matilda,
had now by his cries drawn some of the monks to his aid.  While
part of them endeavoured, in concert with the afflicted Theodore,
to stop the blood of the dying Princess, the rest prevented Manfred
from laying violent hands on himself.

Matilda, resigning herself patiently to her fate, acknowledged with
looks of grateful love the zeal of Theodore.  Yet oft as her
faintness would permit her speech its way, she begged the
assistants to comfort her father.  Jerome, by this time, had learnt
the fatal news, and reached the church.  His looks seemed to
reproach Theodore, but turning to Manfred, he said,

"Now, tyrant! behold the completion of woe fulfilled on thy impious
and devoted head!  The blood of Alfonso cried to heaven for
vengeance; and heaven has permitted its altar to be polluted by
assassination, that thou mightest shed thy own blood at the foot of
that Prince's sepulchre!"

"Cruel man!" cried Matilda, "to aggravate the woes of a parent; may
heaven bless my father, and forgive him as I do!  My Lord, my
gracious Sire, dost thou forgive thy child?  Indeed, I came not
hither to meet Theodore.  I found him praying at this tomb, whither
my mother sent me to intercede for thee, for her--dearest father,
bless your child, and say you forgive her."

"Forgive thee!  Murderous monster!" cried Manfred, "can assassins
forgive?  I took thee for Isabella; but heaven directed my bloody
hand to the heart of my child.  Oh, Matilda!--I cannot utter it--
canst thou forgive the blindness of my rage?"

"I can, I do; and may heaven confirm it!" said Matilda; "but while
I have life to ask it--oh! my mother! what will she feel?  Will you
comfort her, my Lord?  Will you not put her away?  Indeed she loves
you!  Oh, I am faint! bear me to the castle.  Can I live to have
her close my eyes?"

Theodore and the monks besought her earnestly to suffer herself to
be borne into the convent; but her instances were so pressing to be
carried to the castle, that placing her on a litter, they conveyed
her thither as she requested.  Theodore, supporting her head with
his arm, and hanging over her in an agony of despairing love, still
endeavoured to inspire her with hopes of life.  Jerome, on the
other side, comforted her with discourses of heaven, and holding a
crucifix before her, which she bathed with innocent tears, prepared
her for her passage to immortality.  Manfred, plunged in the
deepest affliction, followed the litter in despair.

